 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-08323 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. DeAngelis, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
November 24, 2014.1 On March 25, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F.2 
                                                     
1 Applicant is requesting a trustworthiness determination for access to sensitive information, also known as 
a “public trust” determination, to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) position. 
 
2 The Department of Defense acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. The Regulation has been replaced by DOD Manual 
5200.02, Procedures for the DOD Personnel Security Program, effective April 3, 2017, which makes the 
Directive applicable to ADP cases. Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on 
December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 11, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with 
supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted 
by Department Counsel on August 25, 2016. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on August 29, 2016. He did not submit 
material in response to the FORM. The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM 
(Items 1 to 8) are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old personal computer specialist employed by a defense 
contractor since October 2014. He was unemployed for seven months in 2014. 
Previously, he held a job from 2006 to 2014, but was discharged by his employer over a 
dispute with his manager. He graduated from high school in 1994 and attended some 
college. He is unmarried but has been living with a person since 2011. He served in the 
U.S Air Force from 2001 to 2005, where he last held a security clearance.  
 
The SOR alleges six collection accounts totaling approximately $3,404, and failure 
to file and pay federal and state tax returns for tax years 2009 to 2013. He listed his 
financial delinquencies on his SF 86. Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in his 
answer to the SOR, except he denied SOR ¶ 1(g) and (h), alleging he failed to file and 
pay his state tax returns. He provided a narrative explaining his answers, an IRS letter, 
and an IRS installment agreement request. 
 
Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶ 1(a) – (f), but contended that one or two of 
the debts may have been settled since he believes he could not have renewed his driver’s 
license unless the debts were paid. He did not identify which SOR debts would have been 
settled. He also stated that he intended to resolve his tax obligations before addressing 
his other debts.  
 
Applicant stated in his SF 86 that he was irresponsible about his taxes and that he 
contacted the IRS and other creditors to arrange payments. In his answer, Applicant 
claimed that he filed his tax returns for tax years 2010 to 2013 in September 2015, and 
that he had previously filed his 2009 return but did not know when. He stated that he 
included an initial payment of $241 with an installment agreement request to the IRS with 
his returns. In May 2016, Applicant’s request to the IRS to apply a credit for his 2010 tax 
refund to other tax obligations was denied. There was no documentary evidence 
presented to show that tax returns were filed, other than for tax year 2010, or that an 
installment agreement was approved or any delinquent tax payments were made. 
                                                     
adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. My decision is based on the guidelines in SEAD 4, 
referred to in this decision as “AG.” The changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my 
decision in this case. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant asserted his intent to pursue a resolution with the IRS. He noted that he is from 
a U.S. territory that does not require residents to file a tax return to the IRS, therefore he 
did not think about doing so during the years alleged.3 He denied failing to pay or owing 
state taxes. No evidence was produced by the Government to support this allegation in 
SOR ¶1(h). 
 
 Since Applicant elected to have this case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing, I was unable to further inquire into these allegations, or evaluate his demeanor 
or credibility in response to questions. There was no evidence presented to show 
Applicant’s current financial condition or whether he ever consulted a financial counselor. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered [for access to sensitive 
information] will be resolved in favor of the national security.” The Government must 
present substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive 
¶ E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
                                                     
3 Residents of U.S. territories generally file tax returns to their respective local governments, rather than 
the IRS. See, https://www.irs.gov/individuals/international-taxpayers/individuals-living-or-working-in-us-
possessions. 
 
4 
 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence are sufficient to establish 
the disqualifying conditions for SOR ¶ 1(a) – (g). There was insufficient evidence showing 
Applicant failed to file or pay state income taxes when due. SOR ¶ 1(h) is resolved in 
Applicant’s favor. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, and there is insufficient 
evidence to determine that they were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely 
to recur. He provided no reasonable explanation for his delinquent debts. He asserted 
that he filed his delinquent returns in 2015 (and the 2009 return at another time), but he 
failed to provide evidence to show the returns were filed, except for tax year 2010, and 
has not shown that delinquent taxes are paid. Applicant’s explanation for failing to file and 
pay federal tax returns does not mitigate his actions. His willful disregard of his federal 
tax obligations and other delinquent debts, raise questions about his judgment and 
willingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has commented:4 
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with such rules and systems is essential for protecting classified 
information.5 As we have noted in the past, a clearance adjudication is not 
directed at collecting debts. By the same token, neither is it directed toward 
inducing an applicant to file tax returns. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at 
evaluating an applicant’s judgment and reliability. A person who fails 
repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not demonstrate the high 
                                                     
4 ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). See ISCR Case No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Mar. 25, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002)). ISCR Case No. 14-01894 
at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). 
 
5 ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002). 
 
 
6 
 
degree of good judgment and reliability required of those granted access to 
classified information.6 
 
The Appeal Board clarified that even in instances where an “[a]pplicant has 
purportedly corrected [the applicant’s] federal tax problem, and the fact that [applicant] is 
now motivated to prevent such problems in the future, does not preclude careful 
consideration of [a]pplicant’s security worthiness in light of [applicant’s] longstanding prior 
behavior evidencing irresponsibility” including a failure to timely file federal income tax 
returns.7 
 
In this case, the negative financial and judgment information is significant. 
Applicant did not take appropriate, responsible, and timely action to resolve his tax and 
other financial obligations. Although he requested an installment agreement with the IRS, 
he did not show he has made any payments. The remaining debts have also not been 
resolved. He presented no evidence showing his current financial condition or that he 
sought financial counseling. There is insufficient evidence to show his financial situation 
is under control. Overall, no mitigating conditions fully apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
[trustworthiness determination] by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and 
all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Although adverse information concerning a single 
criterion may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual 
may be found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 
 
 
                                                     
6 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-
01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union Local 473 v. 
McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 
 
7 See ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 3 and note 3 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016) (characterizing “no harm, no foul” 
approach to an Applicant’s course of conduct and employed an “all’s well that ends well” analysis as 
inadequate to support approval of access to classified information with focus on timing of filing of tax returns 
after receipt of the SOR).   
 
 
7 
 
Insufficient evidence has been submitted to show that Applicant’s delinquent 
financial obligations are being resolved and that his financial situation is under control. 
Applicant has lived outside of his home territory since at least 2001. He is expected to 
comply with federal tax laws despite the customary practice in his former residence. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant him eligibility 
for access to sensitive information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.h:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public 
trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
