 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08847 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 6, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 4, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). On June 17, 2016, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 18, 2016 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 8, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on September 12, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 29, 2016. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 7, 
which were admitted without objection. Despite my leaving the record open until 
 
2 
 
October 31, 2016, Applicant has offered no exhibits. However, Applicant testified on his 
own behalf. The record then closed on October 31, 2016. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (TR) on October 11, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 48 years old. He has been employed with a Government contractor 
for six years. He is divorced but remarried, and has two children.  (TR at page 18 line 1 
to page 20 line 2, and GX 1 at page 12.)  Applicant attributes his past-due indebtedness 
and income tax delinquencies to his current wife, a nurse, losing her income as a care 
giver to her mother, when Applicant’s mother-in-law passed away.  (TR at page 28 lines 
13~21.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified 14 debts totaling approximately $19,693, and a state income tax debt for 
about $3,357. It also alleged that he failed to file his Federal and state income tax 
returns, as required, for tax years 2012 and 2014. Applicant admitted all of the 
allegations. 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 1.a.~1.c.  Applicant avers that he has now filed his Federal and state income tax 
returns for tax year 2012.  He further avers that he is paying his state income tax 
delinquency by way of garnishment.  (TR at page 20 line 5 to page 23 line 16.)  He also 
avers that he intends to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax year 2014.  
(Id.)  Despite having been given a month to do so, Applicant has submitted no 
documentation in support of his averments.  These allegations are found against 
Applicant. 
 
 1.d. and 1.e.  Applicant filed for the protection of a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in June 
of 2002.  It was dismissed in March of 2003.  (TR at page 23 line 17 to page 24 line 16.) 
Applicant again filed for the protection of a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in May of 2006.  It 
was dismissed in February of 2007, when Applicant defaulted on his approved payment 
plan.  (TR at page 24 line 17 to page 26 line 1.) 
 
 Throughout his hearing, Applicant averred that he is expecting to receive 
$27,000, as he overpaid his past child support; and an additional $50,000, in a lump 
sum pension payment from a previous employment.  (TR at page 34 line 13 to page 35 
line 24, and at page 38 line 15 to page 40 line 24.)  He further testified that with this 
$77,000, Applicant fully intends to address the remaining alleged past-due 
indebtedness.  (Id.) 
 
 1.f.~1.s.  Applicant admits that he is indebted, as the result of 14 past-due debts, 
in the amount of about $19,693.  (TR at page 26 line 2 to page 37 line 15.)  Despite his 
 
3 
 
above mentioned averment to do so; and despite my leaving the record open for one 
month to permit him to do so, Applicant has submitted nothing further in this regard.  
These allegations are found against Applicant. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt. His actions 
demonstrated both a history of not addressing his debt and an inability to do so. He also 
failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2012 and 2014, as 
required. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Two Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant has significant past-due indebtedness, and 
still has not filed required income tax returns. Furthermore, his behavior did not happen 
long ago, but is continuing.  It does cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) do not provide mitigation. 
 
5 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.~s.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
