 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02737 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 26, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On December 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications 
and other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The 
SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and detailed 
                                                          
1 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated March 26, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 14, 2015. On December 18, 2015, she 
responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on June 1, 
2016. The case was assigned to me on August 4, 2016. A Notice of Hearing was issued 
on August 31, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 19, 2016. 
 
 During the hearing, 4 Government exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 4, 1 Administrative 
exhibit, and 16 Applicant exhibits (AE) A through AE P were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on September 27, 
2016. The record closed on September 27, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted a number of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h., and 1.k. through 1.r.). 
Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration 
of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been initially 
a receptionist and eventually a program control analyst, with the company since October 
2015. She is a 1997 high school graduate. She received an associate’s degree in 2004 
and a bachelor’s degree in 2006. She has never served in the U.S. military. Applicant was 
never granted a security clearance. She was married in 2005, separated in 2007, and 
divorced in 2009. She has two daughters and three sons.  
 
Financial Considerations2 
Applicant candidly acknowledged that she had not made some responsible 
financial decisions during her younger adult years. However, the financial difficulties that 
brought about an SOR arose in October 2007 when her husband abandoned her and 
their three children. At the time he left the marital residence, he was earning an annual 
salary of approximately $30,000. Applicant was several months pregnant. He ceased all 
financial support when he left. The financial situation declined even more when, in 
February 2008, Applicant was terminated from her job. That job generated an annual 
salary of $31,200. Her youngest son was born in October 2008. With insufficient funds to 
continue making her normal monthly payments, accounts became delinquent. She 
                                                          
2 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: GE 1, supra note 1; GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated April 24, 2014); GE 3 (Combined Experian, 
TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated April 11, 2014); GE 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated February 28, 2015); 
and Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated December 18, 2015. More recent information can be found in the exhibits 
furnished and individually identified. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
contacted creditors to apprise them of the situation and tried to modify her payments. 
Because of low income, Applicant qualified for “medical scholarships” with respect to 
various medical accounts. The situation deteriorated to the point where she lost her 
residence to foreclosure (the house was worth between $70,000 and $80,000 at the time, 
and she was making mortgage payments of $800 per month) and her car to repossession 
(her monthly car payments were $400). She exhausted her savings and obtained some 
financial assistance from her family, to the best of their ability, but it was not enough. 
Applicant and her children relocated to a public housing project in March 2009. That same 
month, Applicant was divorced. The court noted that Applicant’s husband owed her a 
child support arrearage of $8,844, as well as his share of medical bills totaling $1,382.65. 
He was ordered to pay her $872 per month for current child support plus $100 per month 
for the arrearage. 
Applicant managed to receive unemployment compensation totaling $250 per 
week, and eventually, in December 2010, obtained some part-time employment 
generating $8.50 per hour. In February 2012, she obtained a position that paid her an 
hourly salary of $15. Applicant was unemployed from November 2013 until February 
2014. She joined her current employer, and within a two-year period thereafter, her 
annual salary rose to $38,480. During 2012 and 2013, well before the SOR was issued, 
Applicant worked at rehabilitating her student loans, and in 2014, she started 
readdressing her other debts. At about the same time, Applicant’s teenage daughter gave 
birth, and Applicant’s finances were, once again, temporarily negatively impacted 
because her daughter was not mentally of emotionally able to handle the situation. 
Applicant’s granddaughter resides with her, but her daughter does not reside with them. 
In May 2016, Applicant purchased a residence financed by the same lender that had 
previously foreclosed on her earlier residence. 
The SOR identified 18 purportedly delinquent debts that had been placed for 
collection or charged off, as reflected by her 2014 credit report or her 2016 credit report, 
or her e-QIP, or her Personal Subject Interview. Those debts, totaling approximately 
$32,078, and their respective current status, according to the credit reports, other 
evidence submitted by the Government and Applicant, and Applicant’s comments 
regarding same, are described below:  
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): This refers to a home mortgage for $77,779 and a second home 
mortgage for $2,350 with the same mortgage lender that were foreclosed in 2009, and 
the property was purchased for $81,071.46. There was no deficiency. Applicant’s two 
credit reports reflect zero balances on both mortgages. The accounts have been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): This refers.to an automobile loan for approximately $10,077 that was 
placed for collection and charged off. The lender repossessed the vehicle. Applicant 
eventually paid the lender $3,000 from her savings to resolve any delinquency. The lender 
eventually informed Applicant that the matter had been settled, and that she was released 
from any and all obligations.3 The account has been resolved. 
                                                          
3 AE A (Letter, dated March 9, 2016). 
 
4 
                                      
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): This refers to a bank credit card account with an unpaid balance of 
$435.49, of which $183 was past due in February 2015. The account was brought current 
by Applicant in June 2015, and there are no other delinquencies.4 The account has been 
resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.d. through 1.f., 1.h., and 1.p. through 1.r.): These refer to seven medical 
accounts with a variety of unpaid balances that were placed for collection by the same 
hospital in 2008. In 2013, after learning of a scholarship program available to low-income 
families, Applicant applied for assistance under that program. On April 24, 2014 – 18 
months before the SOR was issued – the scholarship was approved, and Applicant’s 
medical bills stemming from 2008, were paid off, leaving a zero balance.5 The information 
listed by TransUnion and Experian was eventually deleted from Applicant’s credit 
reports.6 The accounts have been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.): This refers to a cable account with an unpaid balance of $179 that 
was placed for collection.  When Applicant obtained a credit report she became aware of 
the delinquency, and sometime in 2015, she paid the creditor the remaining balance.7 
The account has been resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.i. and 1.j.): These refer to two additional medical accounts with unpaid 
balances of $688 and $753 that were placed for collection in 2008 and 2009. Applicant 
contacted the collection agent regarding the accounts but was advised that if she obtained 
a new credit report, the charges would no longer be listed. Neither account is listed in her 
September 2016 credit report.8 The accounts have been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.k.): This refers to a cellular phone account with an unpaid balance of 
$763 that was placed for collection. The charges were increased because Applicant’s 
daughter lost her phone and under the agreement, it was necessary to purchase another 
phone for $250. On March 28, 2014 – over 20 months before the SOR was issued – 
Applicant paid the collection agent $457.89, and the remaining balance was listed as 
zero.9 The account has been resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.l. through 1.o.): These refer to four student loan accounts with unpaid 
balances of $3,371, $5,038, $6,404, and $3,201 that were supposed to be consolidated 
with Applicant’s other student loans, but for unexplained reasons, they were not part of 
the consolidation. When Applicant entered her difficult financial period, her other 
consolidated student loans were placed into a deferred status, but these four were not. 
                                                          
4 AE B (Payment Activity, dated December 14, 2015). 
 
5 AE L (Hospital Statements of Services, dated April 24, 2014). 
 
6 AE C (TransUnion Dispute, dated February 1, 2016); AE D (Experian Dispute, dated February 1, 2016). 
 
7 AE E (Letter, dated December 18, 2015). 
 
8 AE F (Experian Credit Report, dated September 12, 2016). 
 
9 AE G (Final Statement, dated April 23, 2014). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
Applicant and the collection agent agreed that if Applicant would make a modest payment 
each month for ten consecutive months, the accounts would be rehabilitated. She was 
successful. The current status of her remaining now consolidated student loans in the 
amount of $52,330.94, is that they are in good standing in a repayment status. Some of 
the student loans have already been paid off.10 The accounts have been resolved. 
 In September 2016, Applicant submitted a Personal Financial Statement that 
reported her net monthly income as $4,056.63 (including $1,182 in child support); with 
$3,000 in monthly expenses; leaving a monthly remainder of $1,055.94 available for 
discretionary saving or spending.11 She has no other delinquent accounts. Applicant has 
never had financial counseling. Applicant has made substantial progress in resolving her 
delinquent accounts. It appears that Applicant’s financial status has improved 
significantly, and that her financial problems are finally under control.  
Work Performance and Character References 
 Applicant’s administrative officer, who also serves as the executive assistant to the 
chief executive officer and president of Applicant’s employer, has had daily interactions 
with her. He characterized Applicant as professional and trustworthy, with a positive and 
upbeat work ethic and attitude. He also noted that she displays the highest level of 
integrity and competency despite being confronted with stressful situations. He fully 
supports her application for a security clearance.12 A former colleague, who has known 
Applicant for over 20 years, commented that Applicant is always very respectful of 
privacy, classified information, and rules and regulations. She is always trusted. He noted 
that Applicant is a proactive member of the community and a loving mother.13 A friend 
focused on Applicant’s positive contributions to the community and family.14 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”15 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
                                                          
 
10 AE H (Account Details, dated September 12, 2016). 
 
11 AE J (Personal Financial Statement, dated September 2016). 
 
12 AE O (Character Reference, dated April 19, 2016). 
 
13 AE P (Character Reference, undated). 
 
14 AE K (Character Reference, undated). 
 
15 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”16   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”17 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.18  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”19 
                                                          
16 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
17 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
18 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
19 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”20 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . . 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant’s initial financial problems arose in October 2007 and 
worsened in February 2008. Accounts became delinquent and were placed for collection. 
A house was foreclosed, a vehicle was repossessed, and student loans went into default. 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the person 
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications 
that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG 
¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated 
                                                          
20 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”21 In addition, 
AG ¶ 20(e) may apply where “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.” 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) apply. Applicant’s financial problems 
are attributed to a variety of factors: (1) her husband abandoned her and their three 
children in October 2007; (2) at the time he left the marital residence, Applicant was 
several months pregnant; (3) Applicant’s husband ceased all financial support, including 
child support, when he left; (4) Applicant lost her job in February 2008; (5) her youngest 
child was born in October 2008; and (6) Applicant was unemployed from November 2013 
until February 2014. All of those factors were largely beyond Applicant=s control. Applicant 
did not ignore her debts. Instead, she approached her creditors and tried to establish 
account rehabilitation arrangements. With insufficient funds to make any substantial 
impact on her debts, she reduced expenses by relocating her family to low-income public 
housing, and when she could, she took a variety of minimum-paying part-time positions. 
Well before the SOR was issued, Applicant paid off the deficiency of her repossessed 
vehicle; rehabilitated her student loans; zeroed out her delinquent medical accounts with 
the assistance of a special low-income assistance scholarship program; successfully 
disputed some accounts; and resolved all other delinquent accounts.  
Although Applicant never received financial counseling, she has accounted for all 
of her accounts, and there are no other delinquent debts... She now receives child support 
and a decent salary. Her Personal Financial Statement indicated that her net monthly 
income as $4,056.63 (including $1,182 in child support); with $3,000 in monthly 
expenses; leaving a monthly remainder of $1,055.94 available for discretionary saving or 
spending. Applicant has made substantial progress in resolving her delinquent accounts. 
It appears that Applicant’s financial status has improved significantly, and that her 
financial problems are finally under control. She appears to have acted prudently and 
responsibly. Applicant’s actions, under the circumstances confronting her, no longer cast 
doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.22 
                                                          
21 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
22 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.23       
There is minimal evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant failed 
to maintain her normal monthly payments to a number of his accounts, and, over multi-
year period, a number of accounts became delinquent. A house was foreclosed, a car 
was repossessed, and student loans went into a default status.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
There is no evidence of misuse of information technology systems or mishandling 
protected information. Applicant’s financial problems were attributed to a variety of 
combined factors that were all largely beyond Applicant=s control. She was a pregnant 
wife whose husband abandoned her and for a time he did not pay any child support, and 
she lost her job. Without the financial resources to maintain her accounts in a current 
status, they became delinquent. However, years before the SOR was issued, Applicant 
commenced the long road back to financial solvency. She reduced her expenses, 
relocated the family to low-income public housing, accepted low-salaried part-time jobs, 
and set up repayment plans. She obtained court-ordered child support. She has resolved 
all of her formerly delinquent accounts. Once she obtained meaningful employment, 
Applicant followed through on her promises to resolve her debts.24 The lender that 
foreclosed on Applicant’s previous residence had sufficient confidence in her financial 
                                                          
23 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
24 The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a substitute 
for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially responsible manner. ISCR 
Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
stability to grant her another mortgage when she purchased her new residence in May 
2016. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 25 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an extraordinarily meaningful track record of debt 
reduction and elimination efforts, and she started to do so years before the SOR was 
issued. She maintains a budget, and has a substantial monthly remainder available for 
saving or spending.  
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
security worthiness. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising from her financial considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG 
¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.r:  For Applicant 
     
  
                                                          
25 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
