 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00463 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
June 6, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 7, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 10, 2016, (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 24, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on August 29, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 21, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 8, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified; and after the hearing submitted 
 
2 
 
Applicant Exhibit (AppX) A. Department Counsel had no objections to AppX A, which 
was admitted.1 The record then closed on October 21, 2016. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (TR) on September 30, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations regarding Financial Considerations 
in subparagraphs 2.a.~2.p. He also admitted the SOR allegation as to Personal 
Conduct in subparagraph 1.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. (GX 1 at page 5.) He is a “Technician,” and does not 
currently hold a security clearance. (TR at page 19 line 4 to page 20 line 17.)  He is 
married and has four children, three of whom are adults, ranging in age from 20~25. 
(Id.)  As I consider Guideline F the more significant of the two alleged, I will address it 
first. 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to the downturn of the housing market 
in 2008.  (TR at page 37 line 8 to page 39 line 24.)  Presently, he and his family live in a 
rental.  (Id.)  He has purchased his grown children cars for transportation to and from 
their colleges.  Applicant has chosen not to address any of the 16 alleged past-due 
debts. (TR at page 37 line 8 to page 39 line 24.) 
 
 2.a. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor A for a past-due debt in the 
amount of about $139. He has not contacted this creditor, and does not plan to do so 
“until next year,” sometime in 2017.  (TR at page 25 line 6 to page 27 line 6.)  This 
allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 2.b. Applicant admitted that he was indebted to Creditor B for a past-due debt in 
the amount of about $849. He now avers it “is paid off,” but has submitted nothing in 
support of this averment. (TR at page 27 lines 7~21.)  This allegation is found against 
Applicant. 
 
 2.c. Applicant admitted that he was indebted to Creditor C for a past-due debt in 
the amount of about $279. He now avers that he is now current with this creditor, but 
has submitted nothing in support of this averment. (TR at page 27 line 24 to page 29 
line 16.)  This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 2.d. Applicant admitted that he was indebted to Creditor D for a past-due debt in 
the amount of about $408. He now avers it is “paid off,” but has submitted nothing in 
support of this averment. (TR at page 29 lines 17~24.)  This allegation is found against 
Applicant.  
                                                          
1 Applicant’s exhibit was offered without explanation, and relates to five debts, only one of 
which is alleged by the Government under subparagraph 2.m. of the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 2.e. Applicant admitted that he was indebted to Creditor E for a past-due debt in 
the amount of about $2,030. He now avers that he has “no idea” what this debt is for, 
and has no plan to address it. (TR at page 29 line 25 to page 30 line 3.)  This allegation 
is found against Applicant. 
 
 2.f.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor F for a past-due debt in the 
amount of about $940. He has not contacted this creditor, and has no plans to do so.  
(TR at page 30 lines 11~25.)  This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 2.g. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor G for a past-due debt in the 
amount of about $1,694. He has not contacted this creditor, and has no plans to do so.  
(TR at page 31 lines 1~8.)  This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 2.h. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor H for a past-due debt in the 
amount of about $754. He has not contacted this creditor, and does not plan to do so 
until “next year,” sometime in 2017.  (TR at page 31 line 9 to page 32 line 1.)  This 
allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 2.i. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor I for a past-due mortgage 
debt in the amount of about $1,694. He has not contacted this creditor, and has no 
plans to do so.  (TR at page 32 line 2 to page 34 line 12.)  This allegation is found 
against Applicant. 
 
 2.j. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor J for a past-due debt in the 
amount of about $1,721. He has not contacted this creditor, and does not plan to do so 
until “next year,” sometime in 2017.  (TR at page 34 lines 15~24.)  This allegation is 
found against Applicant. 
 
 2.k. and 2.l. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor K for two past-due 
debts totaling about $3,046. He has not contacted this creditor, and does not plan to do 
so until “next year,” sometime in 2017.  (TR at page 34 line 25 to page 36 line 6.)  
Applicant has submitted documentation showing a similar creditor; but with a different 
original creditor, and with different amounts.  (AppX A at pages 3 and 4.)  These 
allegations are found against Applicant.   
 
 2.m. Applicant admitted that he was indebted to Creditor M for a past-due debt in 
the amount of about $173. At his hearing, he averred that he had not contacted this 
creditor, but it appears to have been “settled in full.” (TR at page 36 lines 7~15, and 
AppX A at page 5.)  This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 2.n. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor N for a past-due debt in the 
amount of about $503. He has not contacted this creditor, and has no plans to do so.  
(TR at page 36 lines 16~20.)  This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 2.o. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor O for a past-due debt in the 
amount of about $28. He has not contacted this creditor, and has no plans to do so.  
(TR at page 36 line 21 to page 37 line 2.)  This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
4 
 
 
 2.p.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor P for a past-due debt in the 
amount of about $227. He has not contacted this creditor, and has no plans to do so.  
(TR at page 37 lines 3~7.)  This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 1.a.  Applicant admits that, in November of 2015, he was suspended from work 
for one week without pay for: 1) Inappropriate/Unprofessional Behavior and 2) Misuse of 
IT assets, as the result of Applicant viewing a co-worker’s pay information and 
disseminating that information to other co-workers.  (TR at page 20 line 18 to page 24 
line 15, and GXs 7 and 8.)    
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
5 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
   The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 19(a), and 
19(c). Further inquiry about the applicability of mitigating conditions is required.  
 
 Two Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant has not acted responsibly, or in a timely manner, to attempt to resolve 
his delinquent debts. Except for subparagraph 2.m., his debts are not current. 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant application of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant’s debts may have been due, in part, to the crash of the housing market 
in 2008, but he has had ample time to resolve his debts since then.  Further, he failed to 
demonstrate responsible behavior toward his debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is only partially 
mitigating. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying under the facts of this case: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, which when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment . . . 
This includes but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior . . . . 
 
 Applicant clearly breached the privacy of a co-worker. This behavior indicates 
questionable judgment and untrustworthiness. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
 
7 
 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, it is 
apparent that none of them apply. Applicant has not submitted any documentation as to 
his good character, such as letters of recommendation or awards and certificates from 
his place of employment.  Thus, he has not provided information in this record to show 
that he has met his burden of proof to mitigate his personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
 
8 
 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the 
Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security concerns. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a.~2.l:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.m.:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.n.~2.p:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
