 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06586 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 24, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 14, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on June 1, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the 
 
2 
 
FORM on June 10, 2016. Applicant did not respond to the Government’s FORM. The 
case was assigned to me on May 4, 2017.  
  
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
New Adjudicative Guidelines  
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG under the Directive.1 
Accordingly, I have applied the June 2017 AG.2 However, because the September 2006 
AG were in effect when the SOR was issued, I have also considered the September 
2006 AG. Having considered both versions of the AG, I conclude that my decision 
would have been the same had I applied the September 2006 AG. 
 
Evidence 
 
The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 3 are admitted in 
evidence without objection. Other than his Answer to the SOR admitted in evidence as 
Item 1, Applicant did not submit any additional documentation.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about South Korea. The request was included in the record as Item 4. Applicant did not 
object. The request is not admitted in evidence but I have taken administrative notice of 
the facts contained in Item 4. The facts administratively noticed are summarized in the 
Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. He is a 44-year-old hardware 
engineer employed by a defense contractor since April 2015. He has never held a DOD 
security clearance.3  
 
Applicant was born in South Korea and immigrated to the United States in 1999. 
He obtained a bachelor’s degree from a South Korean university in 1996, a master’s 
and doctorate degree from U.S. universities in 2001 and 2005, and a master’s degree 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security AG, 
which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for initial or continued access to 
classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability). 
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Items 1-3.  
 
 
3 
 
from a university in the United Kingdom in 2014. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen 
and obtained a U.S. passport in 2013. He is married to a South Korean citizen, and has 
two children who are dual, native-born U.S. and South Korean citizens. He has owned 
his home in the United States since May 2011.4 
 
 Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of South Korea residing in the United States. She 
is 42 years old and was born in South Korea. Applicant married her in June 1999 in 
South Korea. Applicant indicated that his spouse plans on becoming a U.S. citizen and 
renounce her South Korean citizenship. She was a housewife until January 2015, when 
her father in South Korea legally signed over his manufacturing company in Mexico to 
her. The company in Mexico is one of multiple subsidiary companies under a parent 
manufacturing company in South Korea, all of which is owned by Applicant’s father-in-
law, with the exception of the company in Mexico. Applicant accompanied his father-in-
law and brother-in-law to Mexico in June 2012, at his father-in-law’s request, to check 
on the company. Applicant traveled to Mexico in May and June 2014, also at his father-
in-law’s request, to check on the company. 
 
 Applicant discovered in June 2015 that his father-in-law gave Applicant’s spouse 
stock in his companies in South Korea. Neither the stock in the South Korean 
companies nor the company in Mexico are in Applicant’s name. Applicant’s wife is trying 
to determine the value of her stock in the South Korean companies and her company in 
Mexico. As of June 2015, Applicant stated that they had not received any money from 
either, and they do not have any other foreign financial interests.5 
 
 Applicant’s two children are dual, native-born U.S. and South Korean citizens, 
residing in the United States. They are ten and eight years old. Applicant’s wife 
petitioned for their South Korean citizenship so that they could obtain South Korean 
passports, for ease of traveling to South Korea. As South Korean citizens, they are 
eligible to receive medical assistance in South Korea, though they have never utilized 
this benefit. Applicant indicated that he can have his daughters become solely U.S. 
citizens.6  
 
 Applicant’s sister, age 41, is a citizen of South Korea residing in the United 
States. She is pursuing her U.S. citizenship. She works for an insurance company. 
Applicant stated that he does not have a strong relationship with her. He indicated that 
he has quarterly telephonic and electronic contact with her. As of June 2015, he last 
saw her at her wedding in 2008.7 
 
 Applicant’s second sister, age 39, is a citizen and resident of South Korea. 
Applicant stated that he does not have a strong relationship with her. He stated that 
                                                          
4 Items 1-3. 
 
5 Items 1-3. 
 
6 Items 1-3. 
 
7 Items 1-3. 
 
 
4 
 
they grew apart because of the distance between them. Applicant indicated that after 
their parents died, he tried to get her to move to the United States but she did not want 
to. As of May 2015, he last contacted her in May 2010. At that time, she worked as a 
teacher in South Korea. In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated that he does not 
know where this sister lives, what she does, or how to contact her.8    
 
 Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens and residents of South Korea. His father-
in-law is 70 years old, and his mother-in-law is 68 years old. As previously discussed, 
Applicant’s father-in-law owns a parent manufacturing company with multiple 
subsidiaries in South Korea. Applicant indicated that his mother-in-law takes care of one 
of the subsidiary companies in South Korea. Applicant stated that his wife sparsely 
contacts them. He indicated that he has telephonic and electronic contact with his 
father-in-law once every four months to annually, and last saw his father-in-law during 
their June 2012 trip to Mexico. He indicated that he has telephonic contact with his 
mother-in-law once every four months to two years, and in-person contact once every 
four years. As previously stated, at his father-in-law’s request, Applicant traveled to 
Mexico twice in 2014 to check on the company in Mexico.9  
 
 Applicant’s brother-in-law, age 38, is a citizen and resident of South Korea. As of 
June 2015, Applicant indicated that his brother-in-law was taking over his father-in-law’s 
companies in South Korea. Applicant indicated that he has annual telephonic and 
electronic contact with his brother-in-law, and last saw him during their June 2012 trip to 
Mexico.10 
 
 Applicant has a bank account in South Korea. When Applicant lived and worked 
in South Korea from 2009 to 2011, he opened the bank account so that his employer 
could deposit his pay into the account. When Applicant moved back to the United 
States, he took out most of the money and left a minimal balance in the account. He 
indicated that he forgot about the account because he had not accessed it in a long 
time, and he planned to close the account.11  
   
 Applicant stated that his unique engineering background coupled with a security 
clearance would allow him to more fully contribute to the work that he does.12  
 
South Korea 
  
South Korea has a history of collecting protected U.S. information. The 1996 
Interagency OPSEC Support Staff Intelligence Threat Handbook notes that South Korea 
                                                          
8 Items 1-3. 
 
9 Items 1-3. 
  
10 Items 1-3. 
  
11 Items 1-3. 
 
12 Item 1. 
 
 
5 
 
has targeted the United States with intelligence gathering programs, and has centered 
its collection efforts on computer systems, aerospace and nuclear technologies, and its 
activities have included stealing information from computerized databases maintained 
by U.S. government agencies. The 2000 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign 
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, issued by the National 
Counterintelligence Center, ranks Korea as one of the seven countries most actively 
engaging in foreign economic collection and industrial espionage against the United 
States. The 2008 Annual Report indicates that the major foreign collectors remain 
active. Industrial espionage remains a high-profile concern relating to South Korea and 
South Korean companies.  
 
The United States restricts the export of sensitive, dual-use technologies that can 
have civilian and military uses, or that can be used to build weapons of mass 
destruction. South Korea has been the unauthorized recipient of technology controlled 
under U.S. export control laws, including: material that could be used in missile 
delivery/reentry systems, encryption software, optics and prism data, and infrared 
detectors and camera engines.  
 
While the South Korean government has generally respected the human rights of 
its citizens, reported human rights problems include: the government’s interpretation of 
national security and other laws limiting freedom of expression and restricting access to 
the internet; official corruption; the absence of a comprehensive antidiscrimination law; 
sexual and domestic violence; child prostitution; and trafficking in persons. The South 
Korean national security law grants authorities the power to detain, arrest, and imprison 
persons believed to have committed acts intended to endanger the “security of the 
State.” 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
6 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, financial, 
and property interests, are a national security concern if they result in divided 
allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent with 
U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and interests should consider 
the country in which the foreign contact or interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, considerations such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to 
obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
 
7 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a 
potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect 
classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to help 
a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information or technology;  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the individual 
to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal conflict of 
interest. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, 
and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR 
Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where 
family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
Applicant’s two children, while dual, native-born U.S. and South Korean citizens, 
are minors residing with Applicant and his spouse in the United States. Applicant 
stated that he can have them become solely U.S. citizens. Applicant’s 41-year-old 
sister, while a South Korean citizen, resides and works in the United States and is 
pursuing U.S. citizenship. The record does not contain any evidence that Applicant’s 
two children and one sister have any other ties to South Korea. Given these facts, 
none of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7 apply, and I find SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c 
in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Applicant’s bank account in South Korea contains a minimal balance. Applicant 
opened the account in 2009 when he lived and worked in South Korea, and he took 
out most of the money when he moved back to the United States in 2011. He forgot 
about the account because he had not accessed it in a long time, and he planned to 
close the account. The record does not contain any evidence that Applicant has any 
other foreign financial interests. Neither the stock in the South Korean companies nor 
the company in Mexico are in Applicant’s name. Compared to the home Applicant has 
 
8 
 
owned in the United States since 2011, Applicant’s South Korean bank account does 
not constitute a substantial foreign financial interest. I find that AG ¶ 7(f) is not 
established, and I find SOR ¶ 1.g in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Applicant’s spouse is a South Korean citizen, and his 39-year-old sister, parents-
in-law, and brother-in-law are citizens and residents of South Korea. South Korea has a 
history of collecting protected U.S. information. The 1996 Interagency OPSEC Support 
Staff Intelligence Threat Handbook notes that South Korea has targeted the United 
States with intelligence gathering programs. The 2000 Annual Report to Congress on 
Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage ranks Korea as one of the 
seven countries most actively engaging in foreign economic collection and industrial 
espionage against the United States. The 2008 Annual Report indicates that the major 
foreign collectors remain active. In addition, South Korea has been the unauthorized 
recipient of technology controlled under U.S. export control laws.  
 
Applicant’s ties to South Korea through his spouse and his 39-year-old sister 
create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b) and 7(e) have been raised by 
the evidence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided  
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which  
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty  
or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, government, or  
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that  
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or  
exploitation. 
 
Concerning Applicant’s family in South Korea, AG ¶ 8(a) is not established for 
the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). Applicant 
indicated that he does not have a strong relationship with his sister in South Korea. 
They grew apart after their parents died. As of May 2015, he last contacted her in May 
2010. In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated that he does not know where this 
sister lives, what she does, or how to contact her. I find AG ¶ 8(c) is established as to 
Applicant’s sister in South Korea, and I find SOR ¶ 1.d in Applicant’s favor. 
 
 
9 
 
Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of South Korea, and she resides with Applicant in 
the United States. Her parents and brother are citizens and residents of South Korea. 
Applicant saw his father-in-law and brother-in-law in 2012, and traveled to Mexico twice 
in 2014 at his father-in-law’s request to check on the company in Mexico. He has 
telephonic and electronic contact with his father-in-law once every four months to 
annually. He has telephonic contact with his mother-in-law once every four months to 
two years, and in-person contact once every four years. While Applicant indicated that 
his spouse sparsely contacts her family in South Korea, her father signed over his 
company in Mexico to her and gave her stock in his South Korean companies in 2015; 
and, as of June 2015, the South Korean companies have been taken over by her 
brother. AG ¶ 8(c) is not established.  
 
Applicant has lived in the United States since 1999, though he did return to live 
and work in South Korea between 2009 and 2011. He received a master’s and 
doctorate degree in the United States. He has worked as an engineer in the United 
States from 2005 to 2009, and since 2015. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
2013. His children were born in the United States, and he has one sister who lives in 
the United States and is pursuing her U.S. citizenship. He has owned his home in the 
United States since May 2011. These are factors that weigh in Applicant’s favor.  
 
However, Applicant’s ties to his spouse, and to his family in South Korea 
through his spouse, are equally as strong. Applicant failed to meet his burden to 
demonstrate that he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
AG ¶ 8(b) is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, 
 
10 
 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has no t  mitigated the security concerns raised by his spouse who is a 
citizen of South Korea residing with him in the United States, and his parents-in-law and 
brother-in-law who are citizens and residents of South Korea. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.e – 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.d, 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
