 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06464 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 19, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 8, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On May 1, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 16, 2016.  He denied all of the SOR 
allegations concerning his bankruptcy filings and delinquent debts, and requested that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 1.)  On July 14, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 6 Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on July 25, 2016, and received by him on July 29, 2016. The FORM 
 
2 
 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM on August 23, 2016 and submitted a three 
page exhibit, admitted without objection and marked as Applicant’s Exhibit A. Applicant 
did not object to Items 1 through 6, and were admitted into evidence.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 42 years old. He is married and has two children. He has a high 
school diploma and some college.  He is employed with a defense contractor as a 
Quality Assurance/Compliance Inspector.   He is seeking to obtain a security clearance 
in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified seven debts totaling approximately $83,000.  Applicant admitted each of the 
allegations in the SOR.  (See Answer)  Credit Reports of Applicant dated March 21, 
2016 and December 18, 2014, confirm this indebtedness.  (Applicant’s Exhibits 4 and 
5.)  He has been working for his current employer since September 2014.  
 
Applicant’s SF-86 indicates that he served in the United States Air Force from 
July 1997 to August 2014 and received an honorable discharge.  It also indicates that 
he received two Article 15’s while in the military.  In August 2009, he was charged with 
violating a technical order, and was suspended and forfeited $2,000.  In September 
2011 he was again charged with violating a technical order, and was reduced in rank 
from E-6 to E-5.  (Government Exhibit 6.)     
 
 During his subject interview, Applicant’s stated that in March 2006 he purchased 
a house.  His payments were $1,200 monthly.  He was making bi-weekly payments of 
 
3 
 
$600 which were set up on auto pay with the lender that were directly deducted from his 
checking account at his bank.  A year or so later, Applicant learned that his deductions 
were not going towards his house payments and that he was behind approximately 
$24,000.  Applicant stated that he sent proof of his payments deducted from his bank 
account to the lender, but they insisted that they never received the payments.  
Applicant did not look into the matter any further.  In 2010, the lender allowed the 
Applicant to refinance the house to a make lower payments of $899 monthly to help him 
get back on track with his payments.  Applicant states that he thought he was current on 
these payments until July 2014, when he learned from the lender that he was $75,000 
behind on his mortgage, which included the original delinquency of $75,000, plus fees 
and additional delinquency costs.  Applicant thought the original delinquency amount 
was added into the refinance.  The lender told Applicant that it was not and that 
Applicant has been delinquent since 2008.  (Government Exhibit 6.)            
 
1(a) A delinquent mortgage account is past due in the amount of $78,190 with a total 
loan balance of $145,091.  The debt remains owing.  This is the delinquent mortgage 
loan on his house that is currently in foreclosure.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR, and 
Applicant Exhibit A.)   
 
1(b) A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was sent to collection in the approximate 
amount of $372. The debt remains owing.  Applicant does no know what this account is 
for.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR, and Applicant’s Exhibit A.) 
 
1(c) A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $372.  The debt remains owing.  Applicant does not know what this account 
is for.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR, and Applicant’s Exhibit A.)    
 
1(d) A delinquent debt was charged off.  The debt remains owing.  Applicant does not 
know what the account is for.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR, and Applicant’s Exhibit A.) 
 
1(e) A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed in collection in the amount of 
$3,441.  The debt remains owing.  Applicant does not know what the account is for.  
(Applicant’s Answer to SOR, and Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  
 
1(f) A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the amount of $112.  The 
debt remains owing.  Applicant does not know what the account is for.  (Applicant’s 
Answer to SOR, and Applicant’s Exhibit A.) 
 
1(g) A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed in collection in the approximate 
amount of $577.  The debt remains owing.   Applicant does not know what the account 
is for.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR, and Applicant’s Exhibit A.) 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant admits that he has been negligent in his 
financial responsibilities.  He realizes that it is his fault alone.  He states that he is 
currently in the process of mitigating the financial issues alleged in the SOR.  He plans 
to start working with his creditors to bring himself in good financial standing after his 
unspecified court hearing in September 2016.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)      
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
   
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Although Applicant has been employed full time with his current employer since  
September 2014, and before that he served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force for 
fourteen years, all of the debts in the SOR remain owing.  He has done nothing to 
resolve them or to show a good faith effort to resolve them.  He has not sufficiently 
addressed his delinquent debts, nor has he shown systematic proof of payment toward 
any of his debts.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant’s financial problems have not been mitigated.  In fact, there are no 
circumstances beyond his control that have been proven to relieve him of his financial 
obligations.  He has failed to establish that he acted reasonably or responsibly with 
respect to his debts.  He has not demonstrated that he addressed his debts in a 
responsible or timely manner, as they all remain outstanding.  As he stated, he has 
simply been negligent.  At this time, all of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR remain 
owing.  Applicant has not demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely.  
Applicant remains excessively indebted. There are no indications that his financial 
problems are being resolved or are under control.  
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
________________________ 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
