 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
      DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05437 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 After he was made aware of the security concerns raised by his financial problems, 
Applicant established a sufficient record of debt payments to mitigate the financial 
considerations concerns. He understands that he has to maintain his financial 
responsibility to be eligible for a clearance. He did not deliberately falsify his 2014 security 
clearance application (SCA). The financial considerations and personal conduct security 
concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted an SCA on December 5, 2014. After reviewing it and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) on March 12, 2016, issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline E (personal 
conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on June 22, 2016, and requested a decision 
based on the written record. 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence prompting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by transmittal letter 
dated August 17, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on August 31, 2016. He was 
allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, 
extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant timely responded to the FORM and 
submitted nine pages (marked and admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1) addressing 
some of the accounts alleged in the SOR. The case was assigned to me on May 23, 
2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included his 
unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator from 
March 30, 2015. Applicant was informed he could object to the summary of his interview 
and it would not be admitted, or that he could make corrections, additions, deletions, and 
update the document to make it accurate. Applicant was informed that his failure to 
respond to the FORM or to raise any objections could be construed as a waiver, and the 
evidence would be considered by me. Applicant responded to the FORM by submitting 
documents showing contact with creditors and payments made. He raised no objections. 
I admitted the FORM and Applicant’s evidence, and considered them. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s response, he admitted all of the SOR allegations, except for SOR ¶ 
1.h, which he denied. He also submitted comments in explanation and mitigation. He 
stated that he was making monthly payments on the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e 
(same as 1.k), and 1.i. That he would call the creditor of the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b 
to set up a payment plan, and that he was currently saving money to settle the account 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. He averred he paid the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d (same as 
1.f), 1.g, and 1.j. Applicant admitted he did not list his delinquent accounts on his 2014 
SCA (SOR ¶ 2.a), but then stated that “at the time of hire, knowledge of my debt situation 
was zero.” I considered his response a denial to deliberately falsifying his 2014 SCA. 
 
Applicant’s SOR admissions are incorporated into my findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old sheet metal worker employed with a federal contractor. 
He completed high school in 2000, and attended community college for some time, but 
did not earn a degree. He attended a technical school and earned a training certificate in 
2003. He married his first wife in April 2006, and they have two children, ages 10 and 9. 
 
Applicant’s employment history shows that he was employed between January 
2004 and November 2009. He was unemployed between December 2009 and January 
2010; employed between February 2010 and March 2011; and unemployed between April 
2011 and July 2011. He started working for federal contractors in August 2011. He has 
worked for his current employer and security sponsor since September 2014. 
 
 
3 
                                         
 
Applicant submitted his SCA in December 2014. In response to Section 26 
(Financial Record) of the SCA, Applicant disclosed no delinquent accounts.  
 
A government background investigator interviewed Applicant in March 2015. 
During the interview, Applicant volunteered that he had financial problems that included 
a number of delinquent debts. He explained that he was his family’s main source of 
income, but his wife was in charge of managing the household finances. He stated that 
when he was younger he misused his credit because he did not have the knowledge to 
handle his finances. When the accounts became delinquent, he did not have the financial 
resources to pay them. Applicant also struggled to pay the family’s living expenses and 
their debts because of his periods of unemployment.  
 
As of his March 2015 interview, Applicant had not participated in financial 
counseling. He claimed he was living within his financial means, and believed he was 
capable of meeting his financial obligations. Applicant promised the investigator to contact 
his creditors and start making payment arrangements to resolve his delinquent debts. He 
claimed that he had learned his lesson and had no intentions on repeating his financial 
mistakes.  
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant submitted documentary evidence showing 
payments made and ongoing payment arrangements with a number of the creditors 
alleged in the SOR. The status of his SOR debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleged a $3,140 delinquent debt to a bank. Applicant claimed he was 
making $25 a month payments, but failed to present any documentary evidence to 
corroborate his claim. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleged a $1,065 delinquent debt to a bank in collection. Applicant 
averred he would call the bank and set up a payment plan. He failed to present any 
documentary evidence to corroborate he set up a payment plan. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleged a $1,868 delinquent rent account in collection. In his SOR 
answer, Applicant claimed he was saving money to settle the account. In his response to 
the FORM, he submitted documentary evidence showing he paid the debt in July 2016.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f alleged the same account, owing $464 to a bank. Applicant’s 
documentary evidence shows he paid the account in February 2015. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.k alleged the same account, owing $7,304 to a retailer. 
Applicant’s documentary evidence shows he entered into a payment agreement and 
made the first $270 payment in April 2015. He presented no evidence of additional 
payments since then. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g alleged s $315 delinquent debt to a retailer. Applicant’s documentary 
evidence shows he paid the debt in March 2015. 
 
 
4 
                                         
 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleged a $110 delinquent medical account. Applicant disputed the debt 
and claimed he did not know anything about it.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.i alleged a delinquent account, owing $395 to a retailer. Applicant’s 
documentary evidence shows he entered into a payment agreement and made four $71 
payments, starting in April 2016. The last documented payment was made in August 
2016.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.j alleged a $473 delinquent debt to a credit card company. Applicant’s 
documentary evidence shows he paid the debt in March 2015. 
 
The record evidence documents Applicant’s history of delinquent debt. However, 
Applicant presented documentary evidence to show that he has been in contact with his 
creditors, and that he resolved 8 of his 11 delinquent debts.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
 
5 
                                         
 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the file record. AG ¶ 19 
provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and “(c) a history 
of not meeting financial obligations.” The record established the disqualifying conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and  
                                            
2 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
 
6 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 The financial considerations mitigating conditions in AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) 
apply and mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s documentary evidence shows that 
he contacted his creditors, established payment plans, and resolved 6 of the 11 debts 
alleged in the SOR before the SOR was issued. He subsequently resolved two additional 
debts. I find that his financial problems are under control. 
 
 Applicant’s periods of unemployment likely contributed to or aggravated his 
financial situation. However, he candidly admitted he was negligent managing his 
finances because he was young and immature. After realizing the security concerns 
raised by his financial problems, Applicant initiated good-faith efforts to resolve them. He 
has established a track record of debt payments and promised to continue resolving his 
remaining delinquent accounts. On balance, Applicant presented sufficient information to 
establish that he has learned his lesson and has responsibly addressed his financial 
situation. He understands that he has to maintain his financial responsibility to be eligible 
for a security clearance. The financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
  
                                            
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
                                         
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant omitted relevant and material information from his 2015 SCA when he 
failed to disclose that he had financial problems that included numerous delinquent 
accounts.  
 
  Applicant’s omissions, if deliberate, would trigger the applicability the following 
disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
  Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. (ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 6, 2006)). Considering the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s age, 
education, experience working for government contractors, his 2015 statement to a 
government investigator, and his positive behavior after the background interview, I find 
that Applicant’s omissions were not deliberate or made with the intent to mislead the 
Government. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old sheet metal worker employed with a federal contractor 
since September 2014. He presented some evidence of circumstances beyond his control 
that contributed to, or aggravated his financial situation (periods of unemployment); 
however, he also admitted to his own financial irresponsibility due to his age and 
immaturity.  
 
After he was made aware of the security concerns raised by his financial problems, 
Applicant established a sufficient record of debt payments to mitigate the security 
 
8 
                                         
 
concerns. He also promised to resolved his remaining delinquent accounts. On balance, 
Applicant presented sufficient information to establish that he has learned his lesson and 
responsibly addressed his financial situation. He understands that he has to maintain his 
financial responsibility to be eligible for a security clearance. Financial considerations and 
personal conduct security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.k:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
