 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07670 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Catie Young, Attorney At Law 
 
 
June 6, 2017 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 29, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 19, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 3, 2016. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on November 3, 2016, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on December 5, 2016. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 7, which 
were admitted without objection.  The Applicant offered Exhibits A through K, which 
were marked and admitted without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. He also 
submitted Post-Hearing Exhibits L through S, which were marked and admitted without 
objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 13, 2016.  
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is divorced with 
one son.  He has a Masters Degree in Business Administration.  He holds the position 
as a Senior Systems Engineer for a defense contractor and is seeking to retain his 
security clearance in connection with employment.  
 
 Applicant admits each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this guideline.  
The SOR alleges applicant is indebted to three creditors in the total approximate 
amount of $15,000.  In his Answer, Applicant admitted each debt. Each debt can also 
be found listed in credit reports dated May 31, 2008; August 13, 2014; September 23, 
2014; and August 23, 2016.  (Government Exhibits 4, 5, 6 and 7.)   
 
 Applicant served in the United States Marine Corps from 1998 to 2006.  He was 
in a combat tour in Iraq just before he was honorably discharged in 2006, as a Sergeant 
E-5.  He received a number of awards in recognition of his service including a Good 
Conduct Medal (with one star), Operation Iraqi Freedom Medal, a Sea Service 
Deployment Ribbon (with 3 stars), Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, the National 
Defense Service Medal and others.  (Applicant’s Exhibit Q.) 
 
 Applicant began working for his current employer in September 2016.  He has 
held a security clearance since 1998.  (Tr. p. 25.)  His history of employment shows that 
he has worked for a number of defense contractors, has never incurred a security 
violation, nor has he had any disciplinary problems.     
 
 From 2007 through January 2012, Applicant was employed with a defense 
contractor, and for years 2008, 2009, and 2010, he was deployed overseas earning 
approximately $328,000 annually.  While overseas, Applicant had minimal living 
expenses.  He spent his money carelessly, funding a lavish first-class lifestyle, traveling 
frequently to Hawaii, and going on cruises.  He purchased several rifles and scopes to 
go to the shooting range.  He explained that he would go to nightclubs and spend 
$1,500 on a bottle service table.  (Tr. p. 66.)  From 2008 to 2012 he would gamble once 
or twice a month at different casinos, traveling to Las Vegas or Atlantic City with his 
fiancé.  Each trip would cost him $5,000 to $8,000, not including the money he used to 
gamble.  (Tr. p. 85.)  Applicant does not believe these trips had any negative impact on 
his finances.  He also spent money for improvements to his fiance’s house, installing a 
jacuzzi, a fence, and a theatre room.  Although Applicant married in 2008, he divorced 
in 2009.  Since 2008, Applicant has been required to pay child support.  He was current 
with it until early 2015.   
 
 In 2011, when Applicant returned to the states, his compensation decreased to 
$105,000 annually and he had living expenses to pay.  However, he continued to live 
lavishly and well beyond his means.  He now admits that he was immature and childish 
with how he handled his finances.  He became excessively indebted and so behind on 
his debts, which by that time included credit cards and personal loans that he used to 
pay for vacations and other luxuries, that he was forced to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
 
3 
 
in February 2014.  His debts of approximately $80,000 were discharged in May 2014.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit P, Government Exhibit 3, and Tr. p. 35.)  Following the bankruptcy, 
in 2014, Applicant purchased a two year old Mercedes, spending $28,000 on the 
vehicle, financing it with a 17 percent interest rate.  His car payments are currently $806 
monthly. 
       
 A federal tax lien was filed against the Applicant in February 2014, the amount of 
$11,717 for back taxes owed.  Applicant explained that in 2012 he cashed out $20,000 
in stock from his 401K, and he did not claim the money on his federal income tax 
returns.  Applicant contacted the IRS in 2013, and then again in November 2016, and 
set up a five year payment plan to resolve this debt.  He pays $250 monthly.  He has 
made four payments so far.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  Applicant has also adjusted his 
withholdings to pay more taxes in his paycheck.  (Tr. p. 40.)     
 
 In December 2014, Applicant suffered a heart attack, and underwent two heart 
operations that month.  He was on disability until he was laid off from his employment.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit E.)  While on disability, he missed three or four child support 
payments.  At one point, he was indebted for child support arrears in the amount of 
$3,898.  He explained that his original child support order went into effect in 2008 in the 
amount of $1,100.  In 2012, the amount was adjusted to $685 monthly.  He states that 
he was current with his child support until January 2015.  Applicant has now brought his 
child support payments current.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C, and Tr. p. 47.) 
 
 Applicant tried to go back to work immediately following his heart attack, as he 
needed the money and the medical coverage to continue.  He became ill again, and had 
to stop working.  He had to extend his disability for time to recover.  During this time on 
medical disability, in June 2015, Applicant was unable to make his car payment.  At one 
point, Applicant was behind in the amount of $1,613 (two payments), with an 
outstanding balance of $36,075.  He states that he has made up the past payments and 
is now current on the payments.  His monthly payments are $806.  (Applicant’s Exhibit 
D.) 
 
 Applicant testified that in November 2016 he received credit counseling and has 
come up with an action plan and an estimated projected budget going forward.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit L.)  He hired an on-line company to train him on financial matters 
and states that he has learned that he has done some wasteful spending in the past 
that cannot be repeated.  He currently earns $116,000 annually.   His monthly expenses 
are $3,800 and his take home is $4,200.  He states that he uses the excess to reduce 
his credit card debt, as he currently has two credit cards with a $450 and $285 balance 
respectively.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G.)  He has no retirement accounts and lives 
paycheck to paycheck.  His financial budget indicates that at the end of the month, after 
making his regular monthly payments, he had $200 left in discretionary funds.  (Tr. pp. 
95-96.)        
 
 Applicant states that he is currently single.  He is renting a one bedroom 
apartment, and is frugal with his spending.  (Applicant’s Exhibit H and Tr. p. 56.)   
 
 
4 
 
 Three letters of recommendation from professional associates of the Applicant, 
one from a past supervisor, and one from his current supervisor, each attest to 
Applicant’s trustworthiness and high integrity.  Applicant is considered to be a 
professional and proficient in his work, a leader, open and honest, and an asset to the 
organization.  He is recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit J.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the 
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or 
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s financial history shows that except in December 2014/2015, when he 
experienced medical problems, he has always earned an excellent living.  Instead of 
showing responsibility and good judgment over the years, he spent his money 
carelessly on luxuries and vacations, until he became so indebted he was forced to file 
Bankruptcy.  He discharged $80,000 in debt.  He then went on to purchase a luxury  
vehicle, financing it at a 17 percent interest rate due to his bad credit standing.  When 
he experienced his heart problem, he was not prepared financially to handle the 
situation and he again became delinquently indebted.  The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 Three Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Admittedly, Applicant’s heart attack, related surgeries, and disability period in late 
2014 and 2015, negatively impacted his financial situation, and was something beyond 
his control.  Since then, Applicant has set up a payment plan with the IRS to repay his 
taxes, and has made four payments.  He is now current on his child support and his car 
payment and he has recently placed $956 in a savings account.  With that said, 
Applicant has made a series of poor financial decisions over many years.  As a result, 
he has no retirement account, and is not prepared for an emergency of any sort, as 
states he lives paycheck to paycheck.  His extensive history of excessive spending, 
casts doubt onto his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  Only recently 
has he shown a change in his lavish spending.  However, there has been is no 
sustained pattern of rehabilitation.  At this time, it is not certain whether the spending 
habits of the past have been resolved or are under control or may soon resurface.  More 
time showing a stable financial history and responsibility is needed in order to qualify for 
access to classified information.  At this time, the concern remains unmitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is well respected by his supervisor. Yet, he has made several 
questionable financial choices that do not demonstrate the judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness needed to hold a security clearance. There are significant unresolved 
concerns about Applicant’s finances and judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.~1.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
