 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07431 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, by demonstrating that his delinquent debts have now either been paid or 
are otherwise current and being resolved. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These AGs 
 
2 
 
 
apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Any changes resulting 
from the issuance of new Adjudicative Guidelines did not affect my decision in this case. 
I provided Applicant a copy of the new AGs by e-mail on June 2, 2017.1   
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 2, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 7, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), along with documents 
identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant received the FORM on June 16, 2016. He was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. Applicant submitted responses on June 29, 2016, and August 22, 2016, 
with documentation. Those documents are marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through 
AE D and admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on April 
10, 2017. On June 1, 2017, I e-mailed the parties and re-opened the record to enable 
Applicant to submit updated documentation,2 which he did. Applicant’s additional 
documents are marked as AE E through AE P and admitted without objection. Applicant 
did not object to the Government’s evidence. The SOR and the answer (Items 1 and 2) 
are the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 5 are admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record closed on June 21, 2017, after Applicant submitted his updated 
documentation.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations but for ¶ 1.e, with explanations. I have 
incorporated his answers and relevant comments into the findings of fact. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He was married from 2005 to 2013. He has two children, 
ages 13 and 18. He has worked as an emergency first responder for most of the last 12 
years. From June 2005 to October 2009, and again from September 2010 to September 
2014, Applicant worked in Iraq, under either Defense Department or State Department 
contracts, providing emergency services to military and coalition forces and U.S. 
diplomatic installations. In between, he briefly returned stateside and worked for a county 
fire department (Oct. 2009-April 2010), but he left that job due to the long commute. He 
was then unemployed until July 2010, when he returned overseas. He briefly worked in 
Saudi Arabia (July-September 2010) before returning to Iraq. Since September 2014, he 
has worked at an installation in the United States.3  
 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
2 HE II.  
 
3 Item 3; AE A.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in January 2015. He 
disclosed several financial delinquencies, including credit card accounts and the 
mortgage on his home.4  
 
 The SOR concerns eight delinquent accounts. Five of them (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 
1.d and 1.g) are consumer debts, totaling $13,857. One account (SOR ¶ 1.e) is a 
delinquent mortgage. One account (SOR ¶ 1.f) is an auto loan. One account (SOR ¶ 1.h) 
concerns $12,000 in past-due alimony. All debts but for ¶ 1.h are proven by Applicant’s 
2015 and 2016 credit reports.5 
  
 Applicant and his wife separated in 2011, and their divorce was finalized in August 
2013. He was ordered to pay three years of alimony payments at $500 a month, for a 
total of $18,000. He made one year of payments but still owed his wife two years’ worth 
(SOR ¶ 1.h - $12,000).6 
 
 Applicant indicated that in 2012 and 2013, while overseas, he earned $184,000 a 
year. He lived within his means and was able to meet his obligations. In April 2014, his 
salary decreased to $95,000 a year when the terms of the contract changed, though he 
did the same job at the same location. This made it difficult for him to maintain his 
mortgage, child support/alimony and other financial obligations. He attempted to 
refinance his mortgage, but had difficulty doing so from overseas.7  
 
The current status of Applicant’s debts is as follows:  
 
 SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a ($333) and 1.d ($991) have been paid. (AE L) SOR debt ¶ 1.b 
($1,164) has been paid and has a zero balance. (AE F) Applicant settled and paid SOR 
¶ 1.c ($5,580) for $1,450. (AE I, AE L, AE N) Applicant is paying $101 a month for SOR 
¶ 1.g ($5,789). As of June 2017, he owed $6,581, down from $7,186. (AE H, AE M) 
 
 Applicant could not afford to refinance his home through a traditional mortgage 
(SOR ¶ 1.e -- $41,859 past due, total due $208,070) so he attempted a short sale. The 
home was sold in February 2016. Documentation filed with the county recorder of deeds 
shows that the mortgage was satisfied and paid in full in March 2016.8 SOR ¶ 1.e is 
therefore resolved.  
 
                                                          
4 Item 3.  
 
5 Items 2, 4, 5.  
 
6 AE A.  
 
7 Item 3; FORM Response.  
 
8 Item 3 (court documents attached to answer); AE A, AE B.  
 
 
4 
 
 
In March 2016, Applicant was one payment past due ($719) on his truck loan, with 
a balance due of about $34,813 (SOR ¶ 1.f).9 He has made automatic monthly payments 
on the account since at least July 2016. As of June 21, 2017, the balance on the account 
was $22,696 and the loan was in good standing. (AE P) 
 
 Since October 2016, Applicant has earned an annual salary of $90,000 a year. 
(AE E, AE K) He recently moved in with his girlfriend, which lowers his monthly expenses. 
Both of his daughters moved in with them last summer. His younger daughter (13) 
remains with them and attends a local school. His elder daughter (18) returned last fall to 
live with her mother so she can graduate high school in her hometown. (AE E). 
 
 In July 2016, Applicant’s ex-wife terminated the domestic relations case she filed 
against him. As of August 2016, he was still in arrears and was to pay $100 a month until 
that is resolved, at which point the case would be closed out. (AE D) In June 2017, his 
former wife provided an agreement detailing that she has foregone any alimony he owed 
her, and he would in turn forego any child support that would be due to him for their 
younger daughter, who now lives with him. Their elder daughter no longer qualifies for 
child support. (AE O) SOR ¶ 1.h is therefore resolved. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
9 Item 5. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for 
access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
 
6 
 
 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are established by the record. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant has been gainfully employed in the defense industry for many years. He 
fell behind on his monthly expenses and other debts after taking a significant cut in pay 
while working overseas. Once he returned to the United States, he undertook responsible 
action to pay and resolve the debts. He provided documentation that his debts have now 
been paid, forgiven, or are in good standing. He has regained financial stability and is 
living within his means. His financial issues are unlikely to recur and no longer cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b) and 
20(d) apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered the factors that led to 
Applicant’s financial issues and the steps he has taken to rectify them. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. I conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
