 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04462 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
June 2, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 13, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline H for Applicant. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 13, 2016, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he 
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge (AJ). The case was assigned to 
this AJ on October 4, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on October 18, 2016, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on November 2, 2016.  
 
 At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted no 
 
2 
 
exhibits. The record was kept open until November 18, 2016, to allow Applicant to 
submit additional evidence. Two additional documents were identified as Exhibits A and 
B, and were received into evidence without objection. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr) on November 9, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, as reviewed 
above, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of 
fact:  
 
 Applicant is 56 years old.  He has was first married from 1984 to 1996, and he 
has been married to his current wife from 1999 to the present. He has one daughter and 
one adopted daughter. Applicant attended college, but has not earned a degree. 
Applicant has been employed by a Government contractor since 2002, and he is 
currently a Quality Engineer. Applicant seeks a DoD security clearance in connection 
with his employment in the defense sector. 
 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement   
 
 The SOR lists eight allegations (1.a. through 1.h.) under Adjudicative Guideline 
H. They will be reviewed in the same order as they were listed on the SOR:  
 
 1.a. The SOR alleges, and Applicant admitted in his RSOR, that he misused his 
daughter’s prescription of Vicodin in October 2011, while possessing a security 
clearance.  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified that he has held a security clearance 
continually since 2005. He further testified that he took five of the pills in total from his 
daughter. This was because of severe pain in his neck and back, which ultimately 
forced him to have neck surgery in 2012. He explained that while he could have gone to 
a doctor to have medicine prescribed to relieve the pain, he was very busy at work, and 
he did not want to take off the time to see a doctor. (Tr at 21-23.) 
  
 1.b. The SOR alleges, and Applicant admitted in his RSOR, that he misused his 
co-worker’s prescriptions of Motrin and Vicodin from approximately October 2006 to 
December 2006, while possessing a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant testified that he was suffering from severe back and neck problems, 
causing him a great deal of pain during this period. He again reiterated that he was just 
taking the pills to help him cope with the pain and to continue to work at his job.  He 
estimated that he bought 20 Motrin and five Vicodin from his co-worker on two 
occasions, spending $10 each time for a total of $20. He took Motrin when his pain was 
less severe and the Vicodin for more severe pain. He stated that at the time he was 
using these drugs he was not considering the fact that he possessed a security 
 
3 
 
clearance, because his only real concern was just to help him cope with his pain and 
continue working. (Tr at 23-26.)  
 
 1.c. The SOR alleges, and Applicant admitted in his RSOR, that he “illicitly 
obtained” Motrin and Vicodin from his co-worker’s prescriptions from approximately 
October 2006 to December 2006. Applicant confirmed this allegation, as reviewed in 
1.b., above. (Tr at 23-26.)  
 
 1.d. The SOR alleges, and Applicant admitted in his RSOR, that he used cocaine 
in June 2005, while possessing a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant testified that he used cocaine on one occasion while holding a security 
clearance. He used it at a friend’s house, as he stated, “just to taste it.” (Tr at 26-27.)  
 
 1.e. The SOR alleges, and Applicant admitted in his RSOR, that he used cocaine 
from 1989 to 1993, and in June 2005. 
 
 Applicant did not know the exact amount of times he used cocaine from 1989 to 
1993, but estimated that it was approximately 75 times. He reiterated that during this 
period he did not have a security clearance. He used the cocaine with people he knew. 
(Tr at 26-28.)  
 
 1.f. The SOR alleges, and Applicant admitted in his RSOR, that he purchased 
cocaine from 1989 to 1993. Applicant estimated that he spent about $800 in the 
purchase of cocaine, spending about $25 each time. (Tr at 28-29.)   
 
 1.g. The SOR alleges, and Applicant admitted in his RSOR, that he used 
marijuana from approximately 1974 to 1993. 
 
 Applicant testified that he used marijuana from when he was in high school until 
he was 33. He used it because he liked the effect of marijuana more than from 
consuming alcohol. Applicant confirmed that he has not used marijuana since 1993. (Tr 
at 29-33.)   
 
 1.h. The SOR alleges, and Applicant admitted in his RSOR, that he purchased 
marijuana from approximately 1974 to 1993. 
 
 Applicant testified that he purchased the marijuana he used in either nickel or 
dime bags on less than 25 occasions. He estimated he spent from $100 to $200 in total. 
(Tr at 33-34.)  
 
 Applicant testified that he last used any drug in an illegal manner in 2011, but at 
the time he used them, he had not considered using the drug of someone else to help 
him cope with pain as a violation of the security clearance rules. He has since become 
aware that this is a violation, and he strongly and credibly averred that he would never 
again use illegal drugs or use the prescription drugs of anyone else. In response to a 
question about why Applicant would never illegally or improperly use drugs in the future, 
 
4 
 
he stated, “My job is very important to me and our nation. And I would die for our nation. 
And I love what I do.”  He also explained that he has been in the defense industry for 30 
years and it is very dear to his heart. Finally, he explained that he is a devoted family 
man, and now through his daughter, he is a grandfather. (Tr at 35-37.) 
 
Mitigation  
 
Applicant submitted three Performance Evaluations for years 2013 through 2015. 
(Exhibit B.) He received a rating of “Achieves Expectations” for each year.  Additionally, 
in a post-hearing letter, Applicant explained that in August 2012, he underwent neck 
surgery with a fusion of his C5 through C7, and he has been under his doctor’s care 
since his surgery. He once again reiterated that his last usage of a drug that was not 
prescribed to him was in 2011, and it was because he was working many hours, and 
feeling severe pain in his neck, back and down his legs. Finally in the letter he wrote, “I 
promise you, that I will never put my DOD Security Clearance at risk or jeopardy ever 
again.” (Exhibit A.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement  
  
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
 
      Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgement and because it raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case. 
Applicant's improper and illegal drug abuse, especially the use of prescription drugs that 
were prescribed to another person and the use of cocaine, all while he was holding a 
security clearance, is of great concern, especially in light of his continued desire to have 
access to the nation's secrets. Applicant's overall conduct pertaining to his illegal 
substance abuse clearly falls within Drug Involvement ¶ 25(a) “any drug abuse” and (c) 
“illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, 
or distribution.” ¶ 25(g) is also applicable because of Applicant’s “illegal drug use after 
being granted a security clearance.” 
 
 I also considered a number of factors in mitigation. First I considered the recency 
of use. Applicant last used the Vicodin of his daughter to help him deal with his pain in 
2011, almost 6 years ago. At that time he used about five of her pills. Before that he 
used the prescription drugs of his co-worker, again the Vicodin, in particular, in 2006, 
more than 10 years ago. Finally, he used the cocaine one time when he held a security 
clearance, and that was in June 2005, more than 11 years ago. His other uses of 
cocaine and his marijuana usage were more than 20 years ago. Therefore, a significant 
amount of time has elapsed since his use of any illegal substance. While Applicant's 
use of the prescription drugs is illegal and a violation of his company’s rules and the 
rules regarding security clearances, I do take into consideration that this usage was only 
to help him cope with actual pain, and not to get high or to alter his consciousness. His 
 
6 
 
cocaine use is more of a concern because it clearly was done for him to get high, not to 
ease pain. However, is cocaine usage while holding a security clearance was only one 
time, and again, it was more than 11 years ago. Finally, I found Applicant's testimony 
that he would never use any illegal drug or the prescription drug of anyone else to be 
credible and sincere. At this time I believe that Applicant will not use any illegal drugs in 
the future. Therefore, I conclude that the following mitigating conditions under Drug 
Involvement AG ¶ 26 are applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (3) 
an appropriate period of abstinence. 
 
 In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant 
has used illegal drugs under Guideline H, especially while holding a security clearance. 
Applicant, on the other hand, has introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, 
explanation, or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome the Government's case 
against him. Guideline H of the SOR is concluded for Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no significant questions or doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Drug Involvement security concerns under the 
whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.h.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
