 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06932 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant provided sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 27, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) The Department of Defense (DOD) 
could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On April 
7, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 11, 2016, admitting the 12 delinquent debt 
allegations with explanation. He elected to have the matter decided on the written 
record. (Item 2) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on June 
1, 2016. (Item 5) Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on 
June 8, 2016, and he was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant timely 
filed a response to the FORM. (Item 6) Department Counsel had no objection to 
consideration of the submitted material. (Item 7) I was assigned the case on March 21, 
2017.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 30 years old. He graduated from high school in June 2005, and has some 
technical school education. He served two years of active duty in the Navy from July 
2005 to July 2007, and another almost two years in the Navy inactive reserves from July 
2007 until February 2009. He was granted eligibility for access to classified information 
in January 2005. He was employed by defense contractors in various positions from 
since July 2007 to present, including an assignment in Afghanistan from August 2010 
until December 2012. He has been employed as an intelligence analyst for a defense 
contractor since February 2014. He is married with one child. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated 
March 30, 2015)  
 
 The SOR alleges, and a credit report (Item 4, dated April 14, 2015) confirm the 
following delinquent debts for Applicant: education student loans for $7,704 (SOR 1.a), 
$4,046 (SOR 1.b), $2,563 (SOR 1.c), $2,470 (SOR 1.d), and $14,301 (SOR 1.e); a debt 
to a landlord in collection for $1,031 (SOR 1.f); medical debts for $864 (SOR 1.g), $646 
(SOR 1.h), $545 (SOR 1.i), $130 (SOR 1.j), and $74 (SOR 1.m); and a debt for medical 
service for a pet in collection for $89 (SOR 1.k).1 The total amount of the delinquent 
debt is approximately $34,374. Most of this debt is from student loans.  
 
 There is little information in the case file as to the reasons why Applicant 
accumulated the delinquent debts. Applicant reported most of the delinquent debts 
raised in the SOR on his e-QIP. He noted that he is supporting two households and 
cannot make full student loan payments. He is trying to make small payments on the 
student loans but it has become difficult. He stated he is disputing some of the medical 
debts. The apartment lease debt is for damage to an apartment he vacated for which he 
did not have a security deposit. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated March 27, 2015 at 43-50) In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant did not indicate how and why he accumulated 
delinquent debt. He concentrated his response on the actions he was taking to resolve 
the debts. He included a receipt for payment of the debt at SOR 1.m.  
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant outlined the actions he has taken to 
resolve the delinquent debts. He contacted all of the creditors he could identify to 
                                                          
1 There is no allegation 1.l in the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
establish payment plans. His student loans are consolidated and a payment plan of $75 
monthly established. Applicant provided proof of the payments made under the plan. 
(SOR 1.a – 1.e) He provided proof that he is making monthly payments of $20 on the 
apartment rent debt. (SOR 1.f) Applicant proved evidence that he is making monthly 
payments of $20 as agreed on the medical debts at SOR 1.g and 1.h. He provided 
evidence that $25 monthly is withdrawn from his bank account to pay as agreed the 
medical debt at SOR 1.i. The creditor for the medical debt at SOR 1.j could not locate 
either an account or debt for Applicant. Since no debt was established, Applicant is not 
required to make payments to resolve the debt. Applicant claims he paid the debt for pet 
care at SOR 1.k, but the creditor would not provide a receipt. Applicant again provided a 
receipt for payment of the debt at SOR 1.m. (Item 6, Response to FORM) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
4 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) An individual who 
is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his 
obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one 
aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 A credit report reveals, and Applicant admitted, that he had 12 delinquent debts, 
for student loans, medical accounts, and an apartment lease. Adverse information in a 
credit report can normally meet the substantial evidence standard to establish financial 
delinquency. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). The information 
raises an issue about Applicant’s willingness and ability to meet his financial obligations. 
Once the Government has established the adverse financial issue, the Applicant has 
the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 There is insufficient information in the case file to determine if the mitigating 
conditions at AG ¶ 20 (a), (b), and (c) apply. However, Applicant incurred student loan 
debt deliberately and freely to finance his education. Applicant’s debts are numerous, 
recent, and not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. The financing 
of his education through student loans is not an unusual circumstance or beyond 
Applicant’s control. Applicant presented no evidence that he received financial 
counseling.  
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(d) does apply. Good faith means acting in a way 
that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. 
Applicant is not required to be debt-free nor must his plan require paying off all debts 
immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that Applicant act responsibly given 
his circumstances. Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve 
financial problems, and that he has taken significant action to implement that plan. 
Applicant’s plan must show a systematic method of handling debts, and Applicant must 
establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. A meaningful track record of debt 
payment can be established by evidence of actual debt payments or reduction of debt 
through payment of debts. A promise to pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for a 
track record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible 
manner.  
 
 Applicant provided adequate information that he resolved, paid, or is paying all of 
his delinquent debts. Even though there is insufficient information to determine how and 
why Applicant incurred delinquent debt, there is ample evidence to establish that 
Applicant acted responsibly by developing payment plans for his debts. Applicant 
established that he is making payments under the agreed payment plans. There is clear 
evidence that his financial problems are being resolved and his finances are under 
control. His reasonable and responsible actions towards his finances is a strong 
indication that he will protect and safeguard classified information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s service in 
the Navy, and his service in Afghanistan as a civilian in support of the military mission. 
Applicant provided sufficient credible documentary information to establish that he took 
reasonable and responsible action to resolve his financial obligations by making 
payment plans to resolve his debts. He also provided sufficient evidence that he is 
making the required payments under the plans. Applicant demonstrated appropriate 
management of his finances and a record of action to resolve financial issues. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has established his suitability for access to 
classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.m:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
