 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-07939 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a track record of financial responsibility and her financial problem 
is being resolved. She mitigated the Guideline F (financial considerations) concerns. 
Applicant deliberately omitted material financial information from her trustworthiness 
position application and failed to mitigate the Guideline E (personal conduct) 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility to hold a position of public trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire (Application) requesting eligibility 
for a position of trust on October 10, 2014. After reviewing it and the information 
gathered during a background investigation, on May 6, 2016, the Department of 
Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guidelines F and E.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 9, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The 
case was assigned to me on December 7, 2016. The DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
 
2 
 
 
on December 12, 2016, scheduling a hearing for January 18, 2017. At the hearing, the 
Government offered four exhibits (GE 1 through 4). Applicant testified, presented the 
testimony of one witness, and submitted exhibits (AE) A through L). AE L was received 
post-hearing. All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on January 25, 2017.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 The Government amended the SOR on January 17, 2017 (the day before the 
hearing), adding four financial allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.m through 1.p). (Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) 1) Applicant objected to the amendment. I offered to reschedule the hearing at 
Applicant’s convenience. She declined because it would create a financial hardship. 
The original SOR allegations made Applicant aware that her federal and state income 
tax problems were a concern. Notwithstanding, to mitigate any possible adverse effect 
caused by the amendment, I granted Applicant an extension until February 28, 2017, to 
submit additional matters for my consideration.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.h, 1.j, and 1.k. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.l, and both Guideline E allegations (SOR 
¶¶ 2.a and 2.b). She did not admit or deny the amended SOR allegations and I 
considered them denied. Her admissions to the SOR and at hearing are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old administrative assistant employed with a federal 
contractor since 2002. She graduated from high school in 1985, and completed about 
30 college credits. Her employer recently merged with another federal contractor. After 
the merger, Applicant was required eligibility for a position of public trust to continue the 
work she has performed since she was hired in 2002. This is her first application for a 
position of public trust. 
 
Applicant married in 1999 and separated in 2009. She has a son, age 25, from 
this marriage. Her husband abandoned Applicant and her son in 2009. He has paid no 
child support or alimony since he left the marriage. Applicant filed her own income tax 
returns before she married. After she married, her husband was in charge of the family 
finances and the filing of the income tax returns. Applicant testified that after her 
husband abandoned her, she had to learn to manage her finances and file income tax 
returns. She earns approximately $35,000 a year. Her son was dependent on her until 
recently. While living with Applicant, her son contributed to the household expenses. 
 
In Applicant’s 2014 trustworthiness application, she indicated she has worked for 
her current employer since 2002, and reported no periods of unemployment or 
underemployment since then. In Section 26 (Financial Record) of her 2014 Application, 
Applicant stated that she had no delinquent accounts, no financial problems within the 
 
3 
 
 
prior seven years, that she had timely filed her income tax returns, and that she owed 
no taxes. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation disclosed the SOR debts which are 
established by Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence (GE 2 through 4). 
The status of the SOR accounts is as follows: 
 
Applicant filed her federal income tax returns for tax years 2009 through 2012 in 
October 2014. (SOR ¶ 1.a) In December 2014, Applicant entered into a repayment plan 
with the IRS. She is currently making $100 monthly payments to satisfy her debt. Her 
IRS installment agreement statement shows consecutive payments from July 2015 
through May 2016. (AE C, D) Applicant testified she had made payments up to 
December 2016, but submitted no documentary evidence to corroborate those 
payments. After the hearing, she submitted documentary evidence showing payments 
made in January and February 2017. (AE L) 
 
Applicant’s state filed tax liens against her in March 2006 ($7,057); February 
2011 ($495.77); March 2008 ($341.96); January 2008 ($6,773); and November 2007 
($7,638). (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1,m, 1.n, 1.o, and 1.p, respectively.) These liens are established 
by GE 4. Applicant has a payment agreement with her state for tax year 2012 (not 
alleged in the SOR). She presented documentary evidence of one payment made in 
February 17, 2017. She presented no other evidence of payments made or payment 
agreements established for any other delinquent tax years or liens filed by the state.  
 
Applicant submitted a statement of intent promising to “never fail to file her 
federal and state income tax returns again” with an automatic revocation of her 
clearance for any failure to file. (AE A)  
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.b, and promised to make payment arrangements. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.k allege delinquent traffic tickets in collection issued to Applicant’s 
son, who testified the tickets were issued to him, and promised to pay them. He 
explained that because Applicant cosigned for his car, her name was in the title and, 
even though he committed the traffic violations, the tickets reflected back to her. 
Applicant’s son averred he had to pay some of the tickets before he could register his 
new car (not cosigned by Applicant). He also averred that SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.i alleged 
the same ticket. (Tr. 30 – 43; AE E) 
 
Concerning the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.g, Applicant testified 
she intends to place them in a debt consolidation program to be established in the near 
future. Applicant is disputing the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l because it is for equipment 
that she already returned. As of the hearing date, she had not retained the services of a 
debt consolidation company. She presented no documentary evidence of any disputes 
filed with any creditors or with the credit bureaus.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant claimed she recently established a payment agreement to pay $106 
monthly, starting in February 2017 (after the hearing), for the account alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.e. Applicant presented no documentary evidence to support her claim. 
 
Applicant testified that most of her debts were acquired during the marriage. 
When her husband abandoned Applicant, he took all the money. She became the only 
provider, and her income was not sufficient to pay her living expenses and accumulated 
debts. She became responsible for the household finances and filing her income tax 
returns. Applicant averred she was not financially sophisticated and had to learn about 
finances and to file her income tax returns. She received financial counseling in January 
2017, and testified she learned to make monthly payment on her debts and to make and 
follow a budget. She averred she cut off two credit cards and has modified her behavior 
to save money. (AE F) 
 
Applicant submitted favorable reference statements from her supervisors. They 
consider Applicant to be a hard worker, competent, dependable, reliable, honest, and 
trustworthy. She was recognized as employee of the quarter for her exceptional 
performance, and is considered to be a valuable and productive employee. She is 
considered to be the “go-to administrator” in her professional office. Her references 
endorse her eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
  SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified her 2014 SCA when she 
answered “no” to Section 26 and failed to disclose that she failed to timely file her 
federal and state taxes between 2009 and 2012, and that she owed taxes to both. She 
also failed to disclose the tax liens the state filed against her, and 10 delinquent 
accounts she had within the prior seven years.  
 
  Applicant denied she deliberately falsified her application. She explained that this 
was her first application for a position of public trust and she did not know what she was 
doing. She claimed she did not understand the questions, had no help completing the 
application, and that she answered the questions to the best of her ability. At the time 
she completed her Application, she did not have a credit report with all of her financial 
information, and she was not aware of her delinquent accounts.  
 
  Applicant initially claimed she did not know her income tax returns had not been 
filed. However, her husband abandoned her in 2009 and they had no contact. Later, she 
stated that she knew she had to file separately from her estranged husband. Applicant 
filed her income tax returns for tax years 2009 through 2014 sometime prior to 
submitting her October 2014 Application. She also entered into a payment agreement 
with the IRS in December 2014. Later during her testimony, Applicant claimed she did 
not disclose her failure to timely file her taxes because she had just filed them. 
 
  Applicant also claimed she did not timely file her income tax returns because she 
had never filed income tax returns before, did not know how to file, and she needed 
someone to help her file. She stated she was scared of filing her income tax returns 
alone and procrastinated filing them. She also stated she needed some information 
 
5 
 
 
from her husband and waited for it, but never got it. (Tr. 67) Applicant testified that she 
has learned to file her income tax returns and will not have problems filing her taxes in 
the future. Applicant acknowledged that before she married, she filed her own income 
tax returns. 
 
  Concerning the state tax liens, Applicant testified she knew only about the tax 
lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. When her husband left her in 2009, Applicant was aware that 
they owed state income taxes. She claimed her husband told her he was going to pay 
the state taxes and she believed he would. Shortly before her hearing, Applicant 
established a payment agreement with the state to pay $50 monthly, starting on 
February 15, 2017, to pay the tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. She claimed she did not 
know about the other tax liens until she was served with the amended SOR. In her SOR 
answer and at her hearing, she stated her intention to establish payment agreements 
with the state to pay her tax debt.  
 
In February 2017, Applicant submitted to the state a request to participate in an 
“offer in compromise program” based on her financial hardship. She stated in the 
request that her gross annual salary is $35,000, she could barely make ends meet, lives 
from paycheck to paycheck, and is only one paycheck away from being homeless. She 
asked to settle her personal taxes, which she estimated to be $6,564, for a total of 
$656. There is no response from the state attached to the document submitted. (AE L)  
 
Policies 
 
In issuing the SOR, DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as 
amended (Regulation);1 and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. The 
case will be decided under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017. 
 
The DOD considers ADP positions to be sensitive positions. For a person to be 
eligible for sensitive duties, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness must be 
such that assigning the person to a sensitive position is clearly consistent with the 
national security interests of the United States. SEAD 4, E(4); SEAD 4, App. A ¶ 2.d. 
Applicants for ADP positions are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination is made.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
                                            
1 ADP cases are adjudicated under the provisions of the Directive. (Deputy Under Secretary of 
Defense’s Memorandum for the Director, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, dated November 19, 
2004.) 
 
6 
 
 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
A public trust position decision resolves whether it is clearly consistent with the 
interest of national security to grant or continue an applicant’s access to sensitive 
information. The Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States to grant 
or continue his or her access to sensitive information.  
 
Persons with access to sensitive information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national security as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government. Access to sensitive information determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials. SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). 
Eligibility for a public trust position decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not 
met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing access to sensitive 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the trustworthiness concern is that failure to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk 
of having to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 
18) 
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is well documented in the file record. 
She acquired the tax liens and delinquent SOR accounts between 2007 and 2014. She 
presented some documentary evidence of payments made, efforts to contact creditors, 
and payment plans, but mostly after receipt of the SOR. Four of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions apply: AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; AG ¶ 
19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; AG ¶ 19(c): a 
history of not meeting financial obligations; and AG ¶ 19(c): failure to file or fraudulently 
 
7 
 
 
filing federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, o 
local income tax as required.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangement with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant filed her delinquent income tax returns and established a payment plan 
in 2014, before issuance of the SOR. She has been making her payments and is in 
compliance with her agreement. Concerning the state tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, 
Applicant contacted the state in early 2017, established a payment plan, and made her 
first payment in February 2017. She also requested an offer in compromise to resolve 
the state tax liens alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.m through 1.p, due to financial hardship in 
February 2017. Although the state has not responded, I find for Applicant on the state 
tax lien allegations. She does not have the financial resources to pay all her delinquent 
debts at the same time. She is paying her past-due federal taxes first. If the offer in 
compromise is denied, I believe Applicant will continue to make payment arrangements 
to address the remaining state tax liens (SOR ¶¶ 1.m through 1.p). (AE L)  
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant paid or resolved the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.k. Her son 
admitted these were his delinquent traffic tickets and promised to pay them. Her 
documentary evidence shows she paid SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 1.h (paid by son), 1.j, and 1.k 
after the hearing. SOR ¶ 1.i is a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.f, and is decided for Applicant.  
   
 Concerning the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.g, Applicant plans to 
place them in a debt consolidation program she intends to establish in the near future. 
She presented no evidence of a debt consolidation program.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s 2009 separation a circumstance beyond her control that 
may have contributed or aggravated her financial problems. Applicant’s evidence of 
financial responsibility is not strong; however, considering the totality of her 
circumstances, I find it is sufficient to establish her financial responsibility under her 
circumstances. Applicant’s income is small, she raised her son without any financial 
assistance, and she filed her delinquent income tax returns and established a payment 
plan with the IRS before the SOR was issued. She has been making her IRS payments, 
and addressing her other delinquent accounts within her financial limitations. Her son 
has a job and appears to a productive member of society.  
 
 Applicant’s references consider her to be a hard worker, competent, dependable, 
reliable, honest, and trustworthy. She was recognized for her exceptional performance, 
and is considered to be a valuable and productive employee. Applicant participated in 
financial counseling and testified that she follows a budget. In sum, the available 
information is sufficient to establish that her financial problem is being resolved. 
Applicant established that she has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the trustworthiness concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
  Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant had knowledge of her delinquent 
accounts, unfiled income tax returns, and that the state filed tax liens against her and 
her husband at the time she completed her 2014 Application. Applicant’s omission of 
material financial information on her 2014 Application triggers the applicability the 
following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
9 
 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 None of the above mitigating conditions fully apply. In light of the evidence as a 
whole, Applicant’s claims of innocent mistake are not sufficiently established by the 
evidence she submitted. Applicant made several contradictory explanations about her 
failure to disclose her financial information. Ultimately, her testimony and excuses for 
her failure to disclose the required financial information are not credible. I considered 
Applicant’s age, education, experience working for a government contractor, her 
excellent reputation as a top performer, the number and value of the debts, unfiled 
income tax returns, and tax liens filed against her. On balance, Applicant had ample 
knowledge of her delinquent accounts, unfiled income tax returns, and filed tax liens at 
the time she completed her 2014 Application. Her evidence is insufficient to mitigate the 
Guideline E security concerns.  
 
10 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has been in a difficult financial situation because of circumstances 
beyond her control and through no fault of her own. She provided sufficient 
documentary evidence to show she has been in contact with her creditors, and that she 
has made efforts to settle or pay her delinquent debts within her financial limitations. 
Her evidence is sufficient to show that she has a track record of financial responsibility 
and her financial problem is being resolved.  
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to mitigate the personal 
conduct concerns. Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a 
position of trust, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of eligibility 
for such position. Unmitigated concerns about Applicant’s falsification of her 2014 
Application lead me to conclude that grant of eligibility for a position of public trust to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.p:      For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a position of public trust to Applicant. Eligibility for a position of public trust 
is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
