1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 15-04580 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for 
access to classified information. She presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns stemming from her ties to the country of Taiwan during 
the security clearance process. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on September 15, 2014. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. On August 18, 2016, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a statement of reasons 
(SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information.1 The SOR is similar to 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
2 
 
a complaint in a civil court action. It detailed the factual reasons for the action under the 
security guideline known as Guideline, B, Foreign Influence and Guideline, C, Foreign 
Preference. Applicant answered the SOR (undated), and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me December 2, 2016. A notice of 
hearing was issued on March 22, 2017, scheduling the hearing for May 11, 2017. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-2 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, presented one witness, and submitted six exhibits, which were marked as 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A-F, and admitted into the record without objection. The 
transcript was received on May 22, 2017. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony 
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.   
 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
regarding the Republic of China - Taiwan. Applicant did not object and the memorandum 
of administrative notice and source documents were entered into the record as 
Government Exhibit 2.  At the hearing, SOR allegations under Guideline C were formally 
withdrawn. (Tr. 7) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a. The admission was 
incorporated in my findings of fact. Applicant also admitted the SOR allegations under 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference. However, as noted above, Guideline C was withdrawn 
at the hearing. 
 
Applicant is 24 years old, single, an only child, and born in the United States, but 
acquired Taiwanese citizenship through her parents. From the age of three to ten she 
lived in Taiwan with her parents when they returned to Taiwan for employment. (Tr. 9) 
Her parents also had to care for Applicant’s grandparents, who reside in Taiwan. 
Applicant and her parents returned to the United States in 2003. She graduated from a 
U.S. high school in 2010, and received her undergraduate degree from   an American 
university in 2014. (GX 1; AX D) Applicant held a positon of trust with another Government 
agency in 2014. (AX A) She has worked for her current employer as an IT analyst since 
June 2014.  
 
Applicant has financial interests in the United States. She earns about $85,000 
from her current position as a senior analyst. She supports herself in the United States. 
She has her health benefits through her employer. (AX F)  She had a small bank account 
in Taiwan as a child, which has long been closed. She rents a townhome in the United 
                                                          
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, DOD CAF adjudicators reviewed the case using the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 
1, 2006. I decided the case using new AGs effective June 8, 2017. My conclusions would be the same 
under either guideline.  
 
3 
 
States. Applicant has a retirement account and savings account in the United States. She 
estimates that the combined value is about $90,000.  (Tr. 41) She has no financial 
interests in Taiwan. 
 
Applicant‘s parents are dual citizens of the United States and Taiwan. They lived 
in the United States until 2013. Her mother and father held professional positions in the 
United States. (AX E).They moved back to Taiwan to care for Applicant’s grandparents. 
Applicant’s parents have a home in the United States. (AX B) Applicant’s mother pays 
U.S. tax on her home. (AX C). Applicant’s parents spend part of the year in the United 
States and the rest of time in Taiwan. (Tr.21)  
 
Applicant’s parents have no association with the Taiwanese government. They 
have never worked for that government.  (Tr. 33) Applicant’s parents do not know about 
the nature of Applicant’s work or that she is in the process of obtaining a security 
clearance. Applicant visited her parents in 2016, and stayed with them for a few weeks. 
She has visited them once a year since they returned to Taiwan.  Applicant speaks to her 
parents on the phone via Skype. 
 
Applicant’s employer testified that Applicant has some specialized skills around 
statistics and optimization which would help the company meet requirements on 
contracts. (Tr. 43) The witness testified that the combination of skills that Applicant has 
are hard to find in new analysts. The witness is aware of the security concern at issue in 
this case. She is aware that Applicant travels to see her parents in Taiwan. (Tr. 45) The 
witness has known Applicant for about two years. She holds a security clearance. (Tr. 46) 
The person who was responsible for hiring Applicant knew about Applicant’s dual 
citizenship. (Tr. 49) Applicant informed the interviewer that she was willing to do anything 
that was necessary to obtain her security clearance.  
 
 . 
 
Administrative Notice (Republic of China -Taiwan) 
 
In response to the Government’s request, to which Applicant did not object, I have 
taken administrative notice of the following relevant facts about Taiwan: 
 
• The 2009 and 2011 Annual Reports to Congress on Foreign Economic 
Collection and Industrial Espionage identified Taiwan as being involved in 
economic collection and industrial espionage, particularly in cyberspace.  
 
• The United States does not diplomatically recognize Taiwan. In the U.S.-PRC 
Joint Communiques of 1972, 1979, and 1982 the U.S. expressly 
“acknowledged” China’s position that there is only “one China” on both sides of 
the Taiwan Strait. 
 
• China’s intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, 
frequently seek to exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China 
4 
 
who can use their insider access to corporate networks to steal trade secrets 
using removable devices or e-mail. Moreover, “Chinese actors are the world’s 
most active and persistent perpetrators of economic espionage. Chinese 
attempts to collect U.S. technological and economic information will continue 
at a high level and will represent a growing and persistent threat to U.S. 
economic security.” 
 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.2 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”3 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.4 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.5 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.6 The Government has the burden of presenting evidence 
to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.7 An applicant is 
responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts that 
have been admitted or proven.8 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.9 
 
                                                          
2 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
3 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
4 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
5 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
6 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
7 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
8 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
9 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
5 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.10 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.11 
 
     Discussion 
 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
The security concern under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) is set out in AG ¶ 6, 
as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a  foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
Three disqualifying conditions under this Guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign  person, group, or country by providing that information or 
technology;  and 
 
AG ¶ 7(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement , manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 
                                                          
10 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s close family ties to her parents who are dual citizens and resident of 
Taiwan establish AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e).  A “heightened risk” is associated with 
Taiwan, given its history of economic collection and industrial espionage. 
 
Application of Guideline B is not a comment on an applicant’s patriotism but merely 
an acknowledgment that people may act in unpredictable ways when faced with choices 
that could be important to a loved one, such as a family member.12 Family relationships 
can involve matters of influence or obligation.13 Therefore, Applicant’s family ties with her 
parents raise concerns for which she has the burden of persuasion to mitigate.14   
 
The following mitigating conditions under this Guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the  
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U. S. interest;  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(f): the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 02-04786 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2003). 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 99-0532 at 7 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2000) (When an applicant’s ties in a foreign country raise 
a prima facie security concern, the applicant is required to present evidence of rebuttal, extenuation, or 
mitigation sufficient to carry his burden of persuasion that it is “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
to grant or continue a security clearance on his behalf). 
 
 
7 
 
For the reasons set out in the discussion of AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e), above, AG 
¶ 8(a) is not established. 
 
Applicant was born and educated in the United States. She has lived in the United 
States all her life, with the exception of the years from three to ten, when she left with her 
parents to go to Taiwan.  Her parents have lived in the United States and own property in 
the United States. They are dual citizens of the United States and Taiwan. Applicant sees 
her parents when they are living in the United States part of the year. She visits them in 
Taiwan. She has no siblings or other contacts in Taiwan. Her parents have no connection 
with the government of Taiwan. They do not know about Applicant’s security clearance 
process.  
 
Applicant has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S. 
that she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
There is little likelihood that Applicant’s communications with her parents could create a 
risk for foreign influence or exploitation. Applicant’s financial interests are in the United 
States. She is financially stable. She has no financial interests in Taiwan. She has savings 
and retirement accounts in the United States. She wants to have a career in the United 
States. I find that mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 8(b), (c), and (f) apply.  
 
    Conclusion 
 
The record does not create doubt about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.15 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met her ultimate burden of persuasion 
to show that it is clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant her 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the SOR allegations: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:                         For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline C:  Withdrawn 
 
 
 
                                                          
15 AG ¶ 2(d)(1)-(9). In that consideration, I gave positive weight to the Applicant’s credibility, demeanor and 
maturity.   
8 
 
   
    
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the interest of national 
security to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch  
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
