                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
 )     ISCR Case No.15-07146
)
` )
Applicant for Security Clearance                  )     
Appearances
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to
Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The SOR was dated April 18, 2016. The action was taken under
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision based on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated June 22, 2016.  Applicant received the FORM on July 14,1
2016. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May
24, 2017. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
The Government submitted six items for the record.      1
1
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the four allegations, and provided
explanations for the allegations under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  (Item 2)
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active
duty in the military (U.S. Navy) from 1989 to 2009, receiving an honorable discharge.
He is divorced and has one minor child. Applicant has worked for his current employer
since 2010 as an aircraft mechanic. He completed a security clearance application in 
2015, and has held a security clearance since 2003. (Item 3)
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges four delinquent debts that total approximately $16,420. (Item 1)
The items are a collection account in the amount off $15,965; a medical account in the
amount of $90; a collection account in the amount of $115; and a collection account in
the amount of $250.  (Item 1)
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that his small debts have been paid.
(Item 2) Applicant was unemployed from September 2009 until August 2010. (Item 3)
He supported himself with unemployment benefits and his military pension. He also
noted on his security clearance application that he was looking for employment after he
left the military in 2009 and was unemployed from February 2009 to April 27, 2009.  He
disclosed his financial issues in his 2015 security clearance application and stated that
he was working with a debt-relief company on his largest debt (SOR 1.a) and was
working on a payment plan. (Item 3)
In his 2015 investigative interview, Applicant said he owned a revolving credit
account that was opened in the early 2000s, and became delinquent when he was
unemployed in 2009. He started to work with a debt-relief company and made monthly
payments of $320 to the service, but he stated that the company could not negotiate
with the creditor on the delinquent debt and the amount of debt is unresolved. (Item 4)
Applicant stated that he would resolve the account listed in SOR 1.a by December
2015.
As to SOR allegation 1.a, Applicant’s assertion that he made a payment of $200
on May 27, 2016, is not confirmed by any documentation. His latest credit report
confirms the debt.
As to SOR allegation 1.b, Applicant admitted to the medical account, which
shows a balance of $90. In his response to the SOR, he stated that he paid the account
in full and it has a zero balance. He did not provide proof of payment, and his 2016
credit report shows an unpaid account.  (Item 5)
2
As to SOR allegation 1.c, Applicant reported in his answer that the collection
account with a balance of $115 was paid in May 2016. He did not provide proof of
payment. It does not appear on his latest credit report.
As to SOR allegation 1.d, Applicant admitted the balance, but stated that he paid
$250 in May 2016. He did not provide any documentation. It does not appear on his
latest credit report. (Item 5) 
Applicant’s credit report, obtained in 2016, reflects that the majority of his
accounts are noted “pays as agreed.” However, he noted that he made a $200 payment
on the largest debt in May 2016 and the debt became delinquent in 2009. He has been
working since 2010. Thus, it is not clear as to whether any other efforts to make
payments on this account have occurred. 
There is nothing in the record that shows Applicant’s current financial earnings or 
any attempts to obtain financial counseling, except through the debt-relief company. He
did not respond to the FORM to supplement the record.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
3
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance2
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
The Government produced credible evidence to establish that Applicant had
delinquent debts. The credit reports confirm the debts. Consequently, the evidence is
sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant acknowledged his delinquent debts. He was unemployed after retiring
from the military and at another period in time. He stated that he used a debt-relief
company to help him with his finances. There is no information that he made payments
before the May 2016 payment, which is not documented. He appears to have paid some
smaller debts. He receives credit for any financial counseling that he received from the
debt-relief company. However, although conditions beyond his control caused the debt,
from the information in the record, I do not find that he acted responsibly. The payment
of $200 made in 2016 was not documented, and in his interview he stated he would
5
have this debt paid by 2015. Applicant receives partial credit under AG 20(b). He
receives credit for the counseling under 20(c) and partial credit under 20(d).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors. I
have noted Applicant’s  service in the military, receiving an honorable discharge. He has
had a clearance since 2003.  He is 45 years old. He has a record of paying his accounts.
However, his delinquent debt from 2009 is still unresolved and there is not clear
information in the record that he is on a payment plan and making regular payments. He
was unemployed, but he has been employed with a company since 2010. He did not
supplement the record by responding to the FORM. Applicant has not met his burden of
proof in this case.  Clearance is denied.
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
7
