  1 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07904 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric Eisen, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding family members in India and his 
Indian passport.  Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On February 28, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a letter notarized on March 12, 2016, Applicant admitted all allegations under 
Guideline B, denied the sole allegation under Guideline C, and requested a hearing. I 
was assigned the case on October 16, 2016. On March 3, 2017, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice setting the hearing for April 3, 2017.  
The hearing was convened as scheduled  
 
The Government offered two documents, which were accepted into the record 
without objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-2. The Government also submitted a request for 
administrative notice concerning certain facts regarding the country at issue, the 
  2 
 
Republic of India (India). Applicant noted no objection, but stated his position that the 
package was inapplicable in this case. It was accepted as hearing exhibit (HE) 1. 
 
Applicant gave testimony and offered three files of information, which were 
accepted into the record as Exs. A-C without objection. At the onset of the hearing, the 
Government moved to amend the SOR and withdraw the allegation set forth under 
Guideline C. With no objection, that motion was granted and the SOR was appropriately 
amended. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on April 12, 2017. The 
record was then closed. Based on a thorough review of the case file, I find that 
Applicant carried his burden in mitigating security concerns arising under Guideline B.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice regarding 
certain facts about the Republic of India (India). Administrative or official notice is the 
appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-
11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 
12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most 
common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are 
either well known or from Government reports. Various facts pertaining to this nation 
were derived from the offered request and its attachments.  
 
India is a sovereign, secular democratic republic. It is a multiparty, federal 
parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament and a population of approximately 
1.2 billion. Since gaining independence in 1947, India has had a tumultuous history, and 
continues to experience terrorist and insurgent activities.  
 
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens. The most 
significant human rights problems still existent are prison and security force abuses 
including extrajudicial killings, torture, and rape. Authorities infringe on citizens’ privacy 
rights, and corruption exists at all levels of government.  
 
India, along with other countries, has been involved in criminal espionage and 
cases involving violation of U.S. export controls. Cases have involved the illegal export, 
or attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India, including 
technology and equipment which were determined to present an unacceptable risk of 
diversion to programs for the development of weapons of mass destruction or their 
delivery. Governmental and private entities, including intelligence organizations and 
security services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology.  
 
Despite past differences regarding India’s nuclear weapons program, and its 
cooperation with Iran in some policy areas, the United States recognizes India as key to 
its strategic interests and has sought to strengthen the relationship. The two countries 
are the world’s largest democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by 
representative government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, 
fighting terrorism, and creating a strategically stable Asia. 
  
  3 
 
India and the United States are partners in the fight against global terrorism. A 
Bilateral Counterterrorism Cooperation Initiative was launched in July 2010. As of 2011, 
the number of terrorist-related deaths had decreased. The State Department’s Anti-
Terrorism Assistance program has conducted scores of training courses for Indian law 
enforcement officials. In 2011, a U.S.-India Homeland Security dialogue was 
established to foster cooperation on various law enforcement issues. As of November 
2012, counter-terrorism cooperation with India was described as a pillar of the bilateral 
relationship between the two countries.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old security administrator working for a defense contractor. 
He has been employed by the same entity since 2015. He previously held a security 
clearance without adverse incident that was subsequently withdrawn due to non-use. 
He is married and has two children.  
 
 Applicant was born in India, where he was raised and educated, eventually 
earning a bachelor of science degree in 1991. That year, at age 21, he came to the 
United States to pursue a master’s degree in the sciences. In 1997, Applicant and his 
present wife were brought together in an arranged marriage while Applicant visited 
India. Educated and holding a master’s degree, she came back to the United States 
with her new husband after the wedding. The couple settled and had their first child in 
2003. In 2007, Applicant and his wife became naturalized United States citizens, and 
their second child was born. Today, Applicant’s wife owns her own company, the same 
entity for which Applicant works. Meanwhile, their children are busy with the studies and 
playtime activities typical for their age. At work, Applicant is highly valued. He is noted 
as being a family man who enjoys the benefits of this country.  
 
At issue are six relatives who are citizens and residents of India: Applicant’s 
father, brother, two sisters, and his parents-in-law. Applicant’s father is a former farmer 
who later became a home builder. Now retired, he lives off the proceeds of rental 
properties he owns. He was never in or associated with either the government or 
military of India. Applicant’s late mother was a homemaker. Applicant speaks with his 
father by telephone about every month or two. (Tr. 44) Over the years, Applicant sent 
approximately $9,000 to his parents in India. This “pocket change” was sent as a 
contribution toward Applicant’s mother medical bills as she battled cancer. Applicant 
has not sent his family abroad any money since he applied for a security clearance. 
 
Applicant’s brother in India, a retired private sector store owner, is disabled and 
requires care. (Tr. 47) He has never had an association with the Indian government or 
military. He was in partnership with Applicant’s brother-in-law, and also helped his father 
with real estate issues. This brother now resides with Applicant’s father. Applicant 
speaks to him by telephone on an irregular basis.  
 
Both of Applicant’s sisters are homemakers. One is married to a retired 
restaurant owner. She and her husband live off rental apartment income. Applicant’s 
other sister is married to Applicant’s brother’s former business associate. They live off 
the proceeds from a small business. None of these individuals are or have been 
  4 
 
associated with the government or military of India, nor are they dependent on 
government subsidies. None know that Applicant is applying for a security clearance. 
Applicant speaks with his sisters every month or two by telephone. 
 
Applicant’s parents-in-law, a retired railroad tracker and his homemaker wife, live 
off proceeds from rental properties. Applicant speaks with them by telephone every few 
months. Neither individual has been associated with the Indian government or military. 
Their sons, Applicant’s brothers-in-law, are United States citizens working in areas 
related to information technology. Applicant refers to these brothers-in-law and their 
respective families as “my wife’s family.” (Tr. 21) Applicant’s wife has no inheritance 
expectations. (Tr. 50) 
 
Since 2008, Applicant has annually visited India, usually for about a week. Every 
two or three years, Applicant takes his family with him to India. His main purpose in 
visiting is to spend time with his father, who is in his 80s. His father visited the United 
States once, in 1999. Applicant’s wife’s parents have visited the United States “a couple 
of times.” (Tr. 33) Other than the kin noted above, Applicant has no family or friends in 
India with whom he maintains regular contact. (Tr. 51) 
 
In sum, Applicant has a net worth of a million dollars. His salary is approximately 
$100,000 a year. In last year’s tax return filing, he and his wife had a joint gross income 
of about $160,000. Applicant recently bought his present home. Along with other United 
States citizens, he is a co-partner in the ownership of some investment properties. He 
contributed almost $600,000 toward the acquisition of these properties, which consist of 
strip malls which house a major restaurant and chain retail outlets. (Tr. 52)  
 
Applicant votes in United States elections. He considers the United States to be 
his home. Applicant and his wife have been active with their children’s schools. He 
owns no property abroad, and he has no expectation of inheriting properties located in 
India. (Tr. 38, 46) He has no assets in India. He has never served in the military of, or 
worked for, a foreign nation. He has no intention of acquiring a foreign passport in the 
future. (Tr. 41) He does not consider himself to be a dual citizen, only a citizen of the 
United States. He prefers the life and education system available in the United States. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
  5 
 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant has ties of affection, independently or through his spouse, for his 
father, siblings, and in-laws. Given these facts, disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 
(b) apply:  
 
  6 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b) connection to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
 
In finding disqualifying conditions applicable, I specifically note that AG ¶ 7(a) 
requires substantial evidence of a heightened risk. The heightened risk required to raise 
a disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. Heightened risk denotes a risk 
greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign 
government or substantial assets in a foreign nation. Terrorist activities have transpired 
within India. This fact is sufficient to find a heightened risk exists in this case. In 
addition, foreign family ties can pose a security risk even without a connection to a 
foreign government. This is because an Applicant may be subject to coercion or undue 
influence when a third party pressures or threatens an Applicant’s family members. 
Under these facts, while unlikely, third party coercion concern potentially exists in India. 
Therefore, there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, and find the following apply: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S., 
and 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties to a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information.  
 
Applicant made the conscious decision as an adult to come to the United States. 
Once here, he completed his education, started work in his chosen profession, married, 
became a naturalized United States citizen along with his spouse, settled, and had two 
  7 
 
children. As a family unit, they are thriving in the United States. In addition to his family, 
his wife’s brothers’ families, and his work, Applicant has considerable assets in this 
country and he generates a high income.  
 
In India, Applicant has no financial interests or expectations. His father, a brother, 
two sisters, and parents-in-law remain as citizens and residents. He has visited them 
annually without incident. None of them know of his security clearance application. 
Applicant’s main tether to India is his aged father. No foreign relative has a nexus with 
the government or military of India. All come from the private sector or are homemakers. 
Those who are retired live off the proceeds from their rental properties. There is no 
suggestion that Applicant’s ties to these family members are as strong as those he has 
to his wife, children, and life in the United States.  
 
With these factors in mind, the nature of the foreign country must be considered 
in evaluating the likelihood of exploitation. The United States and India have a long-
standing, stable relationship, and they share common strategic goals. A democracy, 
India is a partner in combating terrorism. There is no evidence it coerces its citizens in 
order to manipulate foreign kin. Given the individual involved and the nature of the 
country at issue, it is unlikely that India would exploit Applicant or his relatives based on 
their relationships. It is also unlikely that Applicant would have to choose between the 
interests of his foreign kin and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) applies.  
 
Moreover, Applicant has developed strong ties to the United States, which 
weighs in his favor when evaluating the question of exploitation or potential conflicts of 
interest based on ties to India. Now 47, he has been in this country since he was 21 
years old. As previously noted, he chose to immigrate and settle in this country, and he 
brought his bride to this country to start their life together. Here, they have built a family 
and made considerable investments. Applicant has no intention of returning to India to 
live and he does not consider himself a dual citizen, preferring instead his life in this 
country. Telephone calls and trips to India to see his aged father continue, but have 
taken a clear second place to Applicant’s day-to-day professional and family life here. 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant’s relationship abroad with his 
foreign kin is so deep and longstanding as to outweigh these factors. I have no 
concerns that Applicant would choose his more significant U.S. ties over his foreign 
connections in the event a conflict of interest arose. AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
  8 
 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Most of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under the above guideline, but some warrant comment or emphasis.  
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old man who was born in India, then came to the United 
States at age 21 to pursue graduate studies. He has since married, settled, become a 
naturalized United States citizen, and had two children. He owns his own home and has 
invested about $600,000 in U.S. rental properties. He earns about $100,000 a year. His 
wife is employed. Their children are busy within their community.  
 
In contrast, Applicant’s aged father, three siblings, and parents-in-law remain in 
India. He maintains regular telephonic contact with his father and nominal telephonic 
contact with the others. Applicant visits his father annually, taking his family with him 
every few years. None of these foreign kin have a nexus with the Indian government or 
military. All are from the private sector and live off investment property proceeds, not 
from the state. Overall, Applicant and his own family are enjoying their American dream 
and are settled in the United States with considerable domestic holdings. Applicant’s 
loyalties are clearly stacked in favor of his family and life in the United States.  
 
When disqualifying conditions are raised, the burden is placed on an Applicant to 
proffer facts and evidence in mitigation of the security concerns raised. Here, Applicant 
presented sufficient information about himself, his family, his domestic holdings, and the 
country at issue to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. Clearance is granted  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Withdrawn 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
