 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ADP Case No. 15-05328 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Finanacial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on December 5, 2014. On February 22, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 21, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on July 6, 2016. On July 7, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was sent to Applicant (including documents identified as Items 1 through 6), 
                                                          
1 ADP Case No. 14-01655 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) (“The Guidelines apply to all adjudications under the 
Directive, including both security clearance and public trust cases.”) 
 
 
2 
 
who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on July 12, 2016, and 
did not respond. Items 1 and 2 are the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 5 are 
admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on May 18, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant is 28 years old and has never been married. Applicant has one child, 
age four. She has no contact with her child’s father and does not receive child support.3 
She received several certifications while enrolled in a job program between 2008 and 
2009 (school A), an associate’s degree in 2011 (school B), and another certification in 
2014 (school C). She took courses via an online college in 2007 (school D), but did not 
complete the program.  
 
Applicant has been employed full time by her current employer since November 
2014. After relocating to return home, she was unemployed from October 2013 through 
November 2014. During this time period, she received government assistance. She was 
also unemployed from January 2012 through April 2012.4  
 
The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts in collection status totaling $34,083, which 
are corroborated by Applicant’s credit reports.5 They include six federal student-loan 
accounts totaling $28,773 (SOR ¶¶ 1.i through 1.n), six medical accounts totaling 
$4,220 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.h), a $631 school tuition account (SOR ¶ 1.a), and a 
$459 utility account (SOR ¶ 1.b). In her SOR answer, Applicant admits to all but one 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) of the debts alleged. She attributes these debts to unemployment and not 
having medical insurance.  
 
Applicant was enrolled at school D in 2007. In 2008, Applicant received a $631 
tuition bill for a class in which she was enrolled. Applicant disputes the bill on the basis 
that she did not receive the course materials for the class. She communicated this 
dispute to school D in 2008. As of December 2014, school D had placed the delinquent 
account for collection in the amount of $631 (SOR ¶ 1.a).6 Applicant did not provide any 
documents to substantiate the basis of her dispute. Aside from stating in her SOR 
answer that she was “in the process of trying to get help with [removing this debt from 
her credit report],” there is no evidence in the record of any action taken by Applicant 
since 2008 to resolve this debt. 
                                                          
2 I extracted these facts from Applicant’s answer to the SOR (Item 2) and the e-QIP (Item 3), unless 
otherwise indicated by citation to another item in the record.  
 
3 See also Item 4. Because Applicant did not respond to the FORM and affirmatively waive any objection 
to Item 4, I will consider only those facts in Item 4 that are not adverse to the Applicant unless they are 
contained in other evidence or based upon Applicant’s admissions in her answer. 
 
4 See also Item 4.  
 
5 Items 5 and 6. 
 
6 Item 5. 
 
3 
 
Applicant borrowed approximately $25,000 between 2010 and 2011 to help pay 
her tuition at school B. As of December 2014, six federal student loan accounts totaling 
$28,773 had been placed for collection (SOR ¶¶ 1.i through 1.n). As of July 2016, this 
balance increased to $28,860.7 She made one payment of $3,000 in April 2014, but 
otherwise did not take action to resolve her student-loan debts.8 In 2014, 2015, and 
2016, all or part of three of her federal tax refunds were applied to these debts in an 
amount totaling $5,762. Without providing any documentation, Applicant claims in her 
SOR answer that she is in the process of trying to consolidate these loans. 
 
Applicant received medical care at two different hospitals in 2009, 2011, and 
2012. Applicant did not have medical insurance until 2012.9 As of December 2014, six 
medical accounts totaling $4,220 were placed for collection (SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.h).10 
Despite her March 2015 promise to pay these medical debts once she became 
employed, Applicant stated in her SOR answer that she had not made any progress on 
resolving them or the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. A new $902 medical collection account 
appeared on her July 2016 credit report.11 
 
The record contains no evidence that Applicant has either sought or received any 
credit counseling. In her SOR answer, Applicant included a copy of her budget from 
January through March 2016. It showed a shortfall in January and March. She also 
provided a copy of her earnings statements for pay periods ending in February and 
March 2016. The record is otherwise silent as to specific details about her relevant 
income and expense history and any specifics concerning the financial impact that her 
past or present circumstances have had on her ability to pay her delinquent debt.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. 
The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all 
available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that 
assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.12  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust to support a DOD 
contract, an administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating 
                                                          
7 Item 6. 
 
8 Item 4. 
 
9 See also Item 4. 
 
10 Item 5. 
 
11 Because this debt was not alleged in the SOR, I consider it only for the purpose of evaluating 
mitigation. 
 
12 Directive, § 3.2.  
 
 
4 
 
conditions in the AG.13 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the 
guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable 
information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
In addition to the guidelines, the Directive sets forth procedures that must be 
followed in trustworthiness adjudications. The Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government establishes a 
disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to establish their eligibility for a public trust position.14 The protection of the 
national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] information will be 
resolved in favor of national security.” The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds . . . .  
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her credit bureau reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
                                                          
13 Directive, Enclosure 2.  
 
14 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶¶ E3.1.14, E3.1.15. 
 
 
5 
 
The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the 
following potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s numerous delinquent debts have 
persisted for more than two years since she regained full-time employment and remain 
unresolved. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant’s unemployment and lack of medical 
insurance were circumstances beyond her control. However, Applicant has failed to 
meet her burden to show that she acted responsibly in light of those circumstances.   
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant has not received any financial 
counseling and her debts remain unresolved. Therefore, I cannot conclude that her 
financial problems are under control.  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Applicant is credited with making a payment on her 
federal student loans in 2014. However, resolution of her student-loan debt via an offset 
of her federal income tax refunds does not constitute good-faith effort. 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. While Applicant expressed a reasonable basis to 
dispute the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, she did not provide documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness 
concerns raised by her financial indebtedness. Accordingly, I conclude she has not 
carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant her eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
