 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-04318  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred more than $11,000 in delinquent credit card, medical, and 
utility debt over the past eight years that he remains unable to repay. Resulting security 
concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, 
national security eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On November 12, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). (Item 3.) On March 25, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 12, 2016, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
June 2, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on June 3, 2016, and received by him on June 16, 2016. The FORM 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant did not submit additional information in response to the FORM, did not file any 
objection to its contents, and did not request additional time to respond beyond the 30-
day period he was afforded.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 
2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national 
security eligibility. My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines, 
although this decision is issued pursuant to the new SEAD 4 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 46 years old, and has two children ages 9 and 5. As of November 
2014 he was married, but involved in divorce proceedings filed by his wife. He has held 
his present employment as an electrical technician with a defense contractor since June 
2010; before which he worked as a technician for three different electronics companies 
starting in February 1995 with no intervening periods of unemployment. He has no prior 
military service or Federal civilian employment. This is his first application for a security 
clearance. (Item 3.)  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted being delinquent on all seven debts 
alleged in the SOR, with explanations. (Item 2.) The debts are documented in the three 
record credit bureau reports from April 2014, April 2015, and June 2016. (Items 5 
through 7.) Applicant said that his financial problems resulted from his unsuccessful 
attempts to invest in and manage residential real estate properties, and his failing 
marriage. (Item 2; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant owes a total of $11,069 on the four delinquent credit card accounts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.g. He said in his answer to the SOR that he 
                                                 
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
cannot afford to repay any of these debts, which became delinquent between 2009 and 
2014. He also said that he intended to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in May 
2016 to discharge these debts, but provided no evidence of any such action while the 
record remained open into July 2016 to permit him to supply additional mitigation. (Item 
2; Item 3; Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant was also delinquent on two medical debts and one utility account, 
totaling $337, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f. He attached copies of checks to 
each of these creditors, and letters with which he said he intended to mail them, to his 
answer to the SOR. Despite being provided an additional 30 days in June and July 2016 
to supplement his mitigating evidence, he provided nothing to show that these checks 
had been received or deposited by the creditors involved. The copies that Applicant 
provided with his answer are insufficient to demonstrate that these debts were resolved, 
but even if they were they constitute less than 3% of his total alleged delinquent debt. 
 
 Applicant did not document any financial counseling or provide budget 
information from which to predict his future solvency. He offered no evidence to support 
findings concerning his good character or trustworthiness, the quality of his professional 
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect 
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. I was unable 
to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his 
case decided without a hearing. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
 
 
4 
 
 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has been continuously employed since at least 1995, yet incurred more 
than $11,400 in delinquent credit card, medical, and utility debt. He was unable to repay 
his credit card debts, and failed to timely resolve three small medical and utility debts 
despite the apparent ability to do so. These financial issues date back to 2009, and 
continue. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant continues to owe more than $11,000 in credit card debt for four 
accounts that became delinquent between 2009 and 2014, and offered no reasonable 
basis to conclude that such problems will not recur. Mitigation was not established 
under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant claimed that he made some bad real estate investments and his wife 
has filed for divorce. These may have been circumstances beyond his control, although 
 
 
6 
 
 
at least the bad investments resulted from voluntary choices on his part. However, the 
evidence does not sufficiently establish causation, or show that he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances, as required for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
Applicant may have sent checks to repay his three small non-credit-card debts, 
but such action is insufficient to establish that his financial problems are being resolved 
pursuant to a good-faith effort on his part. No evidence of financial counseling or budget 
information establishing solvency going forward was provided. Accordingly, Applicant 
failed to establish mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 
20(c) or 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his choices. He continues to owe more than $11,000 in 
delinquent debt that he has accumulated over the past eight years and cannot afford to 
repay. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. Overall, 
the evidence creates doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a 
security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
