 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-08846 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 17, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. DOD acted under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
 
Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on August 15, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 7, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the old AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
on January 17, 2017, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on February 24, 
2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was marked as hearing exhibit 
(HE) I. Applicant testified, but did not offer any documentary evidence. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 2, 2017.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the caption of the SOR to reflect that this 
case is properly styled as a trustworthiness determination, rather than a security 
clearance determination. The motion was granted. Department Counsel also moved to 
amend SOR ¶ 1.b to conform to the proof that Applicant failed to file his state income 
tax returns for tax years 2010-2015. Department Counsel also moved to add SOR ¶ 
1.m, alleging Applicant failed to file his federal tax returns for tax years 2010-2015, as 
developed by the evidence. Applicant did not object to these substantive amendments 
and Department Counsel’s motion was granted. The SOR was so amended.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
this employer since 2015. He is a high school graduate and has completed two years of 
college. He is married, but he is currently separated from his wife. He has four children. 
His wages are garnished, in the amount of approximately $500 monthly, to pay child 
support for two children. He served on active duty in the Army from 1999 to 2003. He 
was deployed to Iraq during this time. He was honorably discharged from the Army and 
later enlisted in the National Guard where he served from 2010 to 2013. He was 
honorably discharged from the National Guard. He has a service-connected disability 
for which he receives a 10% disability rating from the VA.3  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant: is delinquent on state taxes for years 2010 and 2014 
in the respective amounts of $609 and $500 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c); failed to timely file 
his 2010-2015 federal and state income tax returns (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.m); has two 
charged-off accounts and seven collection accounts totaling approximately $23,707, 
which remain unpaid (SOR ¶¶ 1.d - 1.l). The largest of the collection accounts is for a 
delinquent student loan account in the amount of $21,000. The allegations are 
supported by admissions in his trustworthiness application, credit reports from June 
2015 and September 2016, and admissions in his SOR answer.4  
                                                          
2 Tr. at 10-11, 24-25. 
 
3 Tr. at 5, 15-16, 19; GE 1. 
 
4 GE 1-3; Ans. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to not having enough funds available 
once he paid his monthly child support. Also, his estranged wife indicated she would file 
their tax returns, but apparently did not do so. Applicant first learned about the problem 
with his taxes when he went through his background investigation for his current job. 
His state tax liability has not been paid and he has not filed any of the delinquent federal 
or state tax returns to date. He had an appointment with the IRS on March 3, 2017, but 
no information is available from that meeting. His federal and state tax issues remain 
unresolved.5 
 
 Applicant’s student loan debt related back to when he first attended college in 
approximately 2004. He used the GI Bill to fund his schooling then, but because he did 
not complete the course work, he was required to pay back the amount he was given for 
college. He became delinquent on those payments and in 2015 attempted to rehabilitate 
his student loan. He made the required minimal $6 monthly payment for about five to six 
months, but when he missed a payment by having insufficient funds in his account he 
was dropped from the program and his loan remains delinquent. He has not made any 
further payments on his student loan or any other of the SOR debts. All remain 
unresolved.6    
 
 Applicant has not sought financial counseling and he does not have a budget. 
His monthly take home pay is approximately $1,000 with his expenses totaling about 
$700 monthly. At the time of the hearing, he had between $2 and $100 in his checking 
account.7 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 22-23, 27-28; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. at 32-35, 50-54; GE 1-2. 
 
7 Tr. at 40, 44, 46-47. 
 
 
4 
 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the trustworthiness concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
trustworthiness concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, 
including espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. 
I have considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
5 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid and unresolved. He failed to 
file his federal and state income tax returns for years 2010-2105, and he has delinquent 
state tax liability for tax years 2010 and 2014. I find all disqualifying conditions are 
raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. His state tax debt remains outstanding with no 
clear plan to pay it. His 2010-2015 federal and state tax returns remain unfiled. AG ¶ 
20(a) is not applicable. Applicant failed to present evidence showing that his financial 
situation was caused by conditions beyond his control. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 There is no evidence of financial counselling. Given the unpaid status of his state 
tax debt and his unfiled federal and state tax returns, as well as his remaining unpaid 
collection and charged-off accounts, there are not clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are under control. Although he attempted to rehabilitate his 
delinquent student loan account, ultimately he was unsuccessful and evidence of good-
faith efforts to pay or resolve his debts is lacking. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) do not apply.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense assessment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant became indebted. I also 
considered his military service, including his time deployed to a war zone and his VA-
rated disability. However, Applicant has taken no action to resolve his tax issues. He 
has not established a meaningful track record of financial responsibility, which causes 
me to question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive information. Eligibility for 
access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                
 
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
