                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )          ISCR  Case No.  15-06291        
                                                              )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding alcohol consumption and personal
conduct, but did not mitigate security concerns regarding financial considerations.
Eligibility to access classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On April 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order (Exec. Ord.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 11, 2016, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on August 12, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) scheduled the hearing for October 26, 2016. At the hearing, the
Government's case consisted of six exhibits (GEs 1-6). Applicant relied on two witnesses
(including herself) and four exhibits (AEs A-D). The transcript (Tr.) was received on
November 4, 2016.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated 18 delinquent debts
exceeding $16,000. Allegedly, these debts remain outstanding. 
Under Guideline G, Applicant allegedly was arrested for extreme driving under the
influence (EDUI) in June 2012, and she was convicted of the charge, a Class B
misdemeanor, in March 2013. Allegedly, she was sentenced in March 2013 to:
supervised probation for two years; pay $2,500 fine; attend and complete a Mothers
Against Drunk Driving (MADD) impact panel at her own expense; have any vehicle she
drives equipped with a certified ignition interlock device for one year from the date of
conviction; and pay a special assessment fee of $10. 
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly was terminated from her non-government
employment with a major consumer chain in December 2010 for excessive absences
and substandard performance from a major supply chain. Allegedly, she was terminated
from her employment with a non-government food-store chain in September 2011 for
excessive absences.
      In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations pertaining to
financial considerations with explanations. She denied the allegations covered by ¶¶ 1.j
and 1.k, claiming the covered $337 and $362 debts are duplicates of the debt alleged in
¶ 1.l. She claimed she incurred the remaining listed debts over 25 years during periods
of unemployment and getting back on her feet. She further claimed that she is currently
self-employed cleaning houses and working part-time for a defense contractor. 
Addressing the allegations pertaining to alcohol consumption, Applicant admitted
the allegations with explanations. She claimed she is a very active member of Alcoholics
Anonymous (AA) with over three years of sobriety. 
In answering the allegations pertaining to personal conduct issues, Applicant
admitted the allegations covering her alleged terminations in December 2010 and
September 2011 for excessive absences and substandard performance. She claimed
she worked in a poor environment, lost confidence in herself, and failed to win her fight
against alcohol.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 54-year-old engineering technician who works for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted are incorporated herein. Additional findings will follow. 
2
Background
Applicant married in June 1983 and divorced in February 1997. (GE 1) She has
three adult children from her marriage, who she raised mainly on her own. (GEs 1-2; Tr.
48-49) Applicant earned a high school diploma in 1981 and claimed no post-high school
college credits. (GEs 1-2) She has never served in the military.
Applicant has worked for her current employer since January 2015 on a part-time
basis as an engineering technician, until recently when her hours were increased to 40
hours a week. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 50) She reported unemployment between November 2014
and January 2015 and collected unemployment benefits for this period. She
supplemented her income with her house-cleaning business. (Tr. 53-54) Previously,
Applicant was employed by various non-DOD employers between September 2011 and
August 2014, while supplementing her income with her self-employed house-cleaning
business.
Applicant’s finances
Between 2013 and 2015, Applicant incurred a number of delinquent debts, many
of them medically-related. (GEs 3-4) Some of these debts were opened in 2007 and
earlier and only became delinquent in 2013 and 2014. (GEs 3-4) While others (including
her medically-related debts) were opened more recently and became delinquent in 2013
and 2014. (GEs 3-4) 
Together, Applicant accumulated delinquent debts exceeding $16,000. She
attributed most of her debt delinquencies to unemployment and alcohol abuse. (Tr. 50-
51, 55-56) Three of the listed debts in the SOR reflect duplicate accounts with the same
creditor.  SOR debts ¶¶ 1.j ($337), 1.k ($362), and 1.l ($362) are all linked to the same
medical creditor. Only one of these listed debts (SOR debt ¶ 1.l ) can be reasonably 
charged to Applicant and carried as an outstanding debt.
Since returning to employment in January 2015, Applicant has been unable to
address her old debts with the income available to her from both her part-time defense
contractor employment (increased to full-time employment) and private house-cleaning
work. (Tr. 38, 54) While she has been able to pay her current bills timely with the $800 to
$1,200 she nets monthly from her work, she has not been able to address any of the
debts listed in the SOR with the financial resources available to her. (Tr. 38-39) Mindful
of her financial duties to address her old debts, she expressed her intention to “look into
consolidation.” (Tr. 38) To date, she has provided no probative evidence that she has
pursued debt consolidation. The only debts she has been able to address with her
current income are four non-SOR debts. (AEs C-F)
From the evidence of record, Applicant has not reached out to any of her
individual creditors holding SOR-covered debts to explore the availability of even modest
payment arrangements. She has developed no plan for addressing her delinquent debts.
Nor has she provided a budget or evidence of financial counseling. And while she
expressed intentions to explore the availability of consolidation plans, she has not
provided any evidence of follow-though consolidation initiatives.
3
Applicant’s alcohol-related arrest 
Records document that Applicant was arrested on a military installation in June
2012 and charged with EDUI. The military police report covering the June 2012 incident
cited the arresting officer’s impressions of Applicant’s displaying watery eyes, slurred
speech and a strong odor of alcohol beverage when he stopped her. (GE 2).  
Based on his impressions at the scene, he administered a field sobriety test on
Applicant that produced indications of probable intoxication. (GE 2) Applicant was
thereafter arrested at the scene and transported to a local military station. Two
Breathalyzer tests that were administered to Applicant at the station revealed blood
alcohol ratios of .20 and .207 percent blood alcohol content (BAC) levels. Based on the
BAC results, police charged Applicant with  EDUI. (GEs 2 and 5)
In March 2013, Applicant was convicted of the EDUI charge. (AEs 2 and 5) The
court sentenced her to (a) supervised probation for two years; (b) payment of a $2,500
fine; (c) attend and complete a MADD impact panel at her own expense; (d)  have her
vehicle equipped with a certified ignition interlock device for one year from the date of
conviction; and (e) pay a special assessment fee of $10. (GE 2) Applicant documented
her compliance with her probation conditions relative to her March 2013 sentencing
order. (AE B)
Applicant’s alcohol history
Between September 2010 and February 2013, Applicant regularly consumed
alcohol on a frequent basis. (Tr. 49, 55) By August 2011, alcohol consumption was
beginning to have a negative impact on her ability to manage her finances and her work
and personal relationships. (GE 6) Her alcohol consumption pattern during the 2010-
2011 period consisted of weekend drinking.
Typically, Applicant consumed alcohol with friends and often to the point of
intoxication. Alcohol consumption helped her to erase her problems and escape her
emotions. (GE 6) Intoxication caused her to occasionally pass out or lose vision in her
lazy eye, experience slurred speech, and lose tolerance to drinking. (GE 6) Her abuse of
alcohol adversely effected her ability to get to work and caused her to break relationships
and become a closet drinker.
Since March 2013, Applicant frequently attends AA meetings, quite often more
than one a day around her work schedule, and at least five meetings a week. (GE 6; Tr.
39-43, 45-46) Her AA meetings are held at different locations in her community. Some of
the meetings are devoted to single-sex attendees, but most are open to both genders.
(Tr. 45-46) She has a sponsor and earned an AA chip celebrating three years of
sobriety. (AEs A and H; Tr. 39-43) Applicant has worked and completed AA’s 12-step
program over the past three years and has returned to working on the steps again. (Tr.
44)  At these meetings, she sometimes serves as the designated leader and starts the
coffee at meetings. (Tr. 44-45) 
4
Since Applicant has given up drinking, she has noticed a positive change in her
judgment and reliability. (GE 6) She credited her AA participation for her chosen path of
sustained abstinence. (GE 6; Tr.  37)
Applicant’s employment terminations
Between December 2010 and September 2011, Applicant was twice terminated 
by her two employers. In December 2010, she was terminated by her major supply chain
employer for cited excessive absence and substandard performance. (GE 6) And in
September 2011 she was terminated by her food market chain employer for cited
excessive absence. (GE 6) Applicant attributed both of these terminations to a hostile
work environment and her excessive drinking, which she has since addressed in a
sustained and comprehensive way. (GE 6; Tr. 52-53) 
Character References
Applicant is well-regarded by colleagues and friends who have known her. (AE A)
Former colleagues who have worked with her characterized her as honest, helpful,
intelligent, creative, success oriented, considerate of others, a hard worker, respectful,
and reliable. (AE A) Friends who have shared AA meetings with her over a number of
years described her as conscientious and one who volunteered for leading AA meetings
and helping out with the gathered assemblies. (AE A) They credited her with starting her
own business cleaning houses and being trustworthy in caring for their pets while they
were away. 
                      Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. 
These AGs include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and any of the "[c]onditions that could
mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether
or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying
and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines
is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
5
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
   The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including espionage. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Alcohol Consumption
           The Concern. Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the
exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
Personal Conduct
    The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  Of
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during
the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the
security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
6
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately
or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  E. O. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts
between 2013 and 2014. Additional security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history
of alcohol-related incidents, excessive drinking, and losses of employment attributable to
excessive absences and substandard performance. 
Financial Concerns 
Most of Applicant’s debts listed in the SOR are medical debts resulting from
medical services provided Applicant in prior years. Her  incurred delinquent debts warrant
the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”
Applicant’s listed SOR debts (¶¶ 1.a-1.g) were reported in a series of credit reports
issued between November 2014 and November 2015. (GEs 3-4) Credit reports  create
presumptions of authenticity and accuracy. The Appeal Board has explained that credit
reports can “normally meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s
obligations under [directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations.” ISCR Case No. 08-12184
at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) Three of the listed SOR debts reported in applicant’s credit
7
reports reflect duplicate accounts. For the three duplicate accounts reported (SOR debts
¶¶ 1.j-1.l), Applicant is credited with resolution of the ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k debts. SOR debt ¶ 1.l
remains Applicant’s responsibility.  
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to inspire
trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the principal concern of a
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are also implicit in financial cases.
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts under extenuating circumstances
merit partial application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant’s evidence of recurrent
periods of unemployment and alcohol abuse is extenuating. However, she has failed to
meet the other prong of MC ¶ 20(b) that requires probative evidence of the applicant’s
acting responsibly in addressing the underlying debts when she is financially able to do
so. In Applicant’s case, she has been gainfully employed with two jobs since January
2015 and ostensibly able to make some modest progress with her SOR debts. Without
more evidence of responsible repayment efforts, Applicant may not avail herself of the
acting responsibly prong of  MC ¶ 20(b). 
Because Applicant has not mounted any material efforts to address her  incurred
delinquent debts, application of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” is very limited. Prospects for her
addressing her delinquent debts with even modest repayment efforts are too uncertain to
warrant safe predictions that she will be able to initiate any serious repayment efforts in
the foreseeable future. 
By failing to provide good evidence of her addressing her delinquent debts after
she had returned to gainful employment in 2015, Applicant is not able to show the
required level of judgment necessary to meet minimum requirements for security
clearance eligibility. To date, Applicant has provided little evidence of her addressing her
delinquent debts and no documentation of budgeting or pursuing financial counseling.
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant’s limited attention devoted to
addressing her delinquent debts following her return to gainful employment in 2015, 
reflects questionable judgment and unwillingness to fulfill her financial responsibilities. 
Limited evidence of her employment evaluations and civic contributions further limited her
ability to demonstrate her overall dependability and trustworthiness.
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s payment
delinquencies and minimal efforts in addressing her delinquent debts since receiving the
SOR in April 2016, her actions to date in stabilizing her finances are concluded to be
insufficient to meet the mitigation requirements imposed by the guideline governing 
financial considerations.  
8
Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations covered by
¶¶ 1.a through 1.i and 1.l through 1.r of Guideline F. Favorable conclusions are warranted
with respect to  ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k of the SOR. 
Alcohol Concerns 
Additional security concerns are raised over Applicant’s 2012 alcohol-related arrest
and conviction and her history of excessive drinking. By all accounts, Applicant is a highly
regarded engineering technician who has since been promoted to full-time employment.
Employment-related stresses in her life contributed to increased drinking and an  alcohol-
related incident in 2012.  Principal security issues raised in this case center on Applicant’s
history of alcohol abuse. Since her 2012 EDUI arest and conviction, she has satisfied all
of the imposed probation conditions.
Applicant’s recurrent problems with abusive drinking over a period of several years
(dating to 2010) raise initial concerns over the risk of her returning to abusive drinking in
the foreseeable future. On the strength of the evidence presented, two disqualifying
conditions (DC) of the AGs for alcohol consumption (AG ¶ 21) may be applied: DC ¶
22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent,” and DC ¶ 22(c), “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the
point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”
Once Applicant ceased drinking altogether following her 2012 EDUI conviction, she
committed to sobriety with the support of her AA network. Over the course of the ensuing
three and one-half years, her faithful commitments to her AA meetings and its principles
of sobriety earned her praise from her colleagues and AA friends (including her sponsor)
Strengthened in her resolve to remain sober, she has earned an AA chip celebrating
three years of sobriety and has gained the confidence she will need no maintain her
sobriety without fear of a relapse.
Applicant’s sustained abstinence for over three years entitle her to the benefits of
two mitigating conditions (MCs). MC ¶ 23(a) of Guideline G, “so much time has passed,
or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and MC ¶ 23(b), “the individual acknowledges his or
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).” MC ¶ 23(d), “the individual has
successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any
required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
9
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and has
received a favorable prognosis by duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program,” has
partial application to Applicant’s situation based on her commitments to AA.
While neither MC ¶ 23(b) nor MC ¶ 23(d) of Guideline G provide any bright lines
for gauging the sufficiency of an applicant’s period of sustained abstinence, the DSM-5
suggests a period of at least 12 months of sustained abstinence as a factor to consider 
when assessing an applicant’s recovery progress and recurrence risks. Alcohol
avoidance for over three years is something that Applicant has credibly demonstrated
with her evidence. Her continued abstinence is an important consideration in determining
what weight to assign to her reformed drinking claims. See ISCR Case 02-03186 (App.
Bd. Feb. 16, 2006); ISCR Case 01-20579, at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 14, 2004).  
Historically, the Appeal Board has emphasized the importance of a strong
rehabilitation program and a seasoned track record. See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 (App.
Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007); ISCR Case No.
05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007). Applicant has met these requirements with an
impressive showing of sustained abstinence over a three-year-plus period with the aid of
her AA support group.
Taking into account both Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse and incident away
from work and corresponding solid probative evidence of a seasoned track record of
abstinence (both with and without probation reporting requirements), the applicable
guidelines, and a whole-person assessment of her avoidance of alcohol following her only
alcohol-related incident in 2012, it is safe to conclude that Applicant’s sustained
abstinence will likely to remain so for the foreseeable future.
Based on both Applicant’s strong showing of sustained abstinence, aided by her
AA participation and a whole-person assessment of the overall trust and reliability that
Applicant enjoys with her colleagues and AA friends who are familiar with her alcohol
issues and work performance, conclusions are warranted that Applicant has mitigated
security concerns over her history of abusive drinking. Favorable conclusions are
warranted withe respect to the allegations covered by Guidelines G.
Applicant’s Involuntary Terminations
Based on Applicant’s two involuntary terminations from her employers in 2010 and
2011, respectively, for excessive absences and unsatisfactory performance (2010
employer only), security concerns are raised about her trustworthiness and reliability.
Applicant never challenged the cited reasons for the terminations or appealed the
outcomes. Applicant’s terminations are covered by DC ¶ 16(c), “credible adverse
information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole,
10
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected
information.” DC ¶ 16(c) fully applies to the judgment issues raised by Applicant’s
involuntary terminations.
Applicant’s 2010 and 2011 terminations were not all the result of cited excessive
absences and unsatisfactory performance. Alcohol issues clearly played a role in her
employment relationships and performance assessments. The cited reasons for her
terminations, though, are enough to sustain the terminations, absent more evidence from
Applicant as to why her employers were not justified in taking the termination actions they
chose.    
DOHA jurisdiction over employment issues is limited and is generally confined to
assessing the factual basis of employment decisions for their effect on security clearance
eligibility assessments. Based on the information provided from Applicant and her prior
employers, the termination actions taken by these employers cannot be determined to
have been made on an arbitrary or erroneous basis.
Mitigation of the adverse personnel actions taken by Applicant’s prior employers
against her is available to her. The terminations were made over five years ago and have
been followed by favorable employment conditions. Applicant is well regarded by her
colleagues and AA friends and has recently received added hours of work by her defense
contractor employer. 
Employing a whole-person assessment, any adverse inferences to be drawn from
Applicant’s cited excessive absences and unsatisfactory work performance with her 2010
and 2011 employers, respectively, must be balanced with the positive reinforcements she
has earned from sustained abstinence from alcohol consumption and support she
continues to receive from her colleagues and AA friends.
Considering all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
terminations from her prior employers and steps she has taken to restore trust and
reliability with her current employer, colleagues, and AA friends, personal conduct
concerns over Applicant’s involuntary terminations covered by SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b of
Guideline E are mitigated.
Formal Findings
   
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
11
Subparagraphs 1.a-1i and 1.l-1.r:                Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.j-1.k:     For Applicant
GUIDELINE G ( ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION):     FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a:                          For Applicant  
GUIDELINE E (CRIMINAL CONDUCT)    FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a and 3b:                        For Applicant           
                    
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
12
