1 
-            
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-07119 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
       Statement of the Case 
On April 14, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record.  
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on July 22, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on August 5, 2016, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided no response to 
the FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 5, is admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2017.  
   06/12/2017
 
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He obtained his Master’s degree in 1987. Applicant has 
been employed as a ship fitter by a federal contractor since May 2014. He served 
honorably in the Army for six months from February 1976 to August 1976. Applicant 
reports periods of unemployment including December 2013 to May 2014, and 
September 2010 to September 2012. Applicant was married from 1985 until his 1997 
divorce. He has three children and reports having no previous security clearance. 
 
Applicant reported delinquent debts in section 26 of his Security Clearance 
Application (SCA),2 including: a foreclosed upon mortgage loan for his primary 
residence from September 2007; child support arrearages; medical bills; delinquent 
student loans; and charged-off credit cards.  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a (having filed for Chapter 
7 bankruptcy protection in 2014). He had over $500,000 in unsecured debt discharged 
at that time. He denied SOR ¶ 1.c alleging failure to pay his state income taxes from 
2008 to 2011. With respect to the other alleged delinquent debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d 
to 1.g, Applicant responded “don’t recall” to each and every allegation. This is 
noteworthy because three of these allegations involve state tax liens that are clearly 
reflected in Applicant’s credit reports.3 He also discussed these tax liens in his July 
2014 clearance interview. SOR ¶ 1.g alleges $111,000 in child support arrearages to 
which Applicant responded “don’t recall.” Yet, Schedule E of his bankruptcy filings 
conspicuously notes this $111,000 delinquency along with $64,000 in past-due student 
loans and the aforementioned tax liens.4 Also, he discussed his failure to pay for his 
children’s support in the clearance interview. The tax liens, child support obligations, 
and student loans were not discharged in his bankruptcy. Thus, Applicant still had over 
$300,000 in debt even after the Chapter 7 was discharged.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges Applicant made more than one transfer of funds, in the 
$30,000 to $40,000 range, from his solely-owned limited liability company into his 
personal bank accounts. Applicant admitted in his clearance interview that this money 
was his personal savings.5 These transfers were made in late 2014, around the same 
time that Applicant declared to the bankruptcy court that he had only $7,600 in assets 
against $706,811 in liabilities.6 Applicant averred in his clearance interviews that the 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s May 29, 2014 
Security Clearance Application (SCA). (Item 4) 
 
2 Item 2, page 34.  
 
3 Item 2. 
 
4 Item 5. 
 
5 Item 3, Answers to Interrogatories verifying subject interview of July 9, 2015.  
 
6 Item 5, summary of schedules. 
 
3 
 
 
primary reasons for his financial difficulties were a downturn in the economy in 2008, 
and his chronic underemployment or unemployment. He also explained that the afore-
mentioned tax liens were filed against a construction company partnership in which he 
was a partner, along with his brothers.7 He was also previously involved in family 
concrete businesses.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, and 1.d to 1.g have not been resolved. Applicant has not 
cooperated in this process. He provided responses to the SOR that were not candid by 
repeatedly asserting “do not recall” regarding tax liens and child support arrearage that 
he could not have forgotten. He provided no response to the FORM or budgetary 
information.   
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
7 Item 3, p. 5. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
 
5 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, bankruptcy filings and his two clearance interviews of July 2014, and July 2015 
that were adopted and verified by his Answers to Interrogatories. The Government 
produced substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(b) 
and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.8 Applicant has not met that burden. None of 
the delinquent debts have been resolved.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
                                                          
8 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.   
 
 Applicant endured a downturn in the economy, and his employment history is 
sketchy. Arguably, these conditions were beyond his control. He has produced no 
documentation either with his Answer to the SOR, or in response to the FORM. It is 
patently obvious that he knew about the tax liens and child support arrearages. Yet, he 
was not candid in responding “don’t recall” to these specific allegations in the SOR. He 
has not demonstrated that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has 
benefited by the bankruptcy laws as recently as 2014. Yet, even after getting a clean 
slate, he shows no progress on making payments on tax liens and child support 
obligations. Applicant has not met his burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that 
his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred under 
circumstances unlikely to recur. The mitigating conditions enumerated above do not 
apply.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline. Most importantly, Applicant has not been candid or 
forthcoming in the security application process, and he has not cooperated.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He has not met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.d – 1.g: Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:                    For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
