1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )    ISCR Case No. 15-07034 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concern. Clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 2, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and explaining why it was unable to 
find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance eligibility for 
him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On May 27, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations and requested a 
decision based on the administrative record instead of a hearing. On June 16, 2016, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant received the 
 
2 
 
FORM on June 24, 2016.  She filed a response on July 5, 2016, whereupon, the case was 
assigned to me on April 7, 2017. On May 4, 2017, I re-opened the record sua sponte to 
afford Applicant the opportunity to submit additional exhibits. (Items 5) Department 
Counsel did not object. Within the time allotted, she submitted eight documents that I 
identified and incorporated into the record as Item 6 through Item 13.   
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 In Applicant’s Response to the FORM, she noted that the investigator who 
interviewed her on July 27, 2015, misconstrued much of what she told him in the 
subsequent interview summary, prepared as part of the Report of Investigation, and 
proposed for admission by Department Counsel, as Item 3. As such, this document is not 
properly authenticated and is inadmissible under Directive ¶ E3.1.20.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 33-year-old single woman.  She has an associate’s degree and she 
has been working for a defense contractor as a software developer since March 2015. 
(Item 1 at 10, 12)  
 
 Applicant incurred approximately $34,000 of delinquent debt, as alleged in the SOR. 
Approximately $33,500 constitutes a delinquent student loan account, as alleged in 
subparagraph 1.a. The remaining three debts are delinquent utilities and internet service 
providers (subparagraphs 1.b – 1.d). Applicant incurred the student loan in 2004. She was 
working towards an associate’s degree, and after relocating, considered finishing it at a 
different institution online. (Answer at 1) She met with an admission’s representative from 
the online university, and at his urging, executed a master promissory note, which gave the 
university permission to calculate her prospective financial aid, so that they could let her 
know how much tuition would cost. 
 
 Applicant eventually decided not to attend the online university, instead, choosing to 
complete her associate’s degree at a local junior college. Unbeknownst to Applicant, when 
she executed the promissory note with the online university, she authorized them to take 
out an $8,000 loan on her behalf to pay for the first semester’s tuition. Because Applicant 
never enrolled in the university, they returned the money to the lender. The lender still 
considered it an open loan. When Applicant discovered that she was responsible for the 
loan approximately ten years later, it had increased to $33,000. Applicant “takes full 
responsibility” for the loan. (Answer at 2) She intends to satisfy this loan and the other SOR 
debts “as soon as [she] can.” (Answer at 2)  
 
 Applicant’s ability to begin making payments on this debt has been hampered by 
financial issues related to health problems and family crises. Specifically, before she 
discovered she owed the student loan delinquency, she underwent a series of surgeries to 
correct a painful, congenital disorder. (Item 6) Because of the rareness of the disorder, her 
medical insurance did not cover the treatment.  (Item 8) Consequently, she had to take out 
multiple loans to pay for the procedures. When she began this treatment regime, she had a 
3 
 
job with a higher salary than her current job’s salary and she had financial support from her 
family. (Item 6) After she began the surgical procedures, she lost her job. Although she 
found a job working for her current employer, it paid less money. In addition, at or about 
this time, her father was diagnosed with cancer, rendering him unable to provide any 
continued financial support. (Item 6) 
 
 In March 2017, Applicant began searching for a part-time job with the intent of 
generating extra cash to satisfy these debts. Since then, she has contacted multiple 
prospective employers. (Items 9-13)  She maintains a budget. She earns approximately 
$40,000 and has approximately $16 of monthly discretionary income. (Item 7)  
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
4 
 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).1  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 Applicant’s SOR delinquencies trigger the application of disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), 
“a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant unknowingly incurred her most significant debt, the student loan, after it  
was opened by a school where she applied, but never closed when she decided not to 
matriculate there. When she realized the debt was delinquent, it had increased through 
interest and late fees, from $8,000 to $33,000. Although she signed a document 
authorizing the school to apply for the loan on her behalf, she was 21 years old at the time, 
and did not understand the document’s terms. 
 
 Applicant’s inability to make any progress toward debt satisfaction relates to 
circumstances beyond her control, as she lost a job that paid a higher salary than her 
current job shortly after incurring costly medical expenses associated with a series of 
surgeries to correct a rare congenital disorder. In addition, at about this time, her father, 
whom she relied upon, at times, for financial support, was diagnosed with cancer, 
rendering him unable to help her. 
 
 Per Applicant’s budget, she has minimal monthly discretionary income. She has 
been diligently applying for a part-time job to increase her cash flow and begin debt 
satisfaction. I conclude that the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond Applicant’s control and that her actions at trying to find a part-time job to 
supplement her income and pay her debts constitute responsible actions. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies. 
 
 Applicant has yet to gain a part-time job to enable her to begin making payments. 
Consequently, her job search efforts, though commendable, do not trigger the application 
of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). Nevertheless, three of the four SOR debts are nominal debts 
totaling approximately $500, and Applicant incurred the most significant one, the student 
loan, more than ten years ago under unusual circumstances that are unlikely to recur. I 
conclude AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Applicant incurred $34,000 of delinquent debt and does not currently have enough 
discretionary income to begin resolving it.  All but $500 of this debt constitutes a student 
loan that a prospective college applied for on her behalf that somehow remained 
outstanding, accruing interest and penalties over the years, after she decided not to attend 
the college. Although Applicant readily acknowledges that she signed an agreement 
authorizing the prospective school to apply for the loan on her behalf, the fact that she 
remained responsible for a student loan, with all of its attendant compound interest and 
penalties for non-payment, for a school that she never attended is unusual. Moreover, 
6 
 
Applicant was only 21 years old when she entered the agreement with the prospective 
college, and did not understand its specifics. 
 
 Applicant’s inability to develop a payment plan to satisfy this debt since she became 
aware of it does not relate to irresponsibility or bad judgment. Rather, she simply has not 
possessed the discretionary income to develop a payment plan, as a significant percentage 
of her discretionary income has been used to satisfy loans that she entered to help her pay 
for multiple medical procedures she needed to correct a congenital birth defect.  
 
 Perhaps Applicant’s current financial circumstances would disqualify her for eligibility 
for a loan. However, security clearance adjudications are not governed by the same criteria 
as loan eligibility criteria. One’s ability to satisfy delinquent debts is an important factor in 
ascertaining security clearance eligibility, but it is only one of multiple factors under the 
whole-person concept, which includes an evaluation of the nature, seriousness and 
surrounding circumstances underlying the financial problem, and the age and maturity of 
the applicant when the problem began. Evaluating Applicant’s case in this light, I conclude 
that the negative security inferences generated by her outstanding debt are outweighed by 
these aforementioned whole-person factors. Applicant has mitigated the security concern. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
