 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-07595 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On January 26, 2015, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 14, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines H, F, and E.1 The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines.   
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 24, 2016. He answered the 
SOR in writing on July 7, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request on July 19, 2016. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 31, 2016, and I received the 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
2 
 
 
case assignment on September 19, 2016. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
February 27, 2017, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 15, 2017. The 
Government offered Exhibits 1 through 3, which were received without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through N, without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 27, 2017. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by changing the numbering on 
page 2 of the SOR to make the third allegation under Guideline E be numbered as “3” 
instead of “2.” Applicant had no objection to the amendment and I granted the motion. 
(Tr. 14) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in 
Paragraphs 1, and 2 (with a partial denial) of the SOR, with explanations. At the hearing 
he denied Paragraph 3 of the SOR (Tr. 15). He also provided additional information to 
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 38 years old, unmarried, and has no children. He has a master’s 
degree in electrical engineering. He works for a defense contractor. He started work 
there 15 years ago. He earns about $100,000 annually. He has a security clearance 
and has had one for about a decade. (Tr. 25-29; Exhibit 1)  
 
 Applicant admitted “taking a puff” from a marijuana pipe offered to him by a friend 
at a social event on July 4, 2011. He denied using marijuana since then. He admitted he 
may have used it in high school “once or twice.” Applicant realized after the 2011 
incident he should not have done it. He has not used any illegal drug since or before 
this one incident, other than the possible use in high school. He does not see the friend 
who provided the marijuana because he lives in a neighboring state. Applicant told his 
friend that he cannot use marijuana around him because of his security clearance and 
job. Applicant disclosed the marijuana incident on his e-QIP in Section 23 questions. 
Applicant does not currently associate with people who use marijuana. (Tr. 29-36; 
Exhibits 1, 2) 
 
 Applicant submitted a signed statement dated March 7, 2017, explaining the 
events of July 4, 2011, and that the other person involved was a high school friend. His 
statement referred to his disclosure of the incident on his e-QIP and the discussion with 
the investigating agent on March 19, 2015. This statement also stated Applicant would 
“not use illegal drugs and my intent to have my security clearance automatically be 
revoked for any future violation.” (Tr. 36; Exhibit N; Answer)  
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant submitted a random voluntary drug test result from his employer. It 
showed a negative result for any illegal drugs. (Exhibit G; Answer) 
 
 Applicant did not file city income taxes for his former residence he was renting to 
tenants for the years 2012 to 2014. He did not realize he had to pay tax on the rental 
income for that property until he received a tax letter from the city government informing 
him he owed back taxes in February 2015. He filed the tax return for tax year 2011 in 
March 2012 because he had the taxes done professionally and lived in the house as his 
primary residence. After 2011 he completed his income tax returns himself without the 
rental income being calculated for his former residence. In February 2015, he learned 
he should have filed tax returns on the rental income for tax years 2012 to 2014. He 
accomplished those filings in April 2015. He paid taxes of $26.70 on April 14, 2015. This 
tax matter is resolved. (Tr. 36-42; Exhibits 1-3, A-F) 
 
 Applicant submitted character statements from the co-founder and principal 
partner of his employing company, co-workers, a friend, and the friend’s sister who is 
Applicant’s girlfriend. All letters state Applicant is honest, dependable, and hard-
working. He is also described as a talented research engineer and very professional. All 
the writers are aware of the security concerns about Applicant contained in the SOR. 
(Exhibits H to M)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Three conditions are established: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Appellant smoked marijuana one time on July 4, 2011. It was offered to him by a 
high school friend. He took one puff on a pipe filled with marijuana. He had a security 
clearance for his job at that time. Therefore, AG ¶ 25 (a), (c), and (f) are established.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Two conditions may be applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
 Applicant admitted he used marijuana once in 2011. This use was six years ago. 
It so long ago and infrequent, a one-time use, that it is unlikely to recur and has not 
recurred in the intervening years. Applicant disclosed this action on his e-QIP and to the 
government investigator in 2015.This one act does not cast doubt on Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  AG ¶ 26 (a) is established.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged his one-time marijuana use in 2011. He stated he does 
not see or associate with the person who gave him the marijuana because, in part, that 
person lives in another state. He also seems to have avoided situations or people who 
might use marijuana. He testified he has not been in the presence of people who use 
marijuana after that one incident. Applicant submitted a signed statement as an exhibit 
 
6 
 
 
stating his intent not to use illegal drugs and that such use is cause for the revocation of 
any security clearance he may have. AG ¶ 26 (b) is established.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
   
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant did not file his 2012 to 2014 city income tax forms to pay tax on his 
rental property income. Therefore, there is a three-year history of not meeting his lawful 
financial obligations. He failed to file the income tax returns with the appropriate city 
authority. AG ¶ 19 (c) and (f) are established. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Three conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
7 
 
 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s tax problems happened between 2012 and 2014. He filed the 
required returns in 2015 as directed by the taxing authority. He paid $26.70 in taxes. 
The tax error was the result of misunderstanding of tax obligations by Applicant in his 
local government. This misunderstanding has been corrected. The problem occurred 
three to five years ago, and was the result of unusual circumstances in that Applicant 
rented his former primary residence and did not understand he had to pay local income 
tax to the municipality. He had not paid the tax previously. Applicant resolved the tax 
problem. He filed the required forms immediately upon being notified of his error. He 
paid the taxes and the problem has not been repeated. AG ¶ 20 (a), (d), and (g) are 
established.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 16 contains seven disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Three disqualifying conditions may apply: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
8 
 
 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 Appellant engaged in inappropriate behavior on July 4, 2011, by accepting a 
friend’s offer to take a puff on a pipe containing marijuana. This action was also a rule 
violation by anyone who had a security clearance. This behavior created a vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by someone else because it affected Applicant’s 
personal, professional, and community standing. Lastly, Applicant’s friend possessed 
marijuana to put it in the pipe and smoked it before offering it to Applicant. That friend 
was engaged in criminal activity. Therefore, AG ¶¶ 16 (d), (e), and (g) are established.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 17 contains seven conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Three conditions apply: 
 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 Applicant voluntarily revealed his marijuana incident on his e-QIP signed on 
January 26, 2015. He had not concealed anything, but was frank and honest in his 
disclosure when asked on the e-QIP about any marijuana use. The incident was four 
years prior to the e-QIP completion but Applicant remembered it and made a full 
disclosure. The offense was a one-time occurrence and has not been repeated. It is a 
minor incident and six years has passed since it occurred. The matter does not cast 
 
9 
 
 
doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant’s disclosure 
avoids any exploitation. He no longer associates with his high school friend who offered 
him the marijuana. AG ¶ 17 (c), (e), and (g) are established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(b) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant made one mistake on a 
drug use and had a tax misunderstanding. He disclosed or corrected both occurrences. 
They have not been repeated. There is nothing to diminish Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment by either of the alleged security concerns. My 
comments regarding each guideline are incorporated here also.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug involvement 
and substance abuse, financial considerations, and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
