 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05160 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AGs implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered 
this case under the old AGs implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AGs.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 25, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 9, 2016. The evidence 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 4-10 (Items 1-3 include pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on June 
21, 2016. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In August 2016, Applicant, though counsel, 
submitted exhibits (AE) A-S, which were admitted without objection. Applicant’s email 
transmittal information, supplemental response to SOR and FORM, prepared by 
counsel, and exhibit list were all attached to the record as hearing (HE) exhibits I-III. 
Applicant also raised two objections to the Government’s FORM. Both objections claim 
Department Counsel misstated facts and was vague in her characterization of the 
evidence. These objections are overruled. I will weigh the evidence appropriately and 
Department Counsel’s argument is just that--argument, and will be considered by me as 
such. Items 4-10 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned 
to me on May 19, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in his answer to the SOR. The admissions 
are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review of the pleadings and evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He honorably served in the Army from 1991 to 1998, 
and 1999 to 2007. He deployed to Iraq during his Army service. He has worked for 
several defense contractors since leaving the Army in 2007. He has also experienced 
three periods of unemployment since 2011, and various times between 2013 and 2015. 
He is twice divorced with three children, ages 10, 11, and 23. He is a high school 
graduate and is working toward completing a bachelor’s degree.2  
  
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling approximately $17,977. The 
debts are supported by credit reports from November 2014, April 2015, and January 
2016; Applicant’s statement to a defense investigator in January 2015; and by 
Applicant’s SOR admissions.3 
 
 Applicant stated that for SOR ¶ 1.a (credit card debt of $8,534) he set up a 
payment plan of $250 monthly and he has been making payments “consistently since 
December 2015 and have not missed a payment.” His supporting documentary 
evidence shows three payments made (December 2015, April 2016, and May 2016). No 
other proof of payments was submitted. He did not provide documents reflecting his 
payment agreement with the creditor. This account is unresolved.4 
                                                          
2 Item 5; AE B, N. 
 
3 Items 3-8, 10. 
 
4 Items 3-4; AE G-H. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant stated that for SOR ¶ 1.b (credit card debt of $3,215) he set up a 
payment plan of $100 monthly and he has been making payments “consistently since 
April 2016 and have not missed a payment.” His supporting documentary evidence 
shows one payment made (April 27, 2016). No other proof of payments was submitted. 
He did not provide documents reflecting his payment agreement with the creditor. This 
account is unresolved.5 
 
 Applicant stated that for SOR ¶ 1.c (credit card debt of $3,997) he set up a 
payment plan of $50 monthly and he has been making payments “consistently since 
April 2016 and have not missed a payment.” His supporting documentary evidence 
shows one payment made (April 27, 2016). No other proof of payments was submitted. 
He did not provide documents reflecting his payment agreement with the creditor. This 
account is unresolved.6 
 
 Applicant stated that for SOR ¶ 1.d (consumer debt of $2,231) he set up a 
payment plan of $25 monthly and he has “not missed a payment.” His supporting 
documentary evidence shows one payment made (April 29, 2016). No other proof of 
payments was submitted. He did not provide documents reflecting his payment 
agreement with the creditor. This account is unresolved.7 
 
 Applicant submitted a certificate of financial counseling from August 2016, and a 
financial statement showing a monthly net remainder after expenses of $626 (it should 
be noted that the total monthly payments on the statement for debts is $125 less than 
Applicant indicated he is currently paying).8 
 
 Applicant presented five recommendations from former co-workers. All opine that 
Applicant is trustworthy and possesses integrity. They all recommend him for a security 
clearance.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
5 Items 3-4; AE G. 
 
6 Items 3-4; AE G. 
 
7 Items 3-4; AE D. 
 
8 AE I-J. 
 
9 AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid and unresolved. I find all 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant presented evidence that periods of unemployment contributed to his 
delinquent debts. He did not present sufficient evidence to show that his subsequent 
actions to deal with his debts were responsible under the circumstances. While he 
made three payments toward one debt and one payment toward three debts, he failed 
to show his follow-up action on these debts. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. There is 
some evidence of financial counseling, but there is insufficient evidence to show that the 
debts are under control or being resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. His token 
payments with no follow-on payments do not establish a good-faith effort to repay or 
resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. There was no evidence presented 
disputing any of the debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered his honorable military 
service, including his deployment to a combat zone, his periods of unemployment, and 
the positive recommendations of his co-workers. However, Applicant has not 
established a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
7 
 
 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
