 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------------------  )  ADP Case No. 15-06830 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for a public trust position. She did not present sufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the concern stemming from her history of financial problems. 
Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on May 20, 2015. Thereafter, on April 9, 2016, after reviewing 
the application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), detailing a trustworthiness concern under 
Guideline F for financial considerations. The SOR is similar to a complaint. She 
answered the SOR on May 12, 2016; she admitted all but one of the allegations and 
provided an explanation for each allegation; and she provided documentation to support 
her answer.   
 
Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so the case 
will be decided on the written record. On August 22, 2016, Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
submitted all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.1 The 
file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it on August 23, 
2016. She did not reply to the FORM within the 30-day period provided for under the 
Directive. The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2017.   
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 6, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the May 2015 
background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated by a witness, as required under 
¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.2 The Directive provides no exception to the authentication 
requirement. Indeed, the authentication requirement is the exception to the general rule 
that prohibits consideration of an ROI.  
 
Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the 
summary was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the 
authentication requirement. Nevertheless, the record does not demonstrate that 
Applicant, who has not replied to the FORM, understood the concepts of authentication, 
waiver, and admissibility. It also does not demonstrate that she understood the 
implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, given 
the lack of an authenticating witness, I have not considered the ROI in reaching my 
decision.   
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old claims service advocate for a health-care contractor to 
the Defense Department. She has worked for this company since 1995. She is seeking 
to obtain or retain eligibility to occupy a position of public trust for her job 
responsibilities. Eligibility is necessary because her job involves access to sensitive but 
unclassified information. 
 
 In her April 2015 application, Applicant disclosed that she had financial 
problems.3 She reported six delinquent financial accounts and explained, in general, 
that she and her husband fell behind on their bills and were unable to catch up.  
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the SOR alleged a history of 
financial problems consisting of 13 collection or charged-off accounts in amounts 
                                                          
1 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting 
documentation, some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
2 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.). 
 
3 Exhibit 4.  
 
 
3 
 
ranging from $63 to $5,372 for a total of $13,359. The delinquent accounts are 
established by her admissions or the credit reports.4 Four of the accounts are medical 
collection accounts for a total of $2,359.  
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant details, at some length, the status of each 
debt she admits. She explained that she has made payment arrangements with most of 
her creditors. Her documentation submitted in support of her answer shows that she 
has made a single payment of $25 for one of the medical collection accounts on May 2, 
2016. Otherwise, she did not submit any documentation showing that the 13 delinquent 
accounts were paid, settled, in a payment arrangement, cancelled, forgiven, or 
otherwise resolved.  
 
Law and Policy 
 
This case is adjudicated under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017. 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,5 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.6 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
  AG ¶ 19(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of ability to do so; 
                                                          
4 Exhibits 5 and 7. 
 
5 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
6 AG ¶ 18. 
 
4 
 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolved debts.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. At this point, all 13 of the 
delinquent financial accounts are unresolved and ongoing. With that said, I have given 
little weight to the four medical collection accounts that remain unresolved. Medical debt 
is unlike other types of debt. First, it is presumed that medical debt is incurred for 
necessary medical care and treatment as opposed to frivolous or irresponsible spending 
or otherwise living beyond one’s means. Second, medical debt is usually unplanned, 
unexpected, and nondiscretionary. Third, it can add hundreds if not thousands of dollars 
in debt in a short period, which can be overwhelming for a debtor. In my view, having 
less than $2,500 in unresolved medical collection accounts does not fatally undermine 
Applicant’s suitability. Accordingly, the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.e are decided for 
Applicant. 
 
 The same cannot be said for the other nine delinquent debts for about $11,000. 
She did not present any documentation for those accounts. And there is no track record 
showing that she will adhere to the payment arrangements.   
 
 To conclude, Applicant’s history of financial problems, which is ongoing, creates 
doubt or concern about her reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to 
protect sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a 
whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or 
vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant did not present sufficient information to explain and 
mitigate the trustworthiness concern.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:           Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e:      For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f-1.m:     Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
