 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-01089 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision on Reconsideration 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 After reviewing the record evidence as a whole, including information provided by 
Applicant on reconsideration, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns 
about her past-due or delinquent debts. Her request for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On February 2, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified 
information as required for her job with a defense contractor. As part of her background 
investigation, a Government investigator interviewed Applicant on November 14, 2012. 
After reviewing the completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) 
 
 
adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
 
 On December 2, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).2 On January 8, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested 
a decision without a hearing. On March 25, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in 
support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on April 1, 2016, and had 30 days 
from the date of receipt to submit additional information in response to the FORM. The 
record closed after Applicant did not submit additional information before the May 1, 
2016, deadline. I received the case on February 10, 2017. 
 
 I issued a decision unfavorable to the Applicant on March 16, 2017. Applicant 
had until Friday, March 31, 2017, to file notice of any intent to appeal my decision. On 
Monday, April 3, 2017, I received Applicant’s written request (dated March 28, 2017) to 
reconsider my decision denying her request for eligibility for access to classified 
information. She averred that she had submitted information in response to the FORM 
that I should consider. Her request is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1. 
On April 6, 2017, I issued an order advising the parties that I had re-opened the record 
to consider new information from Applicant. My order is included as Hx. 2.  
 
 Applicant timely responded to my order on April 11, 2017, and provided 19 pages 
of information generated between April 2015 and December 2016. It is included as 
Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. Department Counsel waived objection to its admissibility in 
an email (Hx. 3) dated April 28, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $11,477 for 33 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.s, 1.u - 1.hh); and that in April 2005, she filed 
a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition through which she received a discharge of debt in July 
2005 (SOR 1.t). Applicant admitted all of the allegations, claiming only that she was 
repairing her credit. In her e-QIP, Applicant disclosed her Chapter 7 bankruptcy and 
several other debts. Credit reports obtained during her background investigation and the 
pre-SOR adjudication of her case further document all of the SOR allegations. She also 
discussed her financial problems during her November 2012 interview. (FORM, Items 1 
- 6) I have incorporated herein by reference my findings of fact contained in the initial 
decision in this case. Having reviewed Applicant’s information in Ax. A, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive. 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
3 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included six exhibits (Items 1 - 6) proffered in 
support of the Government’s case. 
 
 
 Applicant’s credit reports no longer list the debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
has been working since 2015 with a law firm that specializes in updating entries in a 
person’s credit history. The firm also assists in challenging the accuracy of entries as 
either erroneous or as being no longer reportable because they are more than seven 
years old. A December 2016 credit report shows Applicant is current on a car loan and 
other smaller obligations. It also shows she successfully paid off a car loan that had 
been 120 days late at one time, and that she has numerous retail credit accounts that 
are in good standing. One other account, an unpaid cable television bill for $545, is in 
collection status. (Ax. A) 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that her credit card balances, while current, are “a little 
high” (as of December 2016, they totaled at least $4,598) but that she intends to pay 
them down “to at least 30%.” She would like to buy a house, and avers she does not 
intend to incur bad debts in the future because she now understands the importance of 
good credit. (Ax. A)   
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:  
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
                                                 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.6 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.7  
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information.8 A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Nothing submitted in support of this reconsideration has altered the fact that the 
Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the SOR. The 
facts established herein raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 
as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history 
of not meeting financial obligations).  
 
 I have again considered the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 20. Applicant’s 
new information shows only that the debts reflected in the SOR and corroborated by the 
Government’s information no longer appear in Applicant’s credit reports. There are a 
variety of possible reasons for this, including the mere passage of time. Applicant did 
not establish that the SOR debts were not hers, that she had a verifiable basis for 
disputing them, or that she actually resolved any of them. In view of her long history of 
                                                 
6 Directive, E3.1.14. 
7 Directive, E3.1.15. 
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
9 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
indebtedness, including a Chapter 7 bankruptcy and subsequent accrual of the 
delinquencies documented in the FORM, it was further incumbent on Applicant to show 
that her current finances are sound. She did not provide any information about her 
income and expenses, her savings, or the manner in which she manages her personal 
finances. On balance, Applicant did not meet her burden of persuasion in response to 
the Government’s case. I again conclude she has failed to mitigate the security 
concerns about her finances. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.hh:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a 
security clearance is DENIED.  
 
 If either party wishes to appeal this decision, a notice of intent to appeal must be 
filed with the DOHA Appeals Board no later than 15 days from the date of this decision. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
