 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )       ISCR Case No. 15-03307 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Cheryl Van Ackeren, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had three delinquent mortgage debts, involving investment properties, 
which arose from circumstances beyond his control and were fully resolved in 2016. 
Resulting security concerns were mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings, 
testimony, and exhibits, national security eligibility is granted.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 29, 2013. On March 
24, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on June 15, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on August 8, 2016. The case was assigned to me on August 29, 2016. On 
November 22, 2016, I granted Applicant’s request for an indefinite continuance due to 
his work-related unavailability for a proposed hearing in late 2016. After the availability 
of all parties was coordinated, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Notice of Hearing on May 2, 2017, setting the hearing date for May 18, 2017, 
and I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A 
through G, which were admitted without objection, and testified on his own behalf. Four 
other witnesses also testified for Applicant. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the 
record open until June 1, 2017, to permit submission of additional documentary 
evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE H, which was admitted without objection, and 
the record closed as scheduled. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
May 31, 2017.  
 
On June 5, 2017, I notified the parties that I considered the case to be 
appropriate for summary disposition, and provided ten days within which to object in 
accordance with the DOHA Director’s procedural guidelines for summary dispositions 
promulgated on November 12, 2016. Applicant’s counsel responded on June 5, 2017, 
expressing no objection. On June 19, 2017, Department Counsel reported that the 
Government objected to the summary disposition.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national 
security eligibility. Although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG, my decision 
would be the same under either set of guidelines.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He is married, with two children ages 13 and 8. He 
worked on a part-time subcontractor basis for a defense contractor from March 2006 
until January 2017, when he became a full-time employee. He enlisted in the Army in 
1983, then served 5 years in a Ranger battalion and 16 years in Special Forces before 
honorably retiring as a master sergeant (E-8) in November 2004. He has held security 
clearances without incident for more than 33 years. He is a high school graduate, and 
took some college classes about real estate investment after he retired from active duty. 
(GE 1; AE A; Tr. 29-33, 51-53.)  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant joined his college professor, and several other students with whom he 
studied real estate investing, in a group that bought distressed residential properties, 
rehabilitated them, and resold them for a profit. After about a year and a half, market 
conditions had changed to the point that this investment model was no longer 
sufficiently profitable to continue. Applicant then started working with another company 
that arranged lease-option investments in 2006. He was matched with prospective 
home buyers who could not then qualify for their own mortgage loans, but sought to rent 
a home while improving their credit eligibility. Under these arrangements, Applicant 
purchased four residential properties for prospective buyers who entered into a two-year 
lease contract with an option to purchase the property after two years. The first two 
such arrangements were very successful. The second two involved buyers who wanted 
“fixer-upper” properties, and became problems when the tenant/buyers stopped paying 
rent and had to be evicted. (Tr. 32-46.) 
 
 As a result of these difficulties, Applicant temporarily fell behind on the first and 
second mortgage loans on the two “fixer-upper” properties, A and B. He used personal 
funds and his own labor to effect the numerous repairs the properties required, and 
consulted with an accountant who specializes in real estate transactions to work toward 
resolution of the loan delinquencies. The three delinquent debts alleged in the SOR 
involve the first and second mortgages on property A (¶¶ 1.a and 1.c), and the second 
mortgage loan on property B (¶ 1.b). Applicant has always kept his personal finances, 
including the mortgage on his residence, fully paid and current. (Tr. 46-50, 57.)  
 
 Applicant and his accountant worked to negotiate arrangements with the lenders 
on the two problem investment properties that would permit him to resolve those 
delinquencies. They were successful with respect to the property A. In May 2016, they 
concluded a payoff agreement with the second mortgage lender and fully resolved that 
formerly delinquent $17,602 debt. (AE C.) In June 2016, the first mortgage lender on 
that property approved their application for loan modification under the Home Affordable 
Modification Program (HAMP) that had recently been expanded to make non-resident 
owners eligible for participation. The formerly delinquent $46,728 balance due was 
rolled back into the principal in the modified loan. The property has been refurbished, is 
occupied by renters and, under the modified first mortgage loan terms, is breaking even 
for Applicant. (AE D; Tr. 57-58.) 
 
 Applicant was not able to retain possession of the second troubled, “fixer-upper,” 
investment property B. The first mortgage lender initiated foreclosure proceedings in 
2013, before the HAMP was expanded to cover investors, and would not accept 
anything less than payment in full for the outstanding loan balance. That debt was fully 
resolved through the foreclosure, and all resulting tax obligations were resolved. This 
debt is not alleged in the SOR. However, Applicant remained indebted to the second 
mortgage lender on property B in the amount of $7,004, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He 
and his accountant were able to negotiate and complete a payoff agreement that fully 
resolved that debt in May 2016. (AE D; Tr. 38-43, 57, 61.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Since resolving these three formerly delinquent investment-related debts in 2016, 
Applicant has remained current on all of his debt accounts. He is working full-time for 
his employer with a steady and predictable income, and his remaining three real estate 
investment properties are in good condition, occupied by renters, and profitable. His 
personal financial statement reflects a net monthly income of $10,652 that covers his 
monthly living expenses of $4,424 and debt payments of $4,120 with a resulting 
monthly surplus of $2,108. He also has net assets exceeding $370,000 including more 
than $67,000 in bank savings accounts. (AE B; AE H; Tr. 62, 67-87.)    
 
 Applicant had a distinguished military career, and provided numerous letters from 
current and former colleagues and acquaintances expressing their uniformly excellent 
opinions of his integrity, trustworthiness, and good character. Four witnesses traveled 
significant distances at personal expense to appear in person and provide testimony 
that was similarly impressive concerning Applicant’s unimpeachable patriotism, 
character, and responsibility. During his testimony, Applicant demonstrated a full 
understanding of, and control over, his financial situation and a credible intention to 
maintain it in a responsible manner. (AE F; AE G; Tr. 28-118.)   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
 
5 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
  
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant ran into problems with two real estate investments that resulted in three 
formerly delinquent mortgage loan debts, which he was unable to satisfy before the 
 
 
6 
 
 
SOR was issued. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing 
disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant no longer purchases properties under the lease option program, from 
which his delinquencies resulted, and his remaining investment properties are all 
profitable. He now has a full-time salary, and more than $2,100 in monthly surplus 
income. He is current on payments for the modified first mortgage loan alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a, and has fully complied with the negotiated payoff agreements that resolved the 
second mortgage debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. The delinquencies on those 
loans resulted from the unexpected defaults on agreed lease payments by his former 
tenants, with whom he was connected by a company that vouched for their 
responsibility before he invested in homes for them.  
 
Applicant acted responsibly under unforeseen, difficult circumstances that were 
beyond his control, and there are clear indications that his financial issues are under 
control. His investment decisions involved some risk, but were reasonable when he 
made them. He followed the recommendations of professional counselors, and made 
good-faith efforts to effectively resolve his formerly delinquent debts. The record 
establishes clear mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 
20(a) through 20(d). 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who took reasonable and effective action to resolve the relatively minor financial issues 
created by two temporarily unsuccessful real estate investments. He followed 
professional advice, and has resolved all of his formerly delinquent debt. The likelihood 
that financial problems will recur is minimal; and the potential for pressure, coercion, or 
duress is eliminated by resolution of Applicant’s former delinquencies. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and 
suitability for a security clearance. He fully met his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
