 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04994 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 29, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 5, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on May 31, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on June 10, 2016. Applicant did not respond to the Government’s 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 4, 2017. The Government’s documents 
identified as Items 1 through 5 are admitted in evidence without objection. Other than 
his Answer to the SOR, admitted in evidence as Item 2, Applicant failed to submit any 
additional documentation.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He served in the U.S. military from October 2007 to 
October 2012, when he was honorably discharged. He worked for a prior federal 
contractor from October 2012 to July 2013. He attended community college from 
January 2013 to March 2013, and July 2013 to August 2013, but did not earn a degree. 
He was unemployed from July 2013 to October 2013. He has worked as an electrician 
for his current federal contractor since January 2014. He was granted a DOD security 
clearance in September 2007. As of June 2014, he had never been married, he has two 
children, ages 8 and 4, and he had been living with his parents since June 2009.1  
   
 The SOR alleges a judgment for $1,528, seven delinquent consumer debts 
totaling $12,901, a delinquent child support account for $6,415, a delinquent 
educational account for $1,455, and three delinquent government overpayments totaling 
$1,236. Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations in his response to the SOR.2  
 
The SOR debts are established by Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports. 
The June 2014 credit report lists the two delinquent government overpayments alleged 
in the SOR as ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. It reports an open date for SOR ¶ 1.d of April 2013, and 
an open date for SOR ¶ 1.e of September 2013. The May 2016 credit report continues 
to list only two delinquent government overpayments, both of which have account 
numbers that mirror the first eleven numbers of the account numbers for SOR ¶¶ 1.d 
and 1.e, as reported on the June 2014 credit report. One of the accounts listed in the 
May 2016 credit report is SOR ¶ 1.m, and it has the same April 2013 open date as SOR 
¶ 1.d. The second account listed in the May 2016 credit report carries the same 
September 2013 open date as SOR ¶ 1.e, and is reported as paid. I therefore find that 
SOR ¶ 1.d is a duplicate of 1.m, and SOR ¶ 1.e is paid.3 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to a lack of income and financial 
irresponsibility. He indicated in his June 2014 Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (SF 86), that he is making payments to reduce his delinquent 
child support debt. His May 2016 credit report reflects a delinquent child support 
balance of $6,171, which is lower than the $6,415 balance reported on the June 2014 
credit report.4  
                                                          
1 Item 3.  
 
2 Items 1-5. 
 
3 Items 1-5. 
 
4 Items 3-5. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a judgment for $1,528, seven delinquent consumer debts totaling 
$12,901, a delinquent child support account for $6,171, a delinquent educational 
account for $1,455, and a delinquent government overpayment of $327. There is 
sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
  
 
5 
 
 Applicant paid SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant also paid down the balances of SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
and 1.m, from $6,415 to $6,171, and from $659 to $327, respectively. However, the 
$6,171 balance for SOR ¶ 1.c remains significant, and there is no evidence that 
Applicant has made any additional payments towards either SOR ¶¶ 1.c or 1.m. Further, 
Applicant still has an outstanding judgment, a delinquent educational account, and 
seven delinquent consumer accounts that remain unresolved. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. His failure to 
address his delinquent debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s unemployment and lack of income constitute conditions beyond his 
control that contributed to his financial problems. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), 
Applicant must provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
The credit reports reflect that Applicant paid SOR ¶ 1.e, and paid down the balances of 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.m. However, as previously noted, the $6,171 balance for SOR ¶ 1.c 
remains significant, and there is no evidence that Applicant has made any additional 
payments towards either SOR ¶¶ 1.c or 1.m. There is insufficient evidence to conclude 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. Applicant has not provided 
evidence of any efforts he may have taken to repay or otherwise resolve his delinquent 
debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
 
6 
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. He failed to meet his burden of 
persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c, 1.f - 1.m: Against Applicant 
   
 Subparagraphs 1.d - 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
 
