 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05191 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 23, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on March 12, 2015. (Item 
3) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance.  
 
On February 19, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
 
2 
 
 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are 
effective for decisions issued after that date.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 16, 2016, admitting three allegations of 
delinquent debt under Guideline F (SOR 1.a, 1.d, 1.e). Applicant denied two allegations 
of delinquent debt (SOR 1.b and 1.c). He elected to have the matter decided on the 
written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on April 25, 2016. (Item 5) Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
(FORM) on May 2, 2016. He was provided the opportunity to file objections and to 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. I was assigned the case on May 9, 2017.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM investigator (Item 3) was not authenticated and could not 
be considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the PSI summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, so he did not raise any 
objection to consideration of the PSI. Since there is no objection by Applicant, I will 
consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 52 years old. He graduated from high school in May 1982. He served on 
active duty in the Navy from February 1985 until February 1989 when he was honorably 
discharged. Applicant married in January 1985, and has two children. He has been 
employed as an operations supervisor for a defense contractor since August 1996. He 
received an interim clearance of eligibility for access to classified information in January 
2008. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated January 23, 2015, Item 3 PSI, dated March 12, 2015)  
 
 The SOR alleges, and a credit report (Item 4, dated February 13, 2015) confirm 
the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a federal tax lien of $16,844 (SOR 1.a); a 
judgment for a bank for $3,984 (SOR 1.b); a medical account in collection for $352 
(SOR 1.c); a medical account in collection for $239 (SOR 1.d); and a home foreclosure 
in November 2011 (SOR 1.e). The amount of the delinquent debt is approximately 
$21,000.  
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case were considered under the previous AGs.  
 
3 
 
 
 In the March 2015 PSI, Applicant acknowledged the federal tax lien. Applicant 
explained that he was on disability from 2003 until 2005. Tax withholdings were not 
taken from the disability payments. When he filed his federal tax return in 2005, his 
federal tax debt was approximately $16,000. He contacted the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) to arrange a payment plan but was not successful. The IRS required a monthly 
payment he could not afford. He or his wife have repeatedly contacted the IRS to reach 
a payment plan to no avail. The IRS has kept small tax refunds he received that have 
not resolved the tax lien. Applicant’s plan is to pay off an outstanding loan that he used 
to pay for his mother’s funeral. When that loan is paid, he will again contact the IRS to 
see if he can arrange a payment plan. He will start to repay the tax lien if he can reach 
an agreement. 
 
 Applicant also reported in the PSI that he has no knowledge of the judgment at 
SOR 1.b., or the medical debts at SOR 1.c, and 1.d. At the time of the interview, he had 
not inquired into the accounts. Applicant acknowledged that his house was foreclosed in 
2008. Applicant was current with his mortgage until he went on disability between 2001 
until 2005. He did not have sufficient resources to make the mortgage payments. He 
tried to reach payments arrangements with the mortgage holder, but the monthly 
payments requested by the mortgage holder were larger than he could afford. When his 
wife lost her job in 2008, they could no longer afford to make any mortgage payments. 
The house was foreclose in 2011. After the foreclosure, Applicant has no debt 
remaining from the house.  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant acknowledged his federal tax lien, He 
denied the bank debt at SOR 1.b and stated he is disputing the debt. He provided no 
documentations concerning the dispute. He denied the medical debt at SOR 1.c. He 
stated that the debt was reported to the credit reporting agency in error by the medical 
provider and the provider had it removed from Applicant’s credit report in 2015. 
Applicant did not provided documentation to verify his statement.  
 
 Applicant stated that the medical debt at SOR 1.d was paid in 2015. He did not 
provide a receipt or any other document to establish his payment. 
 
 He acknowledged the foreclosure at SOR 1.e. He reported that after being 
placed on disability, he tried to refinance the mortgage but the mortgage company 
refuse to cooperate with him. He did not provide any evidence of his efforts to refinance 
the mortgage or any information concerning payments that he made. (Item 1, Response 
to SOR, dated March 16, 2016) 
  
 Applicant did not provide any documents to verify his SOR responses. He did not 
present any documents to verify that he contacted creditors to make payment or 
settlement arrangements. He did not provide any evidence of his efforts to pay, settle, 
compromise, dispute, or otherwise resolve any of the delinquent debts. 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified and sensitive information) 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) An 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Credit reports reveal, and Applicant 
admitted, that he has multiple delinquent debts dating to as early as 2011. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts,  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 The information raises issues about Applicant’s willingness and ability to meet his 
financial obligations. Since Applicant has no debt from his house foreclosure, I find for 
Applicant on SOR 1.e. Once the Government has established the adverse financial 
issue, the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible sources, such as a non-profit credit counselling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. The debts pertain to a tax lien, a 
judgment on a credit account, medical debts, and a foreclosure. Applicant’s debts are 
numerous, recent, and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence 
unlikely. The debts are normal ordinary financial matters. Applicant claims that his 
financial problems commenced when he was placed on disability. He did not establish 
that the loss of income because of disability prohibited him from attempting to resolve 
his financial problems. Applicant has not established that the conditions he claims 
caused his financial problems were not within his control. Applicant did not provide 
information concerning financial counseling.  
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Good faith means acting in a way 
that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. 
Applicant is not required to be debt-free nor must his plan require paying off all debts 
immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that Applicant act responsibly given 
his circumstances. Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve 
financial problems, and that he has taken significant action to implement that plan. 
Applicant’s plan must evidence a systematic method of handling debts, and Applicant 
must establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. A meaningful track record of 
debt payment can be established by evidence of actual debt payments or reduction of 
debt through payment of debts. A promise to pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for 
a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible 
manner. 
 
 Applicant claims that he contacted some creditors to establish payments plans. 
However, he presented no documentation of any plans he is negotiating or finalizing. He 
presented no documents to show any present payments made to creditors. He has not 
established a track record of paying his debts in a timely manner and acting in a 
financially responsible manner. His lack of responsible financial conduct is likely to 
continue. In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, he failed to supplement the record with relevant and material 
facts regarding his financial circumstances, to adequately articulate his positions, and 
provide facts to mitigate the financial security concerns. In short, the file lacks sufficient 
 
7 
 
 
evidence provided by Applicant to establish that he paid, arranged to pay, settled, 
compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved his delinquent accounts. The record 
lacks corroborating or substantial document and details to explain his finances. 
 
 Applicant has not met his burden to establish his good-faith efforts to resolve his 
remaining debts. He has not established that he acted with reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and an adherence to duty and obligation towards his financial obligations. With 
evidence of delinquent debt and no documentation to support responsible management 
of his finances, it is obvious that Applicant’s financial problems are not under control, 
and that Applicant is not managing his personal financial obligations reasonably and 
responsibly. There is evidence of a lack of responsible behavior, good judgment, and 
reliable conduct and reasonable actions by Applicant towards his finances. His failure to 
appropriately manage his finances, and his lack of action to resolve financial issues, are 
strong indications that he may not adequately protect and safeguard classified 
information. Applicant has not presented sufficient information to mitigate security 
concerns for financial considerations.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s four years 
of commendable active service in the Navy. I considered that Applicant was 
successfully eligible for access to classified information in the past. Applicant has not 
established an adequate plan to resolve his delinquent debts. Applicant has not 
presented sufficient information to establish that he acted reasonably and responsibly 
towards his finances under the circumstances. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant has not mitigated security concerns arising under the financial considerations 
guideline. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:           Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.e:            For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
