 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
------------------------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 15-07321 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He failed to present sufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from his problematic financial 
history. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on November 11, 2014. This document is commonly known as 
a security clearance application. Thereafter, on May 10, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
 
2 
 
information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 9, 2016. His response consisted of 
handwritten comments on the SOR, and his responses were mixed. His response did 
not include supporting documentation. He requested a decision based on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On July 29, 2016, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, some of 
which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, who received it August 25, 2016. He did not reply within 30 days from receipt 
of the information as required under the Directive. The case was assigned to me on 
June 2, 2017.    
 
Procedural Matters 
 
While this case was pending decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all 
covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The 2017 AG supersede the AG 
implemented in September 2006, and they are effective for any adjudication made on or 
after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have decided Applicant’s case under the 2017 AG. I 
also considered this case under the 2006 AG, and my decision is the same using either 
set of AG.   
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 3, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the April 2015 
background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated by a witness, which is required 
under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.2 The Directive provides no exception to the 
authentication requirement. Indeed, the authentication requirement is the exception to 
the general rule that prohibits consideration of an ROI.  
 
Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the 
summary was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the 
authentication requirement. Nevertheless, the record does not demonstrate that 
Applicant, who has not replied to the FORM, understood the concepts of authentication, 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
2 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.). 
 
 
3 
 
waiver, and admissibility. It also does not demonstrate that he understood the 
implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, given 
the lack of an authenticating witness, I have not considered the ROI in reaching my 
decision.  
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his 
employment as a federal contractor. He has worked as a laborer for a shipbreaking 
company since 2013 in State #1. Before that, he was unemployed from December 2011 
to February 2013. Before that, he lived and had full-time blue-collar jobs during 1994-
2011 in State #2. He relocated to State #1 in 2011. He has never married. He has four 
children, ages 22, 20, 13, and 10. His 20-year-old child lives in State #2, while his other 
three children live in State #1. 
 
In his November 2014 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed that he 
failed to file a federal individual income tax return for tax year 2014; he estimated owing 
about $1,000 in taxes; and he indicated that he would file a return in 2015. His 
admission is nonsensical, because returns for tax year 2014 were not due until April 
2015, several months after he completed the application. He reported no other adverse 
financial information, including delinquent accounts, in response to the various 
questions about his financial history.   
 
Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the SOR alleges, in ¶ 1.a through 
¶ 1.f, a history of financial problems or difficulties consisting of the following: (1) failure 
to file federal and State #1 income tax returns for tax years 2013-2015; (2) a child-
support obligation in collection in State #2 along with an unpaid judgment without a 
specified amount or a specified date of entry of judgment; and (3) four collection 
accounts for a total of about $14,000.3 The four collection accounts are proven and 
established by a November 2014 credit report.4 Applicant did not present any 
documentation showing that the four collection accounts were paid, settled, in a 
repayment arrangement, cancelled, forgiven, or otherwise resolved. The other two 
matters are discussed below.  
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied failing to file federal income tax 
returns for tax years 2013-2015. His admission in his security clearance application is 
nonsensical, as explained above, and cannot be accepted as reliable evidence. And 
there is no other admissible evidence to prove he failed to file returns for tax years 
2013-2015.   
 
                                                          
3 The state income tax returns are not discussed further because State #1 is one of nine states with no 
individual income tax. The nine states are Alaska, Florida, Nevada, New Hampshire, South Dakota, 
Tennessee, Texas, Washington, and Wyoming. Both New Hampshire and Tennessee currently tax some 
dividends and interest. Accordingly, there was no requirement for Applicant to file an individual income 
tax return in State #1.  
 
4 Exhibit 4.  
 
 
4 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that the child-support obligation was 
“under investigation.” There is no admissible evidence to prove that he has a child-
support account that is currently in arrears, in collection, or has been reduced to a 
judgment. The November 2014 credit report shows the following: (1) four child-support 
accounts, one in State #1, his state of current residence, and three in State #2, his state 
of former residence; (2) the three accounts in State #2 are described as 30-days late or 
in collection, the accounts have balances of $0 and no past-due balances, and the 
accounts were transferred or sold (presumably to State #1 under the Uniform 
Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act, which concerns interstate cooperation in the 
collection of spousal and child support); and (3) the account in State #1 is described as 
pays as agreed, has a balance of $47,599, and is not past due. In other words, the 
credit report does not establish that Applicant has a current child-support account in 
arrears or in collection, or that a judgment has been entered against him for child 
support.   
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.5 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”6 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.7 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.8 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.9 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.10 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
                                                          
5 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
6 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
7 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
8 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
10 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
 
5 
 
facts that have been admitted or proven.11 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.12 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.13 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, 
and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.14 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,15 the suitability of an applicant 
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information.16 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
  AG ¶ 19(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income 
as required; and  
                                                          
11 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
12 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
13 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
15 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
16 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic 
financial history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. Although the 
evidence is not sufficient to establish that Applicant failed to file federal income tax 
returns for tax years 2013-2015 or has a delinquent child-support obligation, those 
matters do not end the inquiry. Applicant did not present any documentation showing 
that he has taken affirmative action to resolve the four collection accounts totaling about 
$14,000. I conclude that the collection accounts are unresolved and ongoing.   
 
 Based on the written record before me, I am unable to credit Applicant in 
explanation, extenuation, or mitigation of his problematic financial history. In reaching 
that conclusion, I note that his financial problems are likely connected to his 
unemployment during 2011-2013. That circumstance can certainly create a financial 
hardship for most people. But he has not demonstrated that he has acted responsibly 
since resuming full-time work in 2013. Since then, he has had both time and opportunity 
to initiate the process of putting his financial house in order and have supporting 
documentation showing he has in fact done so. Documentation is necessary because 
the DOD security-clearance process, like other large bureaucratic institutions (for 
example, banks, insurance companies, and universities), does not run on word-of-
mouth; it runs on paperwork.17 It’s the responsibility of the individual applicant to 
produce relevant documentation in support of their case.18 Here, Applicant has not met 
his burden of production because he did not present sufficient documentation showing 
he is making a good-faith effort to resolve the four collection accounts.   
 
 Applicant’s history of financial problems creates doubt about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching 
this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable 
evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also considered the 
whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that he did not meet his ultimate burden 
of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
17 See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 11, 2010) (it is reasonable to expect applicants to 
present documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts).  
 
18 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
