 
1 
                                      
 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ADP Case No. 15-08726 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility to occupy a public trust position is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 7, 2015, Applicant applied for a public trust position and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On May 31, 2016, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended and modified (Regulation); DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) 
applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, 
effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR alleged trustworthiness concerns under 
                                                          
1 Item 3 (e-QIP, dated August 7, 2015). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was 
unable to make an affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for occupying a public trust 
position to support a contract with the DOD. The SOR recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
occupying a public trust position to support a contract with the Department of Defense, 
and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether such eligibility 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a statement, notarized June 29, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations 
and elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant on 
August 22, 2016, and she was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after 
receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive, as 
well as the Guidelines applicable to her case. It is unclear if she was subsequently 
furnished a copy of the SEAD 4. Applicant purportedly received the FORM on September 
29, 2016. The response was due on October 29, 2016. On September 13, 2016, Applicant 
submitted a number of documents in response to the FORM, to which there was no 
objection. They were admitted into evidence as Applicant exhibit A. The case was 
assigned to me on June 2, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted nearly all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c., 1.e., 1.f., and 1.h. 
through 1.w.). Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration 
of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been serving 
as a clinical administrative coordinator with her current employer since July 2015. She 
previously held a variety of positions with a number of employers. Applicant was expelled 
from high school for excessive absences. She returned briefly to an alternative school, 
and eventually obtained a General Educational Development (GED) diploma in 2012. 
Applicant enrolled in a college but subsequently withdrew. She has never served with the 
U.S. military. She was never granted a security clearance, and it is unclear if she ever 
held a public trust position. Applicant has never been married, although she has been 
regularly cohabiting since February 2013. She has three sons, born in 2002, 2004, and 
2007.  
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously issued 
national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this trustworthiness review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the two 
versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations3 
 
 It is unclear when Applicant first experienced financial difficulties, but she 
acknowledged that she had been through a number of periods of voluntary and 
involuntary unemployment over the years: from January 2005 until January 2007 as a 
stay-at-home mother; from May 2008 until October 2008, because she had resigned from 
her job to get a higher-paying job, without having any offer of a new job; from October 
2009 until April 2010, after being fired for failing to keep up with the workload; from May 
2012 until October 2012, after resigning her position to be a stay-at-home mother to care 
for her grandfather and son; from January 2013 until June 2013, because her seasonal 
position ended and she returned to being a stay-at-home mother; from August 2014 until 
January 2015, because she had resigned to accept a new position that subsequently 
became unavailable to her; and from May 2015 until July 2015, when her temporary 
position ended. During her periods of unemployment, Applicant received financial 
assistance from various combinations of the state, her family, her cohabitant, and child 
support.  
 
Because Applicant had insufficient funds to make monthly account payments, her 
finances deteriorated to the point where she was unable to prevent them from becoming 
delinquent, placed for collection, or charged off. Two judgments were filed against her. 
She was evicted from two apartments for non-payment of rent. A vehicle was 
repossessed.  
 
When Applicant completed her e-QIP in August 2015, she acknowledged having 
two judgments filed against her but denied that, within the past seven years, she had any 
delinquent accounts. Applicant claimed that when she was required to complete the e-
QIP, the three-day period was insufficient for her to verify that any debts were her legal 
responsibility, so she omitted them. When Applicant was interviewed by an investigator 
from the U.S. Officer of Personnel Management (OPM) in September 2015, she denied 
having a substantial number of identified debts about which she was confronted.  
 
Applicant stated that she would look into all of the identified accounts, and, in 
October 2015, she would consolidate those which she was satisfied were her debts. 
Applicant eventually changed her mind regarding consolidation. Instead, she chose to 
establish a plan to get her credit back on track by herself. On September 13, 2016, 
Applicant wrote 13 letters to creditors, asking for account information, raising the 
possibility of establishing repayment plans, and requesting that no further negative or 
derogatory reports be placed in her credit reports to negatively impact her credit rating. 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant contended that she had paid off certain accounts, 
either by way of voluntary payments or involuntary garnishment, or that she was in the 
process of gathering information to enable her to resolve other accounts. She failed to 
                                                          
3 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: Item 3, supra note 1; Item 2 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated June 29, 2016); Item 4 (Personal Subject 
Interview, dated September 23, 2015); and Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated 
August 20, 2015).  
 
 
4 
                                      
 
submit any documentation to support her contentions regarding those payments or other 
resolution efforts. 
 
Applicant admitted that she was young and stupid about quitting jobs without 
having another job, and that she intends to be smarter about her medical bills and more 
attentive to her credit report. Her goal, as of September 2015, was to resolve all of her 
debts, except her student loans, within one year. Applicant failed to achieve her goal, and 
it appears that she did not take her initial efforts to contact her creditors until September 
2016. 
 
The SOR identified 23 purportedly continuing delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $20,250 that had been placed for collection, charged off, or gone to 
judgment, as reflected by the August 2015 credit report. Those unpaid accounts were as 
follows: rent and costs for $2,527 that went to judgment in August 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.a.); rent 
and costs for $812 that went to judgment in November 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.b.); a utility account 
for $257 that Applicant claims she paid off in February 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.c.); an unspecified 
type of account for $256 (SOR ¶ 1.d.); a defaulted student loan for $1,252 that Applicant 
contended was paid off by a garnishment from her income tax refund (SOR ¶ 1.e.); rent 
and costs for $5,593 (SOR ¶ 1.f.); student loan and college expenses for $3,506 (SOR ¶ 
1.g.); a cellular telephone account for $1,440 (SOR ¶ 1.h.); a direct-broadcast satellite 
service provider account for $762 (SOR ¶ 1.i.); a direct-broadcast satellite service 
provider account for $677 (SOR ¶ 1.j.); five medical accounts with the same collection 
agent for $578 (SOR ¶ 1.k.), $578 (SOR ¶ 1.l.), $228 (SOR ¶ 1.p.), $57 (SOR ¶ 1.t.), and 
$57 (SOR ¶ 1.u.); a loan for $437 (SOR ¶ 1.m.); a medical account for $322 (SOR ¶ 1.n.); 
a utility account for $257 that Applicant claims she paid off in July 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.o.); an 
unspecified account for $192 that Applicant claims was scheduled to be paid off as of July 
2016 (SOR ¶ 1.q.); three medical accounts with different collection agents for $183 (SOR 
¶ 1.r.), $182 (SOR ¶ 1.s.), and $50 (SOR ¶ 1.v.); and a gas utility account for $47 that 
Applicant claims she paid off as of February 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.w.).      
  
With the exception of her September 2016 letters to various creditors, Applicant 
has offered no documentation to support the creation of any repayment plans, or positive 
actions with any of her creditors, such as letters, statements, receipts, or cancelled 
checks. She did not submit any documentation indicating she had disputed any of the 
accounts with either the creditors, collection agents, or the credit reporting agencies. 
There is no documentary evidence that Applicant took any steps to resolve her debts 
between her September 2015 OPM interview and her May 2016 SOR. Significantly, there 
is no documentary evidence that she took any steps to do so until September 2016 – two 
weeks before the FORM was sent to her. 
 
It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because she did not 
submit a personal financial statement to indicate her net monthly income, her monthly 
household or debt expenses, or whether or not she has any funds remaining at the end 
of each month for discretionary use or savings.  Applicant offered no evidence to indicate 
that her financial problems are now under control. There is no evidence to indicate that 
Applicant ever received financial counseling. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a [position of public trust].”4 As Commander in Chief, the President 
has the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.”5 
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that 
. . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.”6 Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to 
the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made.7  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for a public trust position. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”8 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a 
potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced substantial 
                                                          
4 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
5 Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 , C3.1.2.1.2.3, and C3.1.2.2. See also Regulation app. 10, ¶ 10.2. 
 
6 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
7 Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. It should be noted that a memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense 
for Counterintelligence and Security, Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases, dated November 19, 2004, covers the 
handling of trustworthiness cases under the Directive. The memorandum directed the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) to continue to utilize the Directive in ADP contractor cases for trustworthiness determinations. 
 
8 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant has the 
burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation or 
mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.9  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to sensitive 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.  Furthermore, security clearance 
determinations, and by inference, public trust determinations, should err, if they must, on 
the side of denials.10 In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that 
are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. 
Under ¶ 19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, ¶ 19(b) 
may apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so.” 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
10 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Similarly, under ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. “Consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash 
flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other negative financial indicators” 
may raise concerns under ¶ 19(e). Applicant has had a long-standing problem with her 
finances. She has chronically found herself with insufficient funds to prevent her accounts 
from becoming delinquent. They were placed for collection or charged off. Two judgments 
were filed against her; she was evicted from two apartments for non-payment of rent; and 
a vehicle was repossessed. ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(e) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may 
be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under ¶ 20(b), 
financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received or is 
receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such 
as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under ¶ 20(c). Similarly, ¶ 
20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”11 In addition, ¶ 20(e) 
may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
I have concluded that ¶ 20(b) partially applies, and ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) 
do not apply. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial 
difficulties since about 2005 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or 
“was so infrequent.” Applicant was repeatedly unemployed, both voluntarily and 
involuntarily, on numerous occasions during which time she received financial assistance 
from various combinations of the state, her family, her cohabitant, and child support. She 
                                                          
11 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
chose to become a stay-at-home mother during some periods; she quit jobs to search for 
other jobs that simply failed to materialize; and she was fired from another job for poor 
performance. Those incidents and periods of unemployment cannot be construed as 
being largely beyond her control. Two relatively brief periods of unemployment occurred 
in January 2013, when a seasonal job ended, and in May 2015, when a temporary job 
ended.  
 
Applicant offered no explanation as to why she took no action to resolve her 
delinquent accounts between periods of unemployment or after she obtained her current 
position in July 2015. Applicant offered no evidence of a good-faith effort to resolve any 
of her debts and essentially ignored them to this date. She indicated purported payments 
on some accounts, as well as an intention to resolve all of the other accounts, with the 
exception of her student loans, but her professed actions and intentions are not supported 
by any documentation. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant ever received 
financial counseling. It is unclear if she has funds remaining at the end of each month for 
discretionary use or savings. There is no evidence to reflect that Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control. Applicant has not acted responsibly by failing to address her 
delinquent accounts and by making little, if any, efforts of working with her creditors.12 
Applicant’s actions under the circumstances cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.13 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, Appendix (App.) A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
                                                          
12 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
13 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.14   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. She has been 
with her current employer since July 2015. She was previously unemployed on numerous 
occasions. She has declared her intention of addressing her creditors and resolving her 
financial problems.  
  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant admitted that she was young and stupid about quitting jobs without having 
another job, and that she intends to be smarter about her medical bills and more attentive 
to her credit report. She repeatedly found herself with delinquent accounts, and some 
were placed for collection or charged off. Two judgments were filed against her; she was 
evicted from two apartments for non-payment of rent; and a vehicle was repossessed. 
When Applicant completed her e-QIP in August 2015, other than acknowledging two 
judgments filed against her, she falsely denied that, within the past seven years, she had 
any delinquent accounts. During her OPM interview in September 2015, she denied 
having a substantial number of identified debts about which she was confronted. Although 
Applicant stated that she would take immediate action to validate and resolve her debts 
within a year, she waited for another 12 months before even writing her creditors. She 
failed to submit any documentation to support her contentions regarding any of her 
purported resolution efforts. 
 
There is no evidence from third-parties as to her current reputation for reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Despite her repeated promises to resolve her 
delinquent accounts, Applicant has essentially taken no positive actions to do so. During 
her periods of unemployment, Applicant received unemployment compensation or other 
state financial assistance, as well as financial support from her family and her cohabitant. 
She spent her free time with her children. Applicant’s actions, or demonstrated inaction, 
under the circumstances cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Considering the relative absence of confirmed debt resolution and elimination 
efforts, Applicant’s financial issues are likely to remain. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:15 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
                                                          
14 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an essentially negative track record of debt reduction 
and elimination efforts, generally ignoring her debts, but promising to take some 
corrective actions.  Overall, the evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from her 
financial considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d)(1) through AG ¶ 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.w:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility to 
occupy a public trust position to support a contract with the Department of Defense. 
Eligibility is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
