 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06190 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Foreign preference security concerns are not established. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 2, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline C, foreign 
preference. Applicant responded to the SOR on March 21, 2016, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on August 1, 2016. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on August 5, 2016. As of 
September 30, 2016, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on June 7, 
2017. The Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 72-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2014. He has a bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in the 
United Kingdom (UK) in 1967. He also has a master’s degree and a doctorate, both 
awarded in the United States in 1999. He married in 1969 and divorced in 1979. He 
married his current wife in 1979. He has four adult children.1 
  
 Applicant was born in the United Kingdom. His first wife is a UK citizen, and his 
four children were born in the United Kingdom. Three of his children now live in the 
United States, and are U.S.-UK dual citizens. Applicant worked in the United Kingdom 
for an extended period, and he also worked in the Netherlands for about three years. 
His current wife was born in the Netherlands. She became a U.S. citizen in 2001. 
Applicant came to the United States in 1992, and he became a U.S. citizen in 2001, 
while retaining his UK citizenship.2 
 
 Applicant has a U.S. passport, which he uses to travel. He renewed his UK 
passport in 2007, with an expiration date of early 2017. He receives retirement benefits, 
including monthly payments, from the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. The 
monthly payments are deposited into a UK bank account. He maintains the equivalent 
of about $50,000 in the bank account, and transfers the rest to U.S. accounts. He 
maintains funds in his UK account for when he travels there. He pays taxes in the 
United States.3 
 
 Applicant reported his UK passport, foreign retirement benefits, and UK bank 
account on his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), which he 
submitted in January 2015. There is no evidence that the retirement benefits or the UK 
bank account are dependent upon Applicant’s UK citizenship.4  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 5. 
 
2 Items 3-5. 
 
3 Items 3-5. 
 
4 Items 4, 5. 
 
3 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual’s 
 
4 
 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen’s exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by 
any country other than the United States; 
 
(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; and 
 
(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country in violation of U.S. law. 
 
 Applicant reported the UK passport, foreign retirement benefits, and UK bank 
account on his SF 86. He uses his U.S. passport to travel. There is no evidence that the 
retirement benefits or the UK bank account are dependent upon Applicant’s UK 
citizenship or are in violation of U.S. law. 
 
 The concern under AG ¶ 9 is that “[f]oreign involvement raises concerns about 
an individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it.” There is no evidence that 
Applicant’s foreign involvement is “in conflict with U.S. national interests” or that he 
acted to conceal it. I find there are no applicable disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 10 
and no general concerns under AG ¶ 9. Foreign preference security concerns are not 
established. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
