 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08056 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations or Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On May 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on August 1, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on August 17, 2016, and had 
30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided no response to 
the FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 7, is admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on June 1, 2017.  
 
 
2 
 
 
In the Government’s FORM, Department Counsel amended the SOR to conform 
to the record evidence by adding delinquent debts alleged at ¶¶ 1.q to 1.u, under 
Guideline F (financial considerations), and ¶ 2.a under Guideline E (personal conduct). 
SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that Applicant falsified material facts on the SCA signed on March 
11, 2015, in response to questions in section 15 – Military History – Discipline. Applicant 
did not answer this amendment to the SOR, or provide a response to the FORM.   
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 31 years old. He graduated from high school in 2004 and obtained 
his associate’s degree in 2008. Applicant has been employed by a federal contractor 
since November 2012. He has served in the U.S. Air Force Reserve since 2009. He had 
a previous security clearance in the Air Force. Applicant reports periods of 
unemployment including August 2008 to May 2009, and August 2006 to May 2008, 
while he was student. Applicant has never married, but he has a daughter born in 2015. 
 
Applicant reported delinquent debts in section 26 of his Security Clearance 
Application (SCA),2 including student loans from Sallie Mae in the amount of $53,551. 
Applicant claimed that this delinquency resulted from his unemployment, and he has 
now asked for forbearance on his student loans.  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 12 of the 16 delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR totaling $133,000. He denied only the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.l, 1.n, 
1.o and 1.p, claiming that these were paid in full and removed from his latest credit 
report. However, Applicant has provided no documents or evidence to support his 
claims. Since he did not answer the allegations in the amendment to the SOR at ¶¶ 1.q 
to 1.u, these are presumed to be denied by Applicant. Also, SOR ¶ 2.a is presumed to 
be denied regarding the falsification allegation.  
 
In his clearance interview on August 17, 2015, Applicant explained that he broke 
a lease for a rental apartment where he had lived from June 2013 to July 2014. This 
resulted in the delinquency at SOR ¶ 1.k. Applicant admitted that he failed to give notice 
to the landlord before moving from that leased apartment, and he did not pay the last 
month’s rent. Applicant also stated that he faced rape allegations under Article 120 of 
the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) in November 2010 at Sheppard Air Force 
Base. Applicant claimed that the sex was consensual and a videotape of the sex 
confirmed his contention. Nonetheless, he was found guilty of another lesser offense at 
Article 15 NonJudicial Punishment (NJP) and punished by a reduction in rank and 
forfeiture of $800 dollars per month for six months.3 He stated that he was not trying to 
deceive by not listing this NJP discipline on his SCA. Instead, he no longer had the 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s May 29, 2014 
Security Clearance Application (SCA). (Item 3) 
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Item 4, p. 3. Applicant was re-contacted later on August 17, 2015 via phone.  
 
3 
 
 
documentation to answer accurately, including the exact verbiage of the offense 
charged and the offense for which he was found guilty. He also stated that he may have 
misread or misunderstood the questions in section 15 of the SCA.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.e and 1.g to 1.i all concern delinquent student loan debts. 
Applicant admitted in his clearance interview that he took out these student loans from 
2003 to 2005 and they exceeded $58,000.4 He stated that he asked for and received 
forbearance exemption from making payments on these while he was in the military, but 
the forbearance expired in October 2014. Applicant also claimed that he was unaware 
of most of the delinquencies alleged in the SOR, and he had always assumed his 
parents were making payments on these loans, on his behalf.5 They were not. Applicant 
averred in his clearance interviews that he is now current on his rent and utilities, and 
beginning in August 2015 he contacted the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.p and started making 
payments of $50 each month to settle that delinquent debt.6 He also claims to have paid 
off another $159 debt. Applicant provided no evidence to substantiate these claims.    
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.u are not resolved. Applicant provided no response to the FORM 
or budgetary information. The delinquent debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.q to 1.u, also 
concern student loans and have not been resolved. These 21 unresolved delinquent 
debts total $135,000. SOR ¶ 2.a alleged a falsification in the SCA at section 15. I find 
that it was intentional.  
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines promulgated in Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
                                                          
4 Item 4.  
 
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Item 4, re-contact made on August 18, 2015. 
 
 
4 
 
 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
5 
 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, answer to the SOR, and his clearance interview (and telephonic follow-up) of 
August 2015. The Government produced substantial evidence to support the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(b) and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.7 
Applicant has not met that burden. None of the delinquent debts have been resolved.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;     
                                                          
7 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant endured periods of unemployment or underemployment. Arguably, 
these conditions were beyond his control. He has produced no documentation either 
with his Answer to the SOR or in response to the FORM. He has not demonstrated that 
he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has the burden to provide 
sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and that his 
debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. The mitigating 
conditions enumerated above do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes….  
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
 
7 
 
 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative.  
Since Applicant denied any intent to provide false information as alleged at SOR 
¶ 2.a, his intent is an issue. Under ¶ E3.1.14 of DOD Directive 5220.6, the Government 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and evidence on facts alleged in the SOR that 
have been controverted. Intent can be inferred or determined from the circumstances. 
Applicant responded negatively when asked if he had been subject to court-martial or 
other disciplinary procedures under the UCMJ in the last seven years. The wording of 
the questions in section 15 of his SCA could not be more straightforward and 
unambiguous. It specifically asked about Article 15 NJP’s. Since he had received NJP 
only four years before completing the SCA, it is difficult to envision any set of 
circumstances under which he could have misunderstood the question or forgot about 
the rape allegation. Applicant did not answer the question honestly. I conclude that he 
had the specific intent to deceive when he provided this false answer in section 15, and 
he deliberately falsified the SCA. SOR ¶ 2.a has not been mitigated.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E and Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines. Most importantly, Applicant has not 
been candid or forthcoming in the security application process.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He has not met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
 
8 
 
 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations or under Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.u:             Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:                                  Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
