1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-05296  
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
Applicant did not present sufficient credible information to mitigate financial 
trustworthiness concerns. 
  
On January 9, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for a public trust position to work in 
support of a defense agency. (Item 3) The Department of Defense (DOD) could not 
make the affirmative findings required to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. 
On January 14, 2016, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) for 
financial trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F.  
 
DOD took the action under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. The AGs 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006, were replaced by AGs implemented by 
DOD on June 8, 2017. The decision in this case is based on the new AGs, effective 
June 8, 2017. I have also considered this case based on the AGs implemented on 
September 1, 2006. The outcome of my decision would have remained the same if 
adjudicated under the former AGs. 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 9, 2016. (Item 2). She admitted the 23 
allegations of delinquent debt, and requested a decision on the record. Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on May 23, 2016 (Item 5). Applicant 
received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on June 6, 2016, and was 
provided the opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant provided additional information in 
response to the FORM that was received by DOD on June 30, 2016. On July 2, 2016, 
Department Counsel noted that he had no objection to consideration of the additional 
material. (Item 6) I was assigned the case on April 7, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is a 51-year-old high school graduate employed as a medical claims 
processor for a DOD contractor since March 2001. She married in April 1995 and has 
two children. There is no information in the case file to indicate Applicant’s income, 
assets, and debt payments. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated January 9, 2015) 
 
 Applicant listed her delinquent credit card, medical, and retail debts on her 
January 9, 2015 e-QIP. She stated that she would make arrangements to pay the debts. 
(Item 3)  
 
The SOR alleges and a credit report (Item 4, dated January 29, 2015) confirm 
the delinquent debts for Applicant. The debts consist of seven medical debts in 
collection and 16 loans to banks or credit card debts to department stores. Applicant 
noted that five of the credit card debts are duplicates. The amount of the delinquent 
debt is in excess of $35,000. 
  
Applicant admitted all of the delinquent debts in her response to the SOR. She 
notes that the medical debts to the same provider at SOR 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.r, 1.s, and 1.t 
were consolidated into one debt. (Item 1, Response to SOR, Medical Statement of 
Accounts, at 12) Applicant claims that she started making payments of $25 a month on 
the consolidated medical debts in February 2016. In her response to the FORM, 
Applicant only provided a receipt for a $25 payment in May 2016. Her bank statement 
did not show any $25 payments to the medical creditor. There is no document from 
Applicant or in the case file to show any other medical payments. (Item 1, Response to 
SOR, at 6; Item 6, Response to FORM) 
 
Applicant provided information in her response to the FORM, that she made 
monthly payments of $10 monthly payments on the department store debts at SOR 1.c 
and 1.d. Those payments are reflected in her bank statement. (Item 6, Response to 
FORM)  
  
Applicant reported that the debt at SOR 1.r is a duplicate of the debt at SOR 1.f; 
the debt at SOR 1.s is a duplicate of the debt at SOR 1.g; and debt at SOR 1.t is a 
duplicate of the debt at SOR 1.h. There is no information in the case file to verify that 
3 
 
these debts are duplicates. However, since the amount of each duplicate debt is the 
same, I find that the debts are duplicates. 
 
Applicant claims in her response to the SOR that the debts at SOR 1.j, 1.m, 1.o, 
1.q, and 1.v have been cancelled. She provided documentation to verify that the debts 
were cancelled. The applicable Internal Revenue Service (IRS) form for cancelled debts 
was received for each cancelled debt. (Item 1, Response to SOR, at 13-17) There is no 
explanation as to the reasons for the cancelled debts. There is no indication that the 
cancelled debt were included on subsequent tax returns. I find that the debts were 
cancelled without any payment on the debts.  
  
Applicant claims in her response to the SOR that she employed a law firm to file 
a bankruptcy action. The documents from the law firm furnished by Applicant do not 
show that a bankruptcy action is pending. There is no mention of bankruptcy on the 
documents. Applicant and the law firm did not provide a copy of the bankruptcy petition 
or the required bankruptcy documents. The documents from Applicant’s attorney list 
debts that correspond to the SOR debts. The bank records Applicant provided in 
response to the FORM show $100 monthly payments to the law firm. However, there is 
no information from the law firm that there have been payments to the creditors on the 
debts. In fact, the documents specifically state for each debt that no payments were 
made and the debts are pending. There is insufficient information to conclude that that 
Applicant filed a bankruptcy petition and the debts are being resolved in bankruptcy. 
(Item 6, Response to FORM) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
4 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There is a trustworthiness concern for a failure or inability to live within one=s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations, thereby indicating poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulation. These issues can 
raise questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds (AG ¶ 18). Similarly, an individual who is 
financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their 
obligation to protect sensitive information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one 
aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a position of trust. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  
 
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant’s delinquent debts are established 
by credit reports and Applicant’s admissions in her e-QIP and her response to the SOR. 
The debts pose a trustworthiness concern raising Financial Consideration Disqualifying 
Conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debt; 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligation; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
5 
 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators 
 
 Applicant has significant unresolved consumer and credit card debts to retail and 
department stores. Applicant’s department store and credit card debt spending history, 
and her history of lack of payments of the debts indicate that her spending was frivolous 
and beyond her means. 
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separations, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 These mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant incurred credit card and retail 
debt deliberately and freely to finance her lifestyle. Applicant’s debts are numerous, 
recent, and not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. It is not an 
unusual circumstance beyond Applicant’s control to use credit cards to purchase items 
at a retail store. The circumstances leading to the delinquent medical debts may have 
been beyond her control, however there is insufficient information in the case file to 
make that determination.  
 
 Applicant presented no information that she received financial counseling. 
Applicant has been employed by the same employer for 17 years. In 2015, she stated 
she would make arrangements to pay her debts. Two years later, she presented only 
limited and inadequate information and evidence of a good-faith effort to pay her 
delinquent debts. She is making very limited payments of $10 monthly on only two of 
her debts. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant has a reasonable 
and adequate plan to resolve her financial problems. There is no indication that 
Applicant’s financial problems will be resolved within a reasonable period.  
 
6 
 
 The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed 
explanation of the cause of her financial problems or mitigating information. In 
requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, she failed to provide sufficient evidence to supplement the record 
with relevant and material facts regarding her circumstance, articulate her position, and 
mitigate the financial trustworthiness concerns. She failed to provide adequate credible 
information regarding her past efforts to address her delinquent debts. She did not 
present a sufficiently credible plan of how and when she would resolve her debts. 
Applicant’s failure to make reasonable payments on her debts or show a responsible 
plan to pay her debts shows that she has not acted reasonably and honestly with regard 
to her financial duties and obligations. 
 
 I am unable to find that she acted responsibly and that she made a good-faith 
effort to pay her debts. Her financial problems are recent and ongoing and continue to 
cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. Applicant‘s 
information is insufficient to establish that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances and that her finances are under control. In short, the file lacks sufficient 
evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or that her 
delinquent accounts were otherwise resolved through her efforts. Applicant has not 
mitigated financial trustworthiness concerns. 
  
 Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s trustworthiness eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a trustworthiness 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is required to show that 
she has a credible reasonable plan to resolve her financial problems, and that she has 
taken significant action to implement that plan. Applicant has not established that she 
has a reasonable plan to resolve her delinquent debts. She has not taken sufficient 
actions to reasonably and responsibly resolve her delinquent debts and manage her 
7 
 
financial obligations within her resources. Accordingly, she has not established that she 
can be trusted to manage sensitive information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts pertaining to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, 
and her eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For all these reasons, Applicant’s 
eligibility for a trustworthiness position is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.q, 1.v -1.w: Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.r, 1.s, 1.t:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
