1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-00163 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Cherish A. Bennett, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
Applicant has mitigated the concerns raised by her family members who are citizens and 
residents of Uzbekistan. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on June 25, 2014. On 
August 29, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines B and C. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
DOD on September 1, 2006, and as amended on June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR, through her attorney, on September 30, 2015, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed on August 3, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on September 26, 2016. 
2 
 
On December 20, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for January 10, 2017. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2. GX 1 was 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant objected to GX 2, and I sustained her 
objection. Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through F and H through N were admitted without 
objection. Department Counsel objected to AX G, which I admitted over his objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 25, 2016. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 The hearing in this case was held under the AG implemented on September 1, 
2006. However, the DOD implemented amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision 
was pending. The applicable AG in this case is Guideline B (Foreign Influence.) While 
there are several changes in Guideline B under the amended AG, none of them have any 
applicability to this case, and therefore did not have any impact on the outcome of this 
decision. I have appended both versions of Guideline B to this decision.  
 
Both parties requested I take administrative notice of certain facts about 
Uzbekistan. I admitted Applicant’s summary of facts and supporting documentation 
without objection as Administrative Exhibit (AD EX) III. I admitted Department Counsel’s 
summary of facts and supporting documentation (AD EX II), over Applicant’s written 
objection (AD EX I.) The facts I considered are discussed below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s mother and sister are citizens and residents of 
Uzbekistan. In her Answer, Applicant admitted each of these allegations, and her 
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.     
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old software engineer employed by a defense contractor 
since January 2014. She worked as an intern with the same defense contractor from April 
2012 through December 2013. She was awarded an associate’s degree in August 2010, 
and a bachelor’s degree in December 2013. She and her husband married in October 
2005. (GX 1.) 
 
Applicant was born in Russia in 1980. Her family moved to Uzbekistan in 1982, 
and she resided there with her mother and sister until 2005, when she immigrated to the 
United States. Her parents divorced in 1986, and she was estranged from her father for 
the remainder of his life. (Tr. 97-88.) She completed an associate’s degree in Uzbekistan 
in science and computer engineering in 2000. (Tr. 36-37; Tr. 44.) Between August 2000 
and December 2003, she worked as an administrative assistant for the military academy 
and later for the ministry of defense, both government entities. She then worked for an 
international organization, of which the United States is a member, until she left 
Uzbekistan in 2005. (Tr. 44-49.) 
 
3 
 
 Applicant and her husband met in Uzbekistan in June 2003, while he was working 
there for a U.S. defense contractor. He returned to the United States, and he and 
Applicant maintained contact through electronic mail. Applicant’s husband returned to 
Uzbekistan in September 2003. The couple became engaged in 2004, and Applicant 
came to the United States on a fiancée K-1 visa in August 2005. They married in October 
2005. (Tr. 88-90; AX D.) 
 
Applicant’s mother is a teacher. Applicant talks to her weekly or every other week 
by telephone. Applicant has not seen her mother since August 2005. (Tr. 59.) Applicant 
has never had a close relationship with her sister, and has not had any significant contact 
with her sister since 2012. (Tr. 58; Tr. 61.) However, Applicant’s sister and niece live with 
Applicant’s mother. Applicant occasionally speaks with her sister when her sister answers 
Applicant’s telephone calls to her mother. Applicant used to send nominal gifts to her 
niece, but no longer does so. Applicant has never met her niece. (Answer.) Applicant’s 
sister served in the Uzbekistan military from 1998 until 2010, and has had no military 
affiliation or obligation since that time. (Tr. 63.) She currently works for the international 
organization where Applicant was previously employed, in a job which Applicant helped 
her sister apply for in 2012. (Tr. 92.) Applicant has invited her mother to visit, but she has 
not. Applicant has not invited her sister to visit. (Tr. 61.) 
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in April 2011. Shortly thereafter, she 
contacted the Uzbek embassy seeking instruction on how to renounce her Uzbek 
citizenship. The embassy personnel were not helpful, and Applicant was unable to 
successfully navigate the process through the embassy’s website. After several months, 
Applicant hired an attorney. Through the attorney, Applicant sent an affidavit of 
renunciation, her Uzbekistan-issued passport, copies of her naturalization certificate and 
marriage license, and an explanatory cover letter to the Uzbek embassy by registered 
mail. She did not receive any confirmation from the Uzbek embassy, but she did receive 
the receipt of delivery. She believes that she has affirmatively renounced her Uzbek 
citizenship. (AX D; Tr. 53-55.)  
 
Applicant has have lived in the United States for much of her adult life and 
considers the United States to be her home. (Tr. 30.) She believes that people have far 
better opportunities in the United States than in Uzbekistan, and she has no intention of 
returning to Uzbekistan to live. (Tr. 56.) In about April 2015, Applicant applied for, and 
was offered, a part-time position as an engineering duty officer with the U.S. Navy 
Reserve. She stated that her motivation for applying for this position is, “I would like to 
give back. Basically, I wanted to give back all the opportunities that I have, everything 
that I have right now it's because of this country. So, that was my way to give back.” This 
position is dependent on Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. (Tr. 83.) 
 
Applicant and her husband purchased their house in May 2009. Applicant’s assets 
in the United States also include:  several bank accounts; a money market account; a 
401(k) retirement account through her current employer and one through a previous 
employer; and, a vehicle on which she is still making payments. (Tr. 51-52; AX J; AX K.) 
Applicant possesses a valid U.S. passport. (AX L.)  
4 
 
Applicant’s mother owns her flat in Uzbekistan, which by law, Applicant and her 
sister will inherit. However, Applicant will take any and all necessary steps to disclaim her 
interest in the flat. She has no other actual or potential financial interests in Uzbekistan. 
(Answer; Tr. 62.) She has not traveled to Uzbekistan since she left in August 2005. (Tr. 
59.)  
 
Applicant’s husband is a retired combat veteran who served honorably in the U.S. 
Army from 1975 to 1995. He has worked in various positions as both a defense contractor 
and as civilian Government employee. He has been employed by the U.S. Government 
since 2012. He recommends Applicant for a security clearance in the context of having 
served in the defense industry for more than 41 years, stating that Applicant has the 
requisite principles to protect classified information, and is unwaveringly loyal to the 
United States. (AX F; Tr. 118.)  
 
Applicant’s neighbor since May 2009, a corrections officer, states that Applicant 
has a strong sense of loyalty and duty and a great deal of integrity. Her managers and 
co-workers collectively view Applicant as trustworthy, honest, ethical, and professional. 
They consider her to have an exemplary work ethic and highly recommend her for a 
security clearance. (AX F.) 
 
Uzbekistan gained independence from the Soviet Union in late 1991, but 
maintains close ties with Russia and China. Uzbekistan is an authoritarian state with a 
constitution that provides for a presidential system with separation of powers among the 
executive, legislative, and judicial branches. The executive branch under former 
President Islam Karimov dominated political life and exercised nearly complete control 
over the other branches of government.  
 
On September 2, 2016, President Karimov died in office and new elections took 
place on December 4, 2016. Former prime minister Shavkat Mirziyoyev won with 88 
percent of the vote. An international voting-observation organization, in its preliminary 
election observation mission report, noted that “limits on fundamental freedoms 
undermine political pluralism and led to a campaign devoid of genuine competition.” The 
report also identified positive changes such as the election’s increased transparency, 
service to disabled voters, and unfettered access for 600 international observers1. 
 
The United States pursued close ties with Uzbekistan following its independence. 
After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States, Uzbekistan offered 
over-flight and basing rights to the U.S. and coalition forces. However, in 2005, the Uzbek 
government violently cracked down on unrest in the southern city of Andijon. The U.S. 
Government and others criticized this crackdown, and in response, the Uzbek 
government terminated U.S. basing rights in Karshi-Khanabad that were important to 
the U.S. military efforts in neighboring Afghanistan. Subsequently, Uzbekistan shifted 
towards closer ties with Russia and China. 
                                                          
1 The Requests for Administrative Notice were submitted by both parties before this information was published in U.S. 
Department of State documents. These fact were published at: 
http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/humanrightsreport/index.htm?year=2016&dlid=265554. 
5 
 
 
Regional threats include illegal narcotics, trafficking in persons, extremism, and 
terrorism. Uzbekistan shares a border with Afghanistan and has expressed concern 
about a potential “spillover” effect of terrorism. The Uzbek government remains 
concerned about the return of foreign terrorist fighters, the recruitment of Uzbeks by 
Islamic State of Iraq and Levant (ISIL), and violent extremist groups operating in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. 
 
However, the Uzbek government has made it a priority to limit the activities of 
extremist and terrorist groups such as ISIL, al-Qaida, and others, which have expressed 
anti-U.S. sentiments. Due to the domestic and international threats, the Uzbek 
government has implemented heightened security measures, including establishing 
security checkpoints, restricting access to certain streets and buildings, and initiating a 
media campaign about the dangers of extremism.  
 
The U.S. Department of State advises U.S. citizens that potential for terrorist 
attacks or localized civil disobedience still exists in Uzbekistan. Supporters of terrorist 
groups are active in the region. These groups and others have conducted kidnappings, 
assassinations, and suicide bombings, as well as an attack on the U.S. Embassy in 
Tashkent in 2004. 
 
Uzbek law enforcement uses its powers to suppress legitimate expressions of 
political or religious belief. In addition to restrictions on religious freedom, the most 
significant human rights problems include arbitrary arrest and detention; prolonged 
detention; harsh, even life-threatening prison conditions; torture and abuse of detainees; 
and denial of due process and a fair trial. Restrictions on freedom of speech, press, 
assembly and association, movement and communication, and violence against women 
were also prevalent. Government-organized forced labor, including that of children, is 
an on-going concern. 
 
In 2003, Congress passed legislation prohibiting or limiting foreign assistance 
to Uzbekistan, unless the Secretary of State determines that Uzbekistan has made 
substantial progress in meeting commitments to respect human rights. This legislation 
has since been amended to block certain Uzbek government officials from entering the 
United States, and to permit the Secretary of State to waive foreign assistance 
restrictions for a defined time period, dependent on U.S. national security needs. Such 
waivers have been issued while assessing Uzbekistan’s human rights conditions as a 
“serious concern.” 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
6 
 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
7 
 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 The record evidence, to include the matters accepted for administrative notice, 
establish the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect 
classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information or 
technology. 
 
When foreign family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a 
foreign country, as well as each individual family tie, must be considered. ISCR Case No. 
01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts 
with an immediate family member in a foreign country are not casual. ISCR Case No. 00-
0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government.  
 
Although the relationship between the United States and Uzbekistan is largely 
favorable, Uzbekistan has a poor human rights record, which includes government 
intervention on personal freedoms. Terrorist and extremist groups, present in many 
regions, are known to specifically target U.S.-interests. Accordingly, the record contains 
8 
 
sufficient information to support a finding that Applicant’s relationships with her mother 
and sister create a heightened risk of coercion and exploitation and the potential risk for 
a conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are established. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.” 
ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).   
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the 
nature of the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity 
in the country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 
2006) (reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 An applicant with close family members and interests in a foreign country faces a 
high, but not insurmountable hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign 
ties. Furthermore, an applicant is not required “to sever all ties with a foreign country 
9 
 
before he or she can be granted access to classified information.” ISCR Case No. 07-
13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). However, what factor or combination of factors will 
mitigate security concerns raised by an applicant with family members in a foreign country 
is not easily identifiable or quantifiable. ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 
2014). An administrative judge’s predictive judgment in these types of cases must be 
guided by a commonsense assessment of the evidence and consideration of the 
adjudicative guidelines, as well as the whole-person factors set forth in the Directive. A 
judge’s ultimate determination must also take into account the overarching standard in all 
security clearance cases, namely, that any doubt raised by an applicant’s circumstances 
must be resolved in favor of national security. AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
For the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶ 7(a), AG ¶ 8(a) is not 
established. Applicant’s contacts with her mother are frequent and not casual. While 
Applicant’s contacts with her sister are incidental to contacting her mother, and Applicant 
states that she and her sister are not close, the relationship with her sister, by its nature, 
is not casual. AG ¶ 8(c) is not established. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) is established. Applicant has demonstrated her undivided loyalty and 
her ties to the United States, and would resolve any potential conflict of interest that could 
arise from her relationships with family members in Uzbekistan in favor of U.S. interests. 
Specifically, Applicant came to the United States in 2005, became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 2011, and considers the United States to be her home. She effectively 
renounced her Uzbek citizenship in 2011, and has not returned to Uzbekistan since she 
left. She earned an associate’s degree and a bachelor’s degree in the United States, and 
is seeking an officer position in the U.S. Navy Reserve. None of her family members is 
currently affiliated with a foreign government, and her sister has been a civilian since 
2010. Applicant’s husband, to whom she has been married since 2005, is a combat 
veteran who continues to serve the United States through his civilian Government 
employment. Applicant and her husband bought a house in 2009, and all of Applicant’s 
assets are in the United States.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent 
to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
10 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Some of the factors in AG 
¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but I have also considered the 
following: 
  
Applicant began working for her current employer as an intern while completing 
her bachelor’s degree. She is considered trustworthy, honest, and hardworking by her 
superiors, colleagues, and neighbor. Her husband, a retired combat veteran and current 
civilian Government employee, commends her loyalty to the United States. Applicant 
testified sincerely and credibly about her dedication to the United States, and has 
demonstrated this dedication through her application for a position with the Navy, as well 
as through her employment with a defense contractor. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by her foreign family connections. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
   
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence)  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
