 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-00788 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by 
his past financial problems. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 Applicant answered the 
SOR and requested a decision on the administrative (written) record (Answer). 
 
 On April 21, 2016, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s written 
case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant five exhibits for admission into the record. Applicant 
submitted a response to the FORM (Response). The exhibits accompanying the FORM 
                                                          
1 The CAF took this action under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
2 
 
and the documents Applicant submitted with his Answer and Response are admitted 
into the record.2 On May 9, 2017, I was assigned the case for decision.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 49, is employed as an engineer by a defense contractor. He is 
applying to retain a security clearance, which he was initially granted at least twenty 
years ago when he began working for his current employer.  
 
Applicant graduated high school in 1986, and then enlisted in the U.S. military. 
He served on active duty for 10 years, receiving an honorable discharge in 1996. He 
married in 1997 and has two adult children. 
 
In approximately 2006, Applicant opened a catering business. The business 
faltered during the 2008 recession and he closed it in 2011. Applicant incurred a 
number of delinquent debts related to the failed business, including the $40,000 in debt 
listed in the SOR. Applicant submitted documentation with his Answer and Response 
showing that he addressed and resolved each of the SOR debts.4 As of the submission 
of the case for decision, all the SOR debts were resolved. Applicant’s credit reports do 
not reflect any other delinquent accounts that are not resolved.  
 
Law & Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified 
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
                                                          
2 Administrative documents, including confirmation of Applicant’s continuing sponsorship for a clearance, 
were collectively marked and attached to the record as Appellate Exhibit I. 
 
3 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4 
(SEAD-4), revising the Adjudicative Guidelines. The revised adjudicative guidelines are applicable to all 
security clearance decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (hereinafter “AG”). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) 
(security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards). 
 
4 SOR 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.f (credit card debts incurred for former business). See Answer at 9-12 (settled 
and paid 1.b and 1.f), Response at 5-8 (settled and paid 1.a and 1.d).  
 
SOR 1.c (business-related debt for electric bill). See Response at 3-4 (payment).  
 
SOR 1.e (2010 federal payroll taxes). See Answer at 3-8 (IRS documentation showing installment 
payments made in 2014 and 2015, bringing the balance down from $11,000 to $7,000); Response at 9-11 
(proof paid outstanding amount).  
 
3 
 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges make certain that applicants: (a) receive fair notice of the 
issues, (b) have a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) are not 
subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). In deciding a case, a judge must resolve any doubt raised by the 
evidence in favor of the national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Moreover, 
the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant incurred delinquent debt when his attempt to open a catering business 
failed during the recession. The presence of delinquent debt can raise the Guideline F 
security concern, which is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other 
illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances 
giving rise to delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and 
other qualities essential to protecting classified information.5 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
4 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, including the following pertinent ones: 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, . . . or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, . . .), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s past financial problems were attributable to a failed business venture. 
He attempted to start a business in a segment of the economy that is traditionally 
difficult to break into and maintain a profitable enterprise. This, when coupled with the 
recent economic recession, led to the businesses’ demise and Applicant’s inability to 
pay his debts.  
 
Applicant did not simply walk away from his debts. Instead, he responsibly 
addressed each of his debts, prioritizing his tax debt. He resolved each of the debts 
listed in the SOR through negotiated settlements and payment plans.  
 
The circumstances giving rise to Applicant’s past financial problems do not cast 
doubt on his ability and willingness to continue to properly handle and safeguard 
classified information. Additionally, the manner in which he addressed the debts that he 
incurred following his businesses failure raises favorable inferences regarding his 
continued suitability. Applicant’s present financial situation does not raise a security 
concern. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) apply.  
 
After a complete and thorough review of the record evidence, including 
considering the whole-person factors set forth in AG ¶ 2, I find that Applicant met his 
heavy burden of proof and persuasion in mitigating the security concerns at issue. 
Furthermore, he established his eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:         For Applicant 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interest of national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
