 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05884 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kristian A. Siegwart, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by his inadvertent security 
infractions that occurred about two years ago. He self-reported the incidents and took 
corrective action. He has an otherwise long and successful 36-year career handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant established that similar security incidents 
are unlikely to recur. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
August 22, 2014. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) on February 10, 2016, issued him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline K (handling 
protected information). Applicant answered the SOR on April 22, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA).  
 
The case was assigned to me on October 20, 2016. The DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on January 12, 2017, scheduling a hearing for February 2, 2017. At the 
hearing, the Government offered three exhibits (GE 1 through 3). Applicant testified and 
 
2 
 
 
submitted exhibit (AE) A (comprised of Tabs 1 through 24). All exhibits were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 13, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR factual allegations, with some comments. His 
admissions to the SOR and at his hearing are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of the record evidence, including his testimony and demeanor 
while testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old engineering manager employed with a large federal 
contractor. He is married to his wife of 28 years, and they have three children and five 
grandchildren. Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in engineering in 1981. He 
completed a master’s degree in 1985, and earned a certificate for post-master’s degree 
studies in 1997. A federal contractor hired Applicant as an engineer in 1981, and he 
was granted a security clearance that he has held to present.  
 
The SOR alleges, and Applicant admitted that he committed nine security 
infractions in the last eight years. All infractions involved Applicant bringing his cell 
phone, a Blackberry, and a laptop into secured areas. In January and March 2009, 
twice in March 2012, and twice in September 2014, Applicant took his Blackberry into 
secured areas. In March 2011, November 2011, and March 2015, Applicant took his cell 
phone into secured areas. Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant also volunteered 
that in 2006, he left a company proprietary document unsecured in his office, and in 
October 2015, he took his laptop into a secured area. There is no evidence of any 
additional security infractions or violations during Applicant’s 36 years of employment 
while holding a clearance. 
 
In all these instances, Applicant self-reported the security infractions shortly after 
they occurred to his security officers and his supervisors. Most of the infractions 
occurred when he was opening the office and nobody else was around. As soon as he 
realized he was wearing the electronic device, he removed himself from the classified 
area and reported the infraction.  
 
Applicant received yearly training on the handling and safeguarding of classified 
information since he was granted a clearance. He knew it was prohibited for him to 
bring electronic devices into secured areas. After each security infraction, a company 
security officer and his supervisors admonished Applicant of the security rules. He was 
issued two written warnings after having two security infractions within the same year. 
Based on Applicant’s supervisor statements, there was no compromise of classified 
information as a result of any of these infractions. 
 
Applicant credibly testified that his security infractions were inadvertent. He self-
reported the security infractions shortly after they occurred, except on one instance 
where he waited over the weekend. Applicant explained his office has been located in a 
secured area since 2009. He attributed his security lapses to being distracted with 
 
3 
 
 
personal problems and working on complex work-related issues. His distractions led 
him to forget he was wearing an electronic device when he entered the secured areas. 
His mother’s illness and death, and he being the guardian of his older brother (who is 
disabled) affected his concentration.  
 
Applicant, with his supervisor’s assistance, instituted measures to ensure there 
are no more security infractions. The measures included: (1) moving his office to an 
unsecure area; (2) turning in his Blackberry (he no longer has access to it); (3) buying a 
laptop that will not require him to bring it into the office for software updates; and (4) 
instituting a two-step self-checkup system to ensure he does not bring the cell phone to 
secure areas. Additionally, Applicant completed numerous refresher security training 
courses. 
 
Applicant understands the importance of protecting classified information and his 
personal responsibilities. He noted that in the past, he took similar remedial actions to 
prevent security infractions. This time he has taken a more strict approach by getting rid 
of some of his electronic devices and moving his office outside of a classified 
environment. He believes he will succeed in avoiding any future security infractions. 
 
Applicant is considered to be an honorable, forthright, and honest person. He is 
highly regarded among his colleagues for his technical knowledge, expertise, 
professional work, and because he has been a leader among his peers. He has held 
managerial positions among his colleagues for many years. According to his references, 
Applicant has a keen analytical mind, and his work product is considered to be 
outstanding.  
 
Applicant’s supervisors consider him to be a highly trusted employee. He has 
earned a reputation as a reliable, dependable, trustworthy, and loyal American. His 
references, some of whom have known Applicant since the 1980s, believe Applicant 
has established a reputation for careful adherence to security rules and procedures, and 
as a mentor to young engineers. His references (all with knowledge of the SOR 
allegations) endorsed his eligibility for a security clearance without reservations. They 
noted Applicant’s responsibilities are complex, his mistakes were inadvertent, he 
reported them promptly, and he has taken measures to prevent recurrence. They also 
noted that Applicant engaged in security infractions – not in security violations – and 
there was no compromise of classified information. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
The case will be decided under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017. 
 
4 
 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information  
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information – which includes classified and other 
sensitive government information, and proprietary information - raises 
doubt about an individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or 
 
5 
 
 
willingness and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious 
security concern.1 
 
Security clearance cases require administrative judges to assess whether an 
applicant has the requisite good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to be 
entrusted with classified information. When evidence is presented that an applicant 
previously mishandled classified information or violated a rule or regulation for the 
protection of protected information such an applicant bears a very heavy burden in 
demonstrating that they should once again be found eligible for a security clearance.2 
 
 Applicant’s commission of nine security infractions raise Guideline K security 
concerns. In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following pertinent 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 34(g): any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or 
other sensitive information; 
 
AG ¶ 34(h): negligence or lax security practices that persist despite counseling 
by management; 
 
AG ¶ 35(a): so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it happened 
so infrequently or under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 35(b): the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial 
security training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the 
discharge of security responsibilities; and 
 
AG ¶ 35(d): the violation was inadvertent, it was promptly reported, there 
is no evidence of compromise, and it does not suggest a pattern. 
 
 The security infractions at issue occurred almost two years ago. Moreover, 
Applicant participated in additional security training, established operating procedures, 
and changed his behavior to ensure that similar incidents are unlikely to recur. In light of 
the number of security infractions, I have reviewed Applicant’s claim of reform and 
rehabilitation with “strict scrutiny.”3 I find that Applicant met this burden.  
                                            
1 AG ¶ 33. 
 
2 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014) (very heavy burden standard); ISCR 
Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) (security clearance determinations are “not an exact 
science, but rather predicative judgments.”). 
 
3 ISCR Case No. 06-21537 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 21, 2008).  
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant’s past security infractions were not deliberate nor the result of a 
reckless or even negligent disregard for security rules and regulations. On the contrary, 
Applicant has established a strong reputation for following and complying with security 
rules and regulation. It appears the major contributing factors were inattentiveness due 
to personal problems, working in complex issues in different environments, and having 
his office inside a secured area. Of note, Applicant’s supervisors and security officers 
noted he engaged in security infractions that did not rise to the level of a security 
violation because no classified information was compromised. They strongly 
recommended continuation of Applicant’s eligibility.  
 
 Applicant fully acknowledged his responsibility for the infractions. He self-
reported them, which allowed the responsible security officials to review the situation 
and determine that no compromise occurred. He responded favorably to the counseling 
with his supervisors and took corrective action to put in place safeguards to avoid a 
recurrence. He has not been involved in any type of security incident for almost two 
years. Notwithstanding the SOR security infractions, Applicant has had a long track 
record of properly handling and safeguarding protected information. AG ¶¶ 35(a), 35(b), 
and 35(c) apply. 
 
 Additionally, Applicant’s evidence (performance evaluations and references) 
clearly establishes that he has and exhibits the good judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness expected of all clearance holders. Applicant’s evidence established that 
he will continue to properly discharge his security responsibilities and that the security 
infractions were an aberration.4  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline K in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed 
under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked over 
35 years for the same contractor while holding a clearance. He has established an 
excellent reputation for his knowledge, expertise, and leadership.  
 
Applicant’s supervisors consider him to be a highly trusted member of his 
company, who is a reliable, dependable, trustworthy, and loyal American. Applicant has 
established a reputation for careful adherence to the security rules and procedures, and 
                                            
4 See generally ISCR Case No. 04-05802 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2007) (Board affirmed 
favorable decision where applicant had committed seven security violations in a short period of time, 
because the judge’s findings “concerning the impact that Applicant’s workload had upon his mistakes; the 
inadvertent nature of the violations; . . . and steps Applicant has taken to ensure his compliance with 
security procedures,” as well as “the Judge’s evaluation of Applicant as a believable and honest witness 
in his own behalf” were supported by the record evidence). 
 
7 
 
 
as a mentor to young engineers. His references (all with knowledge of the SOR 
allegations) endorsed his eligibility for a security clearance without reservations. They 
noted Applicant’s responsibilities are complex, his mistakes were inadvertent, he 
reported them promptly, and he has taken measures to prevent recurrence. They also 
noted that Applicant engaged in security infractions – not in security violations – and 
there was no compromise of classified information. 
 
Applicant’s last infraction is not recent. There is no evidence of any further 
security infractions after October 2015. Applicant acknowledged his security infractions 
and credibly promised to prevent recurrence. He understands that any additional 
security infractions would raise additional security concerns. On balance, Applicant’s 35 
years working for a federal contractor while holding a clearance are sufficient to mitigate 
the security concerns raised by his nine security infractions. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline K:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
