 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-06241 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 24, 2014, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 11, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F.1 The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006.   
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 4, 2016. He answered the 
SOR in writing on April 18, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request on May 3, 
2016. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 13, 2017, and I 
received the case assignment on February 15, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
on February 27, 2017, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 16, 2017. 
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 9, which were received without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through D, without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 4, 2017. I granted Applicant’s request 
to keep the record open until April 15, 2017, to submit additional matters.  On April 6, 
2017, he submitted Exhibits E to I, without objection. The record closed on April 6, 
2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in Paragraph 
1 of the SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional information to support his 
request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 38 years old and married with two children. He served in the U.S. 
Army for four years, from 2003 to 2007. He received an honorable discharge and was 
awarded a disability designation. He receives about $500 monthly for that disability at 
the present time. Applicant works for a defense contractor in the computer servicing 
business. He started the job in 2007. He earns $25 per hour and testified he takes 
home about $2,400 monthly. With his disability pay he earns about $35,000 annually. 
His wife earns about $45,000 annually. They just purchased a home for $216,000. He 
made a down payment of $5,100 and intends to refinance in about a year. Their 
payments are $1,400 monthly. Applicant testified they used his wife’s credit to purchase 
the home. (Tr. 26-34, 81; Exhibits 1, 6, 7) 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to his first marriage. He stated his 
present wife is conscientious about their personal finances. They have $5,000 in a 
savings account after putting down $5,100 on their house purchase. He testified at the 
beginning of the hearing that he paid all his debts. (Tr. 24-35, 92; Exhibits 1, 6) 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2001 and it was dismissed in 2002. He 
does not recall how much debt was included in that bankruptcy. Before he joined the 
U.S. Army in 2003 he completed a security clearance questionnaire and denied ever 
filing a bankruptcy in the previous seven years. He claimed at the hearing his father filed 
that bankruptcy. The bankruptcy records from then show it was Applicant who filed the 
bankruptcy in 2001 and it was dismissed in 2002 (Subparagraph 1.u). He also filed a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2012 and dismissed it in 2013 (Subparagraph 1.a). That 
bankruptcy listed $81,710 in debts. Applicant asserted he dismissed it because he was 
paying $1,300 monthly to the trustee and would have repaid the debts in two years and 
still had to pay the same amount for another two years into the trustee fund. He claims 
an attorney advised him to dismiss the bankruptcy and pay the debts directly. However, 
$1,300 monthly for 24 months would have paid $31,200 of the $81,710 debt. His 
explanation for dismissing the bankruptcy is not credible. (Tr. 37-47; Exhibits 1, 4-6) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant received on February 26, 2003 from the U.S. Army personnel security 
clearance facility a letter of intent to deny his security clearance (LOI) because of two 
criminal incidents in 1998 and 18 delinquent accounts in addition to the 2001 Chapter 
13 bankruptcy filing. The delinquent accounts included two civil court judgments, credit 
card debts, a furniture debt, a telephone debt, and a U.S. Department of Education 
student loan. He filed a Response to the LOI and the U.S. Army requested proof of debt 
payments. On February 4, 2004 the Army granted Applicant a security clearance with a 
warning that any “subsequent unfavorable information or failure to resolve your financial 
debts will lead to a possible suspension of your security clearance.” (Exhibits 8, 9)  
 
Applicant has 19 delinquent debts listed in the SOR, totaling $19,325. The debts 
consist of two car loans and repossessions, credit cards, medical accounts, and 11 
student loans. (Tr. 45-80; Exhibits 2, 3, 6, 7, A to I) 
 
 Applicant owed a car loan company $9,099 on an automobile purchase from 
2005 (Subparagraph 1.b). This debt was listed in his 2012 Chapter 13 bankruptcy that 
was dismissed. It appears as a delinquent account on the October 7, 2014 credit report, 
but not on the February 2, 2017 credit report marked as an exhibit by the Department or 
the April 2017 credit report submitted by Applicant. Applicant claims he paid the debt in 
2006 but could not submit any proof of payment at any time nor how much he paid to 
resolve the debt. Applicant admitted he does not have a receipt for paying that debt. He 
asserted that because the debt is not on his current credit report he must have paid it. In 
the government interview in December 2014 Applicant told the investigator that he “has 
no knowledge of this account and does not know where it is from. Subject intends to 
research this account, and if he fines he owes any money towards this account he will 
pay it off in full by 12/31/2015.” There is no proof Applicant accomplished this task. This 
debt is not resolved. (Tr. 45-53; Exhibits 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, H) 
 
 Applicant owes a credit card company $444 (Subparagraph 1.c). Applicant 
contends he paid it between March 2016 and December 2016. But he does not have 
documentary proof of payment. Applicant claims he joined a “credit company’ in March 
2016 and “everything on these papers (i.e., the SOR) were paid.” That service was only 
a six months membership that provided free credit reports, credit review, and a total of 
24 “services.” The agreement with that service specifically excludes settlement 
arrangements, payment plan arrangements, and debt management with budget 
planning. The agreement also designates the service as a “certified credit consultant.” 
There is no writing on the agreement submitted by Applicant that this organization is a 
non-profit credit counseling service. Applicant made four payments of $150 each 
starting in June 2016. Applicant misunderstands that this service did not resolve his 
delinquent debts. He described it as “a monthly status thing.” This particular debt is not 
resolved.  (Tr. 53-55, 78-80; Exhibits 2, 3, 6, 7, H, I) 
 
 Applicant owes two delinquent debts that appear on the Department’s credit 
report exhibits, but he claims he could not find either of them on his credit report and 
considers them non-existent (Subparagraph 1.d for $10 and 1.e for $52). He admits 
they are both medical debts. These debts are not resolved. (Tr. 55; Exhibits 2, 3, H) 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant paid the debt listed in Subparagraph 1.f for $155, had the judgment 
and garnishment for the repossessed automobile in Subparagraph 1.g for $5,305 
reversed and dismissed, paid the $158 debt to a credit union in Subparagraph 1.h and 
the $64 debt in Subparagraph 1.i, and the education account debt for $388 in 
Subparagraph 1.j.  These debts are resolved. (Tr. 56-63; Exhibits 2, 3, A-F) 
 
 Applicant placed all his remaining student loan debts listed in Subparagraphs 1.k 
to l.t with a debt collector from the U.S. Department of Education. He pays $5 monthly 
and has since September 2016. He has six months remaining on that agreement to 
rehabilitate his student loans. The amount of the loans shown on the agreement with 
the collector is $32,863.18. Applicant during the hearing claimed the loans were 
deferred and then that he was paying them at the $5 monthly rate. The Department 
showed there was another student loan for $,716 being paid at $222 biweekly but 
Applicant does not recall it but did discuss it during his government background 
interview in 2014. Applicant is not certain the amount of his student loan debt and 
claimed there was “misunderstanding” about it. (Tr. 64-77; Exhibits 2, 3, 6, G, H) 
 
 Applicant testified he paid the credit counseling service and then spent “my extra 
money, whatever else I made, to pay off those bills that I knew that needed to be paid 
on my credit report.” He claimed he had every document to show he paid debts 
pursuant to the credit counseling service advice. He did not provide such documentation 
for each debt. He stated he was in the process of moving into his new house and his 
documents were in various boxes. That was why he did not have all the documentation 
pertaining to each SOR debt at the hearing. (Tr. 79-81) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
5 
 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Four conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
   
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators.  
 
 Applicant accumulated $19,325 in 19 delinquent debt from 2005 to the present 
time that remains unpaid.  They are listed in the SOR. He also filed Chapter 13 
bankruptcies in 2001 and 2012, but had both bankruptcy actions dismissed the 
succeeding years. Applicant has a history of delinquent debts that lead the U.S. Army in 
2003 to issue an LOI and LON about his delinquent debts at that time, including 
delinquent student loans. The security concern by the Army included another concern 
not the subject of this SOR. Applicant has a history and pattern of delinquent debt he 
never seems to be able to organize and resolve in an orderly manner. The evidence 
raises all of the above security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Two conditions may be applicable:   
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling from a 
legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
Applicant consulted a credit counseling service. It is not stated in the agreement 
with that organization that it is a non-profit credit counseling agency. Applicant did not 
disclose what counseling he received. He stated only that he hired the service and 
thought all his delinquent debts were taken care of by it. However, there are four debts 
unresolved. It is not clear what their status is except Applicant has no proof of paying 
them, though he claims to have done so. His financial problems do not appear to be 
under control. AG ¶ 20 (c) has minimal application.  
 
Applicant resolved one debt in court by having the judgment and garnishment 
vacated, and paid four other debts. The total amount of debt resolved was $6070 out of 
 
7 
 
 
the $19,325 listed in the SOR. Applicant has an agreement to pay $5 monthly to a 
student loan collector that shows he owes $32,863.18 in student loans. Applicant’s debt 
load varies depending on the borrowings that are listed by various collectors. AG ¶ 20 
(d) applies to the five debts resolved, but not to the balance of the debt carried by 
Applicant, which is substantial.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(b) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a security concern 
dating to 2003 from the U.S. Army about his delinquent financial obligations. He 
continues to carry significant debts through two marriages. He blames his first wife for 
his earlier financial debts. He continues to borrow student loans for education he stated 
he does not complete. He has had two automobiles repossessed and has credit card 
and medical debts. All of this financial delinquency occurred in the past 14 years on a 
continuous basis. Now he purchases a new home for $216,000 using his wife’s credit. 
There is no change by Applicant in his financial behavior. The potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress is great. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence is 
substantial. His history and pattern of not being able to manage his money will continue.  
 
 An important factor is that Applicant was warned by the U.S. Army security 
clearance adjudicators in 2003 that his financial delinquencies should be addressed and 
resolved. A continuation of his past conduct in not resolving debts in an orderly manner 
could result in a revocation of his security clearance. Applicant as a civilian continued to 
amass debt and allow it to become delinquent. He could not control his spending so his 
debts were paid properly, or he could not stop spending and allowing his debts to 
 
8 
 
 
become delinquent. Whichever the situation, Applicant has a significant debt 
management problem. He has been on notice for 14 years he needed to be careful.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f to 1.u:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
