                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-07343
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq. 
 For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
06/07/2017
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On April 18, 2016, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations)  and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September
2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 19, 2016. A notice of
hearing was issued on March 21, 2017, scheduling the hearing for April 28, 2017. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-7  were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant
testified but did not submit any exhibits.  I kept the record open for Applicant to submit
additional information. He timely submitted three documents, which were marked as
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A-C, and admitted into the record without objection. The
transcript was received on May 5, 2017.  Based on a review of the pleadings,
testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
1
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the SOR allegations, with
explanations. 
The SOR alleges Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in June 2015, which
was discharged in September 2015 (SOR 2.a) and a Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing in
October 2015, in which a Chapter 13 trustee filed a Motion to Dismiss in March 2016
due to unlisted creditors, which made the performance plan impossible. (SOR 2.b). The
SOR also alleges that in June 2007 Applicant was terminated due to a security
infraction relating to US embassy photographs that were on his personal computer and
an external hard drive. (SOR 1.a); and that he provided misleading information on his
2010 and 2012 security clearance application and during a subsequent clearance
interview in 2014 regarding the reason he was terminated by his employer in 2007.
(SOR 1.b-1.d)
Applicant is a 47-year-old program manager. He served in the military from 1992
until 1996. He obtained his undergraduate degree in 1986 and his master’s degree in
2003. He is also a software engineer who has been with his current employer for about
three years.  Applicant completed his latest security clearance application in 2012 and
has been employed as a federal contractor for many years. (GX 1) He  held a security
clearance in 1996 while in the military. He held a top secret clearance in 2004. He
divorced in 2008 and is remarried with three children. Applicant has been working for a
defense contractor overseas for about three years. (Tr. 11; 65)
Financial
 Applicant cited his financial difficulties to a difficult 2007 separation and 2008
divorce.  He separated from his ex-wife and incurred both mortgage loans on their1
home and all associated costs. He paid the mortgage despite being unemployed in July
2007 until March 2008. Applicant cashed in more than $20,000 from his 401(k) and
used several credit cards to pay bills, which created debt. (Answer to SOR) In
September 2007, his adjustable rate mortgage (ARM) ended and his mortgage loan
payments increased by about $700. He could not obtain a hardship loan modification
because he had not missed any payments. He was advised to skip payments and then
perhaps he might qualify for a loan modification. His credit suffered and many credit
cards were cancelled. Applicant was then told that he made too much money to apply
for a modification. He put his home up for sale in 2013, when he again became
unemployed for almost a year. (Tr. 59) He worked with several debt collectors and
made arrangement for payment plans. (GX 3) After all the good-faith efforts, Applicant’s
short sale is still pending. The processing of the paperwork was mishandled. Several
times Applicant was asked to provide the same information. While he was working
abroad, his current wife would send requested documents to no avail to the mortgage
lender. In 2015, a new appraisal for the home was required. Applicant had the appraisal
Applicant disclosed the information on the SF-86 concerning the financial issues.      1
2
done and told the processors that he would be overseas working. (Tr. 31) Applicant
contacted them from his work abroad and was told the application was now too old, and
the house would go to auction. (Tr. 32) He was advised that the only way to prevent a
foreclosure on the house was to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which he did in 2015 and his
nonpriority, unsecured debts were discharged in 2015. (GX 5) Creditors could not
contact Applicant directly but had to go through his bankruptcy attorney.  Thus, to add
more confusion to this case, Applicant’s car which was not included in the Chapter 7
because payments were current, was repossessed. The reason given for the
repossession was that a letter of “reaffirmation” was sent to Applicant’s lawyer but it
was never received. The lawyer stated that he did not believe that it had to be sent and
he had never done so in his 25 years of practice. (Tr. 33) In order for Applicant to get
his car returned, he was advised to file a Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  (Tr. 62) Applicant
continued to make payments on his car and the car was returned. Since that was the
only item in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy, Applicant’s attorney advised that the Chapter
13 should  be dismissed. (Tr. 53) Applicant relied on the advice that was given to him
on both occasions concerning the filing of bankruptcy. 
Applicant’s current annual salary is about $108,000. His wife earns about
$13,000 a year. He receives a quarterly bonus, which can amount to $15,000. (Tr. 56)
Applicant has a budget. He received financial counseling when he filed for bankruptcy.
(GX 5) He has a monthly net remainder. He is current on his bills. He volunteered that
he has a payment plan with the IRS, which is current. Applicant pays $110 to both
Federal and state tax authorities. He believes he owes about $1,000 to each. (Tr. 52)
This happened in 2012 when he received an IRS Form 1099, and he underpaid his
taxes that year.  He is current with his student loan. (Tr. 57)
Applicant noted that the former home is still up for a short sale, but he now rents
another home for his family. (Tr. 57) He has rented since 2016. He has no delinquent
debts. His 2016 credit report reflects his assertion about not having delinquent debts.
(GX 7)
Personal Conduct
Applicant credibly testified that his security clearance issue has been ongoing 
for years. The personal conduct issues stem from a 2007 alleged security violation
concerning sensitive information relating to US embassies on Applicant’s personal
computer and an external hard drive. At that time, he served as a project manager for
the company and there were no sensitive or classified blueprints. (Tr. 37) The
falsification issues that follow concern Applicant’s responses to a 2010 and a 2012
security clearance application and a 2014 investigative interview.
Applicant denied each of the four allegations concerning falsifications concerning
a security violation  and the reason for the end of his employment in 2007. He denied 
he deliberately falsified his 2010 or 2012 security clearance applications by stating that
he filed for unemployment with the State of Virginia and the employer at the hearing
refused to answer why Applicant was terminated. When pressed to answer the question
by the Commissioner, the employer stated that there was a security infraction.
3
However, the infraction cited was that Applicant did not report that he was separated
from his wife. He  had been separated for about three weeks.  Thus, on the 2010
security application form Applicant noted that he was fired due to the security violation
for not reporting a change in marital status. He emphasized that the official reason for
termination on the unemployment was failure to report change of marital status. (AX B,
Tr. 25) He received unemployment benefits. Since Applicant had received the email
from the branch chief that the hard drive or computer did not have classified
information, thus he believes there was no security violation as alleged in SOR 1.a. (Tr.
27)
As to SOR allegation 1.a, Applicant took pictures of the exterior of buildings as
required by his job (an overseas survey). The pictures were general conduit routing and
interior of buildings. He used a personal digital camera to take pictures, which were
then transferred to a hard drive. He maintained that there was nothing classified. In fact,
he stated that if one would “google” a US embassy in a certain place, you would find the
identical pictures. His ex-wife sent the hard drive to his FSO. Applicant submitted an
email dated 2008 from his branch chief that confirmed that there was nothing
concerning security on the hard drive computer. (AX A; Tr. 21) However, by that time,
Applicant was terminated from the job. Applicant stated that when he was put on
administrative leave in 2007, he was not given the reason for the security violation.
Applicant noted that he had sent the email in with his original material years ago. (Tr.
20) Applicant emphasized that it was a standard practice when they did surveys. They
were not inside classified areas. In fact, diplomatic security did not find any classified or
sensitive information on Applicant’s hard drive. (GX 4) In the 2014 interview report, the
reason for firing Applicant was listed as not changing his marital status.
As to SOR allegation 1.b, Applicant responded “yes” to the question had
anything happened regarding employment in the past seven years (Section 13C) on his
2010 security clearance application. He explained that the reason he was “fired or laid
off” was not reporting change in marital status. (GX 2) He had only been separated a
few weeks. Moreover, since the employer at an unemployment hearing gave that
reason for his termination, he specified in the response to Section 13C, that was the
official reason on file with the state unemployment commission. (GX 2)
As to SOR allegation 1.c, Applicant responded in his 2012 security clearance
application that he left his employer due to a reduction in force. (GX 1) Applicant’s
conversation with his former supervisor between submitting his 2010 and 2012
applicant led him to believe that was the real reason for the termination.  Applicant was
credible when he explained that he had been told by his supervisor that the real reason
he was terminated was Applicant was making too much money. He also agreed with
Applicant that he did not know there was a policy about reporting a change in marital
status. (GX 3) Applicant explained that it was probably not the correct answer, but he
had filled out so many forms he listed that reason. He had no intent to deceive the
Government as they knew he was terminated due to a security violation on several
occasions. 
4
As to SOR allegation 1.d, Applicant spoke to the interviewer in 2014. (GX 4) In
that interview he gave the official reason that he was fired for failure to report a change
in marital status. He did not fail to disclose the alleged security violation about his hard
drive because it was found that there was no sensitive or classified information on his
computer or hard drive. Thus, there was no security violation as alleged in SOR 1.a. 
Applicant was credible when he explained the long, convoluted information that
related to the 2007 incident.  In the 2014 investigative interview, Applicant  explained
the sequence of events following his administrative leave and the fact that he was not
told what the security violation was until the unemployment hearing. At the
unemployment hearing, the employer did not want to give a reason, but finally stated
that it was for non-disclosure of marital status.
Applicant has answered questions concerning the 2007 termination many times
over the years. He stated that he has been interviewed time and again about the 2007
incident. He also testified about a work-place disagreement with management
preceding the termination in 2007. Applicant relayed that he believed that because he
had sent an email complaining about a dress code (requirement of ties) that
management became upset and did give him a warning letter. (Tr. 23) When he was
put on administrative leave, he was not given a reason. As noted above, at the
unemployment hearing, the employer stalled but then answered that the security
violation was non-disclosure of a marital change. (Tr. 24) As to the reduction in force
answer, Applicant by 2012 believed in his opinion that was the real reason for the firing
or termination. (Tr. 25) He acknowledge that it was probably a mistake to answer that
on the security application, however, the termination for a security violation had been
given many times.
 Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
5
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance of2
evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
6
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The following conditions are relevant here.
(A) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and
(B) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant
      facts to an employer, investigator, security official, .......
     
In this case AG ¶ 16(a) and 16 (b) are not established. Applicant consistently
denied that he falsified either his 2010 or 2012 security clearance application or falsified
material facts to an interviewer in 2014. Applicant did not have sensitive information on
his computer or hard drive in 2007. He provided documentation supporting his
assertion. The other falsifications stem from that allegation. As to the answer Applicant
provided in his 2010 security clearance application, he stated that he was told he was
terminated due to a security violation - but not the specifics. When he had a hearing for
unemployment benefits, his employer refused to provide the reason for Applicant’s
termination, but eventually stated to the Commissioner that it was due to a failure to
report a change in marital status. He and his wife had been separated for about three
weeks. Nevertheless, that was the official reason given for the unemployment report
and is on file with the state unemployment commission.  He explained that he was “laid
off or fired”. He denied the falsification and was candid in his answers at the hearing
about his reasoning. He listed information concerning the firing or termination several
times. He  denied that he  falsified his 2012 application. He had put the government on
notice about termination for a security violation and he did acknowledge that he
probably made a mistake by putting “laid off”, although that was his opinion. He
acknowledged that was a mistake. He had no intention to mislead the Government. I
find Applicant has refuted the allegations of falsification and I find for him under the
guideline for personal conduct.   
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.”
7
The government introduced credible evidence that Applicant filed for bankruptcy
on two occasions. The credit report confirms the filings. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations)
apply.  With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against
him and mitigate security concerns.  
Applicant’s 2015 Chapter 7 bankruptcy was discharged in 2015. The bankruptcy
was the result of his marital separation, divorce and unemployment. He paid his bills
and mortgage and used savings until he had no more options. The 2016 Chapter 13
bankruptcy was the result of confusion concerning the repossession of his car which
was repossessed the day after his Chapter 7 bankruptcy was discharged. This occurred
despite the fact that he was  current on his payments. The reason given was that the
company did not receive an “affirmation letter” from his bankruptcy attorney. His
bankruptcy attorney could not open the chapter 7 case for omission of the letter. He
advised Applicant to file for a Chapter 13 bankruptcy, so that he could get his car.
Applicant received the car and after discussions with his attorney, the Chapter 13 was
dismissed. This was an unusual set of events that occurred and Applicant has no new
debts. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶
20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
applies. Applicant paid his mortgages and other bills after his wife left. He paid even
when he was unemployed and took money from savings. The divorce and
unemployment were the cause of the financial problems and he eventually had to file
for bankruptcy, which is a legitimate means of resolving debt. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has application. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control) applies. Applicant
received counseling through the bankruptcy process. He is gainfully employed and has
a good salary. He is paying his bills.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
8
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 47 years old. He served in the military and was honorably discharged. He
held a clearance in the military and also when he served as a contractor in 2004. He
has worked in the field for many years. He has worked abroad for the United States in
many places. As a result of a separation, divorce, and unemployment, he experienced
financial problems. He made good-faith efforts to pay his bills, even when he was
unemployed. He used his savings to pay mortgages. He was advised to file bankruptcy,
which is a legitimate means to resolve debts. He did so in 2015. There was some
confusion concerning his car, which was repossessed after the discharge, and he was
advised by a bankruptcy attorney to file a Chapter 13 to recover his vehicle. This was a
unique set of circumstances. He has resolved the delinquent debt. He is current with a
tax payment plan and his student loans. He has a good job and his current wife also
works. His 2016 credit report reflects that the majority of accounts are current.
I found him candid and sincere in his testimony concerning the answers on his
2010 and 2012 security clearance application. Applicant provided information that
confirmed that there was no security violation as alleged in SOR 1.a. Given the facts in
this case and his responses to the 2010 and 2012 security clearance applications and
report to the investigator in 2014. I do not find that he deliberately falsified material
information or misled the Government. He has mitigated the personal conduct concerns
in this case, as well as the financial considerations security concerns.
Applicant provided sufficient information to establish mitigation under the
financial considerations guideline. Disqualifying conduct under the personal conduct
guideline was not established.  
9
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:                       FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
10
