 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05329 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
financial considerations. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On December 8, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). On June 13, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective on September 1, 2006. This decision applies the 
New AGs that came into effect on June 8, 2017.1  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 18, 2016 (Answer), and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
                                            
1 I considered the AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 2017. My 
decision would be the same if the case were considered under the previous AGs. 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me on September 28, 2016. It issued a Notice of Hearing 
on December 21, 2016, scheduling the hearing for January 18, 2017. The hearing 
convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4 into evidence. Applicant testified, called one witness, and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) 1 through 6 into evidence. All exhibits were admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 26, 2017. The 
record remained open until February 15, 2017, to give Applicant an opportunity to 
provide additional exhibits. Applicant timely submitted AE 7. Department Counsel had 
no objection to the exhibit and it is admitted into evidence.    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted 12 allegations in the SOR and denied the allegations listed in 
SOR, ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.i, 1.l, and 1.m, with explanations. Her admissions are incorporated 
into these findings.  
 
Applicant is 36 years old and divorced since December 2015 after 12 years of 
marriage to her third husband. They separated in 2012. She has two children, ages 11 
and 19. She has one college class to complete and will then earn an associate’s 
degree. She worked for the employer sponsoring her for a security clearance from 
August 2014 until December 2016, when she was laid off pending the outcome of this 
case. She was self-employed in a retail business from 2010 into 2014, when she closed 
it because it did not earn a profit. Her husband was also a co-owner of that business, 
which she started when he deployed on military orders.  She worked for another federal 
contractor from 2005 to 2010. She has also worked as a tax preparer. (Tr. 19-21, 30, 
51; GE 1.) 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to the separation from her husband in 
2012, and subsequent divorce and division of marital property in 2015. After separating, 
she was unable to manage her expenses without her husband’s salary, and moved into 
her mother’s house. (Tr. 22-23, 33.) She is trying to have the marital settlement 
agreement modified because it did not adequately address joint debts and other issues. 
According to the agreement, her husband assumed their house-related debts, and she 
assumed the business-related debts. (Tr. 26, 29-30, 35; AE 4.) 
 
In March 2015, a government investigator interviewed Applicant about her 
financial situation and inquired about the status of 21 delinquent debts. Applicant said 
she was waiting for her divorce to be finalized in order to determine which debts she 
would be responsible for paying. (GE 4.) 
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from January 2015 and May 2016, the 
SOR alleged 17 delinquent debts, which became delinquent between 2011 and 2015, 
and totaled over $44,000. (GE 2, GE 3; AE 1.) The status of each debt is as follows: 
 
1. (SOR ¶ 1.a) This $8,300 debt is owed to credit card company. Applicant used 
the card for expenses related to her closed business. It is reported as an individual 
account in her name. (Tr. 41-44.) This debt is unresolved. 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
2. (SOR ¶ 1.b) Applicant denies owing the $1,6632 debt for a boat she and her 
husband purchased. She asserted it is her former husband’s responsibility, although it 
was not listed in their property settlement. (Tr. 34, 36; AE 4.) It is reported as a joint 
account. She thought he sold the boat. (Tr. 38.) This debt is unresolved. 
 
3. (SOR ¶ 1.c) This $1,065 debt is owed to a credit card company. Applicant 
used this card for expenses related to her closed business. It is reported as an 
individual account. (Tr. 42-44.) This debt is unresolved.  
 
4. (SOR ¶ 1.d) This $4,255 debt is owed to a credit card company. Applicant 
used this card for expenses related to her closed business. It is reported as an 
individual account. (Tr. 42-44.) This debt is unresolved.  
 
5. (SOR ¶ 1.e) Applicant denied owing this $260 debt on the basis that it is her 
former husband’s responsibility, although it was not listed in their property settlement. 
(Tr. 37.) It is reported as a joint account. (Tr. 40.) It is unresolved. 
 
6. (SOR ¶ 1.f) This $565 debt is owed to a cell phone company. It is reported as 
an individual account. (Tr. 41-44.) It is unresolved. 
 
7. (SOR ¶ 1.g) This $579 debt is an unpaid medical bill from 2013. It is reported 
as an individual account. Applicant admitted it is her bill. (Tr. 41-44, 55.) It is unresolved. 
 
8. (SOR ¶ 1.h) This $658 medical debt is an unpaid medical bill from 2013. It is 
reported as an individual account. She admitted it is her bill. (Tr. 41-44, 55.) It is 
unresolved. 
 
9. (SOR ¶ 1.i) Applicant denied owing the $2463 debt for cable service, on the 
basis that it is her former husband’s responsibility because he remained in their house 
after she left the residence. It was not listed in their property settlement. (Tr. 37.) It is 
reported as an individual account in her name. (Tr. 38, 40.) It is unresolved. 
 
10. (SOR ¶ 1.j) This $4,176 judgment was entered against Applicant, individually, 
in September 2013. (Tr. 41-44.) It remains unresolved. 
 
11. (SOR ¶ 1.k) This $3,138 judgment was entered against Applicant, 
individually, in September 2013. (Tr. 41-44.) It remains unresolved. 
 
12. (SOR ¶ 1.l) Applicant denied this $4,2174 debt for a vehicle repossession. 
She stated it is her former husband’s responsibility, although it was not listed in their 
property settlement. (Tr. 34; AE 4.) It is reported as a joint account. (Tr. 40.) It is 
unresolved. 
 
                                            
2The SOR incorrectly alleged this debt as $1,963.  
3The SOR incorrectly alleged this debt as $247. 
4The SOR incorrectly listed this debt as $4,2177.  
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
13. (SOR ¶ 1.m) Applicant denied owing the $704 cell phone debt on the basis 
that it is her former husband’s responsibility, although it was not listed in their property 
settlement. (Tr. 37.) It is reported as an individual account in her name. (Tr. 39, 40.) It is 
unresolved. 
 
14. (SOR ¶ 1.n) This $509 debt is in collections. It is reported as an individual 
account in Applicant’s name. (Tr. 41-44.) It is unresolved.   
 
15. (SOR ¶ 1.o) This $757  is owed to a property owner for a debt arising from a 
lease executed by Applicant. She said it is a fee for moving out. It is reported as an 
individual account in her name. (Tr. 41-44, 55.) It is unresolved. 
 
16. (SOR ¶ 1.p) This $1,762 debt is an unpaid medical bill from 2016. It is 
reported as an individual account in her name. (Tr. 41-44.) It is unresolved. 
 
17. (SOR ¶ q.) This $11,223 medical debt was paid by Applicant’s insurance in 
2015. (AE 7.) It is resolved. 
 
Applicant was earning about $30,000 annually before being laid off. (Tr. 27.) She 
said she cannot afford the payments requested by creditors to begin resolving the 
alleged debts. (Tr. 45.) She is currently receiving unemployment benefits. (Tr. 24, 46.) 
She pays $245 a month to her former husband for child support for her 11-year-old son 
who resides with him. (Tr. 20; AE 3.) She has not participated in credit or financial 
counseling, but uses a credit-monitoring program. (Tr. 49.) Her budget from March 2016 
listed her net income as $1,429 and expenses as $1,850, leaving a monthly shortage of 
more than $400. (AE 2.)  
 
A witness testified on behalf of Applicant. She has known Applicant since they 
were in grade school. She is familiar with Applicant’s financial struggles over the years. 
She said Applicant is dedicated to her job. (Tr. 56-58.) 
 
Applicant submitted two letters of recommendation. A former supervisor stated 
that Applicant is knowledgeable, dedicated, and an asset for any employer. Her most 
recent supervisor is impressed with Applicant’s abilities and work values. He 
recommends her highly. (AE 5.)   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AGs. These 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2, 
describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative 
goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 sets out the security concerns pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information.5  
 
AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to satisfy delinquent debts 
that began accumulating before 2011 and are unresolved. The evidence raised the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 20 provides four conditions that could mitigate the security concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by 
predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s 
financial problems have been ongoing for six or seven years, and cast doubt on her 
reliability and good judgment. The evidence establishes partial mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(b). Some of Applicant’s financial problems resulted from a period of unemployment, 
                                            
5 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and as a consequence of her separation from her husband in 2012 and divorce in 2015. 
Those were circumstances beyond her control. However, she did not provide evidence 
that she acted responsibly under the circumstances, which is necessary for full 
mitigation under this condition. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(c). Applicant presented a budget, which does not cover ongoing expenses or 
payments on delinquent debts. There are insufficient indications that her financial 
problems are under control. The only SOR debt that is resolved relates to a medical bill 
that her insurance company paid in 2015.  
 
Applicant has not made good-faith efforts to pay, resolve, or establish payment 
plans for any of the other 16 SOR-alleged debts, including five smaller debts between 
$246 and $579. There is no evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant national security eligibility trust must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 36-year-old 
hardworking woman, as noted by her employer. Her separation in 2012, divorce in 
2015, and a period of unemployment adversely affected her ability to manage her 
financial obligations. In March 2015, she discussed 21 financial delinquencies with an 
investigator and indicated that she was waiting for her divorce to be completed, in order 
to know which debts were her legal responsibility. In December 2015, the court entered 
a final order in her divorce case. She testified that she needs a modification of that 
property settlement agreement. There is no evidence that, within the past year, she took 
affirmative steps to begin resolving any debts. She has not established a plan to 
address her delinquencies or record of questionable financial management.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all relevant facts 
and circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant did not mitigate the 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
financial considerations security concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves doubt as 
to Applicant’s present national security eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.p:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.q:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
