1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
          -------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 15-04453 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
06/12/2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information. Applicant mitigated the security concern raised by his 
problematic financial history. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on October 12, 2014. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. On March 8, 2016, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant his eligibility for access to classified information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
2 
 
in a civil court case. It detailed the factual reasons for the action under the security 
guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations. Applicant answered the SOR 
on April 9, 2016, and requested a decision based on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On June 1, 2016, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant material  
(FORM).2 The FORM was mailed to Applicant on that same day. He was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on June 10, 2016.3 Applicant did 
not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 4, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
  Included in the FORM were six items of evidence, which are marked as 
Government Exhibits 1 through 5.4 Exhibits 1, and 3 through 5 are admitted into evidence. 
Exhibit 2 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took 
place during the December 2014 background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated, 
as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.5 Department Counsel’s written brief includes 
a footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not authenticated and that failure to 
object may constitute a waiver of the authentication requirement. Nevertheless, I am not 
persuaded that a pro se applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM, which response is 
optional, equates to a knowing and voluntary waiver of the authentication requirement. 
The record does not demonstrate that Applicant understood the concepts of 
authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not demonstrate that he understood 
the implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, Exhibit 
2 is inadmissible, and I have not considered the information in the ROI.    
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. The AG were published in the Federal 
Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2016).  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals’ (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated June 2, 2016, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated June 10, 2016. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 30 
days after receiving it to submit information.   
 
4 The first item in the FORM is the SOR and Applicant’s Answer. Because the SOR and the Answer are the 
pleadings in this case, they are not marked as Exhibits. Items 2 through 6 are marked as Exhibits 1 through 
5.  
 
5 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan raises a number 
of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 53 years old and is a college graduate. He is married and has three 
adult children. He was laid off from August 2004 to January 2005.6 Since October 2014, 
he has worked for a defense contractor.7 
 
The SOR alleged a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy petition filed in September 2005, which 
was discharged in February 2006, and three delinquent accounts (two education loans 
totaling about $90,000, and a relatively minor credit card account for about $2,000).8 
Applicant admitted the bankruptcy filing but denied the delinquent debts. Applicant 
explained that two factors caused him to file for bankruptcy protection in 2005. The first 
was being unexpectedly laid off in August 2004 due to a downturn in the telecom industry. 
The second was becoming reemployed in January 2005 at only half of the compensation 
he was earning before being laid off. By the time of his reemployment, his finances were 
such that he needed the protection of bankruptcy. The bankruptcy discharge cleared his 
unsecured debt and placed the education loans in a deferred status.9  
 
 In the summer of 2011, Applicant was diagnosed with cancer and was given 
about two years to live. He underwent chemotherapy and surgery. As a result of his 
medical condition, he went on short-term disability that reduced his take-home pay which, 
when coupled with medical expenses, adversely affected his finances. At about the same 
time he was dealing with his illness, his educational loans came out of deferment. He 
communicated with the collection agent for the educational loans and underwent 
counseling with a loan recovery specialist. He was advised that in light of his unstable 
and reduced take-home pay, he should make an arrangement to make good-faith 
payments of a minimum amount, until his financial situation improved. He took that 
advice, and since October 1, 2014, he has made payments of $5 per month.10 As of June 
1, 2016, the record shows the educational loans to be in a collection status.11 He also 
paid the credit card debt in April 2015.12 His cancer is in remission, and he returned to 
work full time in October 2014.13  
 
                                                          
6 Exhibit 1. 
 
7 Exhibit 1.  
 
8 SOR ¶¶ 1.a-d.  
 
9 Answer.  
 
10 Answer and Addenda A, B and C.  
 
11 Exhibit 3, Trade Lines entries 23 and 24.  
 
12 Answer, Addendum D. The credit card debt was $2,197. SOR ¶ 1.d. The evidence reports the payment 
of that credit card debt in April 2015. Exhibit 3, Trade Lines entry 7.  
 
13 Answer; Exhibit 1.  
 
4 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.14 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”15 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.16 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.17 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.18 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.19 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.20 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.21 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.22 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.23 
 
 
 
                                                          
14 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
15 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
16 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
17 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
19 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
20 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
21 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
22 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
23 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
5 
 
Discussion 
  
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,24 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.25 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and,  
 
                                                          
24 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
25 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has had a problematic financial 
history going back to his bankruptcy filing in September 2005.  This raises security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
The next inquiry is whether any mitigating conditions apply. Turning first to 
Applicant’s bankruptcy filing in September 2005, the narrower inquiry begins with what 
circumstances caused that filing. Applicant explained that he was unexpectedly laid off in 
August 2004, due to a downturn in the telecom industry. He remained unemployed for six 
months, until being reemployed in January 2005. Even though he regained employment 
in January 2005, his compensation was half of what he made before being laid off. 
Understandably, six months of unemployment had serious adverse effects on his financial 
situation. He opted for the protection of a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. This filing happened 
almost 12 years ago. I find that the filing happened so long ago, occurred under 
circumstances largely beyond Applicant’s control, and that  seeking bankruptcy protection 
was responsible under the adverse circumstances Applicant faced at that time. AG ¶¶ 
20(a) and (b) apply.   
 
The two educational loans are the nub of this case, constituting $91,060.26  When 
his bankruptcy was discharged in February 2006, those loans were placed in a deferred 
status. In the summer of 2011, Applicant was diagnosed with cancer and was given about 
two years to live. Because he went on short term disability while receiving treatment, his 
take-home pay was reduced, and his medical expenses increased. Unfortunately, at 
about the same time, his educational loans came out of deferment. I find that Applicant’s 
medical condition, the resulting adverse effect on his finances, and his loans coming out 
of deferment are circumstances largely beyond his control under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
The next inquiry is whether Applicant acted responsibly under those adverse 
circumstances. When his loans came out of deferment, Applicant had discussions with 
the collection agent for those loans and informed the agent of his difficult financial 
situation.  He was referred to a loan recovery specialist, who recommended that Applicant 
agree to make good-faith, minimum payments until his financial circumstances improved. 
He made such an agreement, and the evidence shows that since October 2014 (notably, 
a year and a half before the SOR was issued), Applicant has paid $5 per month.  
 
The Government argues that the loans are not being paid down with the minimum 
payments, and that the agreement is not a “realistic and meaningful repayment plan.”27 I 
respectfully disagree. The test under AG ¶ 20(b) is not whether the conduct is “realistic 
and meaningful.” The test is whether Applicant acted “responsibly under the 
                                                          
26 Applicant paid the credit card debt in April 2015, before the SOR was issued. I find that mitigating 
condition AG ¶ 20(d) applies.  
 
27 Government Brief, pp. 2-3.   
 
7 
 
circumstances.” A security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting 
an applicant's debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.28 Likewise, a security clearance adjudication is 
not a forum for second-guessing payment arrangements between an applicant and a 
creditor. In this case, the payment arrangement was proposed by the creditor and 
accepted by Applicant. It was an arms-length transaction. Perhaps counsel for the creditor 
would have advised her client to require higher monthly payments, but our role is not to 
improve the position of the creditor. Our role is to assess whether Applicant’s conduct 
was responsible under the circumstances. I find that faced with a serious medical 
condition, increased expenses, lower take-home pay, and non-deferred loans, Applicant 
acted responsibly in agreeing to the minimum payments plan.  
 
 The record does not raise doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.29 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion 
to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for 
access to classified information.30 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the SOR allegations: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:                   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas  
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
28 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008).   
 
29 AG ¶¶ 2(d)(1)-(9) and 2(f)(1)-(6).  
 
30 In this case, the SOR was issued under Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006. Revised Adjudicative Guidelines were issued on December 10, 2016, and became 
effective on June 8, 2017. My Decision and Formal Findings under the revised Guideline F would not be 
different under the 2006 Guideline F.  
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
