 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03855 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 8, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on August 17, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on October 31, 2016, scheduling the hearing for December 7, 2016. 
The case was continued at Applicant’s request and reassigned to me on January 18, 
 
2 
 
2017. DOHA issued another notice of hearing on February 27, 2017, scheduling the 
hearing for April 4, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 13, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since August 2013. He is applying for a security clearance for the 
first time. He attended college for about two years without earning a degree. He married 
in 1991, separated in 2012, and divorced in 2015. He has two minor children.1 
 
 In early 2012, Applicant’s ex-wife emptied their bank accounts, took their income 
tax refund check of about $5,000, and moved with their two children to another state. 
Applicant decided that he could not let the children suffer, so he sent her money each 
month while he lived frugally. A number of debts became delinquent.2 
 
 The SOR alleges an unpaid $1,592 judgment, three medical debts totaling $271, 
and four miscellaneous delinquent debts totaling about $11,000. Applicant admitted all 
of the allegations. All of the debts are also listed on at least one credit report.3 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
August 2013. He reported the largest debt alleged in the SOR (SOR 1.c), a charged-off 
auto loan. He wrote that he was “[w]orking to make payment to pay the balance off.”4 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in October 2013. He 
discussed his financial problems and most of the debts alleged the SOR. He stated that 
he intended to pay his past-due debts or bring them current.5 
 
 Applicant stated in his response to the SOR that he intended to file a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy case to resolve his debts. He did not file bankruptcy, and he has not paid 
any of the debts alleged in the SOR. He continues to live frugally and gives more than 
what the court ordered for his children. He is concerned that his ex-wife and her 
husband cannot provide for the children.6 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17, 28, 44-45; GE 1, 2.  
 
2 Tr. at 17-18, 30; GE 2.  
 
3 Tr. at 22; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-6.  
 
4 GE 1.  
 
5 GE 2.  
 
6 Tr. at 17-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A.  
 
 
3 
 
 In 2009, Applicant used a $224,000 settlement from a vehicle accident to pay off 
a mortgage loan on his and his ex-wife’s house. Applicant moved out of the house at 
some point, and his ex-wife moved back in with the children and the man who is now 
her husband. Applicant and his ex-wife sold that house after their divorce, and he used 
part of the proceeds to buy a house for his ex-wife, her husband, and Applicant’s 
children to live in. He gave the remaining proceeds to his ex-wife to move her family to 
the new house, which is in the same area as Applicant. His ex-wife and her husband do 
not pay him rent, but they pay the property taxes. Applicant owes the IRS about $2,000 
for his 2015 taxes. He anticipated a refund of about $200 for 2016, which would be 
withheld by the IRS for 2015. He hopes that he will be able to start paying his debts in 
about a year.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 17-26, 31-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A. The SOR did not allege the unpaid 
taxes. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be 
considered when looking at Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and in the whole-person analysis.  
 
 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he is unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s devotion to his children is commendable. I found him to be completely 
forthcoming. However, in addition to his children, he is supporting his ex-wife and her 
husband at the expense of his rightful creditors. He stated that he intends to start paying 
his debts in about a year. Intentions to pay off debts in the future are not a substitute for 
a track record of debt repayment or other responsible approaches. See ISCR Case No. 
11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)).  
 
I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable. I find that financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
6 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
