 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-07196 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information in a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 25, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG’s) effective within the DOD for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. This decision is based on the newly 
promulgated adjudicative guidelines effective June 8, 2107.1 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, and elected to have her case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the new AG’s promulgated by Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, of December 10, 2016 and effective on June 8, 2017, I have also considered the case under the former 
AG’s effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the same under either AG’s.   
 
2 
 
 
(FORM) on July 20, 2016. The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received on 
August 23, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days from receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government evidence and provided no response 
to the FORM. The Government’s exhibits identified as Items 1 through 6 are admitted 
into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on June 13, 2017.  
 
 Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted 85 of the 87 SOR allegations of delinquent debts totaling 
$90,336 in her Answer to the SOR. She only denied SOR ¶ 1.y (stating she never heard 
of the pet-hospital creditor) and SOR ¶ 1.bbbb (a $78 grocery-store bill that she thought 
was taken care of already). She also claimed to have a payment plan in place for the 
debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.rr (a $400 debt to T-Mobile). She provided amplifying 
comments in her two-page Answer dated May 23. 2016.3 In response to the vast 
majority of her 87 delinquencies, she stated that she owed these medical debts 
because she had no health insurance. Applicant had medical issues concerning her 
heart.4 In addition to her numerous delinquent medical bills, Applicant has 
miscellaneous delinquent consumer debts. She has provided no documentation to show 
disputes with any of her creditors or actual payments made toward a payment plan, let 
alone proof that any of these debts have been resolved. Indeed, she provided no 
documents with her Answer or otherwise. All of the alleged debts are reflected in her 
credit reports. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
                      .    
   Applicant is 47 years old. She graduated from high school in 1988. She has 
never been married but she has one adult child and two minor children. She has been 
employed as a customer service representative for a federal-contractor since February 
2014. Applicant reports no military service but she claims she did have a previous 
security clearance from the U.S. Postal Service. She is applying for a position of trust 
for the first time. She reported no financial problems in section 26 of her April 27, 2015, 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) (Security Clearance Application) 
(SCA). However, in the final “Additional Comments” section of her SCA, Applicant 
mentioned that she had “a lot of little creditors. I have a copy of my medical bills, too 
numerous to list here I believe.”6 
   
            In her June 10, 2015 personal subject interview with an investigator from the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM), Applicant stated that she was fired from her 
job at Credit Solutions in August 2013, due to tardiness.7 After that, she supported 
                                                          
3 Item 2, Answer to SOR. 
 
4 Item 2, p. 2. 
 
6 Item 3, at page 44.  
 
7 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
 
herself with unemployment compensation. When she got her present job in 2014, her 
wages were garnished to pay delinquent debts. In response to the OPM investigator’s 
questions when he confronted Applicant with her numerous delinquencies, she 
repeatedly said she “does not recall specific details” and she intends to contact creditors 
and set up payment plans. Applicant has produced no evidence that she followed 
through and actually contacted the creditors, or set up payment plans.   
 
                                                    Policies 
  
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Code of Federal Regulations Title 32 – National Defense, part 154.13 and part 
154, Appendix J – ADP Position Categories and Criteria for Designating Positions)  
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.” The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and 
Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in DOD Directive 5220.6 before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
4 
 
 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a [trustworthiness] concern insofar as it may 
result from criminal activity, including espionage.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding information. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. 
The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant admitted to 85 of the 87 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR totaling 
over $90,336. These are longstanding debts, as evidenced by her 2015 credit bureau 
report. She is a single mother of three children and she has endured periods of 
unemployment and serious medical issues. In her Answer to the SOR, she claims that 
 
5 
 
 
she tried to pay off the debt reflected in SOR ¶ 1.a (back rent) and she will call the 
creditor to make payment arrangements. She also stated that she was on a payment 
plan to pay off the mobile phone debt reflected in SOR ¶ 1.rr. In respect to the $78 
grocery bill at SOR ¶ 1.bbbb, she stated “I will call to get this resolved asap.” Yet, 
Applicant has produced no documents to show that she did any of these things. She 
has done little or nothing to meet her burden in mitigating these debts. There is 
sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns arising from financial 
difficulties are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;   
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;   
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant disclosed that she had a lot of little creditors in the final section of her 
SCA, and her medical bills were too numerous to list. She produced no documentation 
to show payments or progress on any of her delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. The 
delinquencies alleged in the SOR are recent and ongoing. Arguably, her periods of 
unemployment and medical issues were conditions beyond Applicant’s control. Yet, she 
has not demonstrated that she has acted responsibly under the circumstances. She 
provided no evidence of financial counseling, good-faith efforts to repay creditors, or a 
budget to show that her financial problems have been resolved or are under control. 
None of the mitigating conditions enumerated above apply.  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed 
under those guidelines. Applicant is a single mother of three children and she suffers 
from severe medical problems that were not covered by health insurance. She has also 
endured periods of unemployment and struggled through a downturn in the economy.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a trustworthiness concern. She has not met her 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1. a – 1.iiii:                       Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
     
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a  public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
Administrative Judge 
