 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-05283 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to submit sufficient evidence to show that she has a track record 
of financial responsibility, that she does not have a financial problem, and that her 
financial problem is being resolved or is under control. She deliberately omitted material 
financial information from her trustworthiness position application. She failed to mitigate 
the Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct) trustworthiness 
concerns. Eligibility to hold a position of trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire (Application) requesting eligibility 
for a position of trust on November 25, 2014. After reviewing it and the information 
gathered during a background investigation, on March 25, 2016, the Department of 
Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guidelines F and E.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 11, 2016, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record. A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material 
 
2 
 
 
(FORM), producing the evidence supporting the trustworthiness concerns, was provided 
to her by transmittal letter, dated July 29, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on August 
4, 2016. She was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide 
material in explanation, extenuation, and mitigation. She failed to respond to the FORM 
and submitted no objections or any additional information. The case was assigned to 
me on June 6, 2017.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included 
her unauthenticated summary of interview with a background investigator from April 21, 
2015. Applicant was informed she could object to the summary of her interview and it 
would not be admitted, or that she could make corrections, additions, deletions, and 
update the document to make it accurate. Applicant was informed that her failure to 
respond to the FORM or to raise any objections could be construed as a waiver, and I 
would consider the preferred evidence. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM, 
submitted no documents, and raised no objections. I admitted the FORM evidence and 
considered it. 
 
 Pursuant to ¶ E3.1.17 of the Directive, I amended SOR ¶ 2.a to correct a 
typographical error and conform the SOR with the evidence. SOR ¶ 2.a incorrectly 
alleged Applicant falsified an electronic Application submitted on “October 10, 2013.” 
The electronic Application was submitted on “November 25, 2014,” and this date will be 
substituted in SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer, Applicant admitted all of the Guideline F factual allegations (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.i). She denied the Guideline E allegation (SOR ¶ 2.a). Her admissions 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old associate account manager employed with a federal 
contractor since 2004. She attended college between 1999 and 2001, and earned an 
associate’s degree. She married in 2006 and divorced in 2014. She has no children.  
 
Applicant submitted a request of eligibility for a position of trust when she was 
hired in 2004. During the 2005 background investigation, she was asked about her 
delinquent accounts. Applicant told the investigator that she was not aware she had any 
delinquent accounts and denied having financial problems. She explained she had 
opened accounts for her mother and boyfriend, but she believed they had been paying 
those accounts, and that her boyfriend was timely paying the household accounts. At 
the time of the interview, Applicant did not have a repayment plan, but she promised to 
pay and resolve her delinquent accounts. (GE 5) 
 
 
3 
 
 
In her 2014 trustworthiness application, Applicant indicated she has worked for 
her employer since 2004, and reported no periods of unemployment or 
underemployment since then. In Section 26 (Financial Record) of her 2014 application, 
Applicant stated that she had no delinquent accounts or any financial problems within 
the prior seven years.  
 
In April 2015, a background investigator asked Applicant about the delinquent 
accounts alleged in the SOR. Applicant stated she started having financial problems 
after her January 2014 divorce. Her income was insufficient to pay her living expenses 
and debts. At the time of the interview, she was residing with her mother to save money 
to pay her debts. She claimed she was working on becoming financially stable.  
 
During the interview, Applicant acknowledged her delinquent student loan (SOR 
¶ 1.f). She claimed she consolidated her student loans in March 2015, and that she was 
making payments on them. She presented no documentary evidence of her loan 
consolidation or of any payments made. Applicant explained she did not disclose her 
delinquent student loan in her 2014 application because she had already taken action 
on her student loans. 
 
In 2013, Applicant dropped a college class and acquired a $1,850 debt. She told 
the investigator she was making monthly payments of about $70 to pay the debt. She 
explained she did not disclose the debt in her 2014 application because she was taking 
care of it. Applicant was asked about a charged off debt to a jeweler. She claimed she 
believed the debt was paid.  
 
The investigator asked Applicant about the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. She 
acknowledged the debt and explained that she was assessed a fee for damages to a 
leased apartment. Applicant stated this was the first time she had heard of the debt 
since she left the apartment. She expressed her willingness to make small payments 
over a period to pay the fee. Applicant denied any knowledge of the remaining SOR 
debts. 
 
Applicant told the investigator she was saving money to buy a home, and she 
knew she needed to resolve her delinquent debts before she could buy the home. She 
wanted to have the financial delinquencies resolved within the next few years. Her plan 
was to make small payments over time and repay her debts. 
 
Attached to her SOR answer, Applicant included a contract with a credit repair 
company she retained in March 2016, to help her resolve her financial problems. She 
claimed she paid the company $1,000 for their services. Applicant presented no 
documentary evidence to show she has settled, paid, or resolved any of the SOR debts. 
 
Applicant provided no information about her current earnings and financial 
position. She provided little information about her monthly income, monthly expenses, 
and whether her current income is sufficient to pay her current day-to-day living 
expenses and debts. There is no information to indicate whether she participated in 
 
4 
 
 
financial counseling or whether she follows a budget. In sum, she presented no 
documentary evidence of any payments made, efforts to contact creditors, establish 
payment plans, or efforts to otherwise resolve her financial problems, except for 
retaining a credit repair company in March 2016. 
 
  SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified her 2014 SCA when she 
answered “no” to Section 26 and failed to disclose that she had seven delinquent 
accounts within the prior seven years. Applicant denied she deliberately falsified her 
application. She stated in her answer to the SOR that she was not aware of her 
delinquent debts, except for the student loan. She acknowledged that she should have 
paid closer attention to her credit. She claimed that in March 2016, she started looking 
for a house to rent. When her lease applications were consistently denied, she looked at 
her credit report, discovered the debts, and took action by hiring the credit repair 
company.  
 
  At the start of her April 21, 2015 interview, Applicant volunteered to the 
investigator that she failed to disclose in her 2014 Application her delinquent student 
loan and another debt to a college. She also admitted to knowing of at least two 
additional delinquent accounts that she failed to disclose in her Application. She 
mistakenly believed she did not have to disclose her delinquent student loans because 
she was addressing them. She claimed another delinquent debt was paid, so she did 
not disclose it. Concerning the delinquent assessed fee, she did not disclose it because 
nobody contacted her after she left the apartment. The investigator noted Applicant 
expressed her willingness to repay her debts. Notwithstanding, Applicant presented no 
documentary evidence to establish the student loan consolidation, any payments made 
toward the student loans, or any payment made toward any of the SOR debts. 
 
Policies 
 
In issuing the SOR, DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as 
amended (Regulation);1 and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. The 
case will be decided under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017. 
 
The DOD considers ADP positions to be sensitive positions. For a person to be 
eligible for sensitive duties, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness must be 
such that assigning the person to a sensitive position is clearly consistent with the 
national security interests of the United States. SEAD 4, E(4); SEAD 4, App. A ¶ 2.d. 
                                            
1 ADP cases are adjudicated under the provisions of the Directive. (Deputy Under Secretary of 
Defense’s Memorandum for the Director, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, dated November 19, 
2004.) 
 
5 
 
 
Applicants for ADP positions are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination is made.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
A public trust position decision resolves whether it is clearly consistent with the 
interest of national security to grant or continue an applicant’s access to sensitive 
information. The Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States to grant 
or continue his or her access to sensitive information.  
 
Persons with access to sensitive information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national security as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government. Access to sensitive information determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials. SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). 
Eligibility for a public trust position decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not 
met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing access to sensitive 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the trustworthiness concern is that failure to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk 
of having to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 
18) 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is well documented in the file record. 
She acquired the delinquent SOR accounts between 1999 (student loans) and 2014. 
She presented no documentary evidence of any payments made, efforts to contact 
creditors, established payment plans, or efforts to otherwise resolve her financial 
problems (except for retaining the services of a credit repair company in 2016). Three of 
the financial considerations disqualifying conditions apply: AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy 
debts; AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant 
has a long history of financial problems, dating back to 1999, that are recent and 
ongoing.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s 2014 divorce, a circumstance beyond her control that 
may have contributed or aggravated her financial problems. Notwithstanding, 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances to warrant applicability of AG ¶ 20(b). She has been with her current 
employer since 2004. She presented no documentary evidence of any payments made, 
efforts to contact creditors, established payment plans, or of efforts to otherwise resolve 
her financial problems, except for hiring a credit repair company in 2015. 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant provided little information about her current earnings and financial 
position. She did not provide any information about her monthly income and expenses, 
and whether her current income is sufficient to pay her current day-to-day living 
expenses and debts. There is no information to show that she participated in financial 
counseling or that she follows a budget. The available information is insufficient to 
establish clear indications that she does not have a current financial problem, or that her 
financial problem is being resolved, or is under control. Applicant failed to establish that 
she has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the trustworthiness concerns for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative 
or adjudicative processes.  
 
  Applicant’s omission of material financial information on her 2014 Application 
triggers the applicability the following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigation, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefit status, determine security clearance eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibility;  
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
8 
 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 None of the above mitigating conditions fully apply. In light of the evidence as a 
whole, Applicant’s claims of innocent mistake are not sufficiently established by the 
scant evidence she submitted. I considered Applicant’s age, education, experience 
working for a government contractor, her long history of financial problems, the number 
and value of the debts, her participation in background interviews in 2004 and 2015, 
and her past promise to resolve her delinquent debts. On balance, Applicant had ample 
knowledge of her delinquent accounts at the time she completed her 2014 Application, 
and she has been placed on notice of the Government’s financial considerations 
concerns. Her evidence is insufficient to mitigate the Guideline E security concerns.  
Whole-Person Concept 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant, 41, was made aware of the Government’s trustworthiness concerns 
about her delinquent debts in 2005, when she completed her 2014 Application, during 
her 2005 and 2015 interviews, when she received the SOR, and when she was 
provided the FORM. She was allowed a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM to 
produce evidence in extenuation and mitigation. She failed to provide any documentary 
evidence to show she has been in contact with her creditors, or that she attempted to 
settle or pay her delinquent debts. Her evidence is insufficient to show that she has a 
track record of financial responsibility, that she does not have a financial problem, or 
that her financial problem is being resolved or is under control.  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of eligibility for such position. 
Unmitigated concerns about Applicant’s financial situation and her falsification of her 
2014 Application lead me to conclude that grant of eligibility for a position of trust to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i:      Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:       Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant eligibility for a position of 
trust to Applicant. Eligibility for a position of trust is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
