 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No.: 15-05692 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised by Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 18, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP), seeking eligibility for a public trust position. On March 
17, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
citing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. DOD acted under DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(January 1987), as amended (Regulation);1 and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
                                            
1 On April 3, 2017, DOD Manual 5200.02, Procedures for the DoD Personnel Security Program (PSP), 
(Manual) was published. It cancelled and incorporated the Regulation, but it did not include the provisions 
for ADP cases. ADP cases continue to be adjudicated in accordance with the Deputy Under Secretary of 
Defense’s Memorandum for the Director, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, dated November 19, 
2004. 
 
2 
 
 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. The AG are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, 
Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in Appendix 8 of the Regulation. 
 
 On April 20, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. On June 30, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed 
and the case was assigned to me on August 8, 2016. On September 29, 2016, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing scheduling 
the hearing on October 28, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, 
and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, which were received in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, but did not present the testimony of any other witness. Applicant offered 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, a tabbed three-ring binder, which was received in evidence 
without objection. On November 7, 2016, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Of the 22 allegations under Guideline F, Applicant admitted eight of them -- SOR 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.l with explanations; and denied the remaining 14 
allegations with explanations. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old lead technical database administrator employed by a 
defense contractor since May 2012. She currently holds an interim position of public 
trust and seeks to upgrade that position to permanent to enhance her position within her 
company. (GE 1, Tr. 12-15)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1979. She was awarded an 
associate’s degree in June 1981, a bachelor’s degree in May 1984, and an MBA in May 
1989. She did not serve in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1, Tr. 15-17, 19)  
 
Applicant was married from August 1990 to February 2011, and that marriage 
ended by divorce. She has two adult children, a son and daughter from that marriage, 
who are both disabled and dependent on her for support. Her son is autistic, and her 
daughter has “high functioning autism with a severe case of ADHD and anxiety.” (GE 1, 
Tr. 17-19) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR contains 22 allegations, of which 20 are debts totaling approximately 
$21,693. (Tr. 10) The remaining two allegations are bankruptcy filings – the first was a 
chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in January 2003 and discharged in February 2004; and the 
second was a chapter 13 bankruptcy filed in April 2010 and dismissed in November 
2010, for failure to make payments. The SOR allegations were established through 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s admissions and through the evidence presented. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.v; GE 1 – 
6) 
 
A review of the hearing transcript and accompanying evidence does not 
document any efforts by Applicant to repay, settle, dispute, or otherwise resolve any of 
the alleged debts.  She claimed that she was making payment on several debts, but did 
not submit proof of any payments. Documented efforts would include items such as 
receipts, canceled checks, correspondence of payment arrangements, or anything 
demonstrating tangible steps to resolve alleged debts. (Tr. 19-85; GE 1 – 6; AE A) 
Applicant stated that she did not know where all of her paperwork was, because she 
had moved to a new home three weeks before her hearing. (Tr. 33)  
 
During Applicant’s August 13, 2012 Office of Personnel Management’s Personal 
Subject Interview (OPM PSI), she stated that she would contact her creditors and make 
payment arrangements. (GE 2) In her April 20, 2016 SOR answer, she also stated that 
she would contact her creditors and make payment arrangements.  
 
Applicant testified that she was unable to make satisfactory progress on her 
debts because of work demands and time required to care for her children. She stated 
that she works “60 to 70 hours a week” and had “a couple that squatted with me for two-
and-a-half years saying they were going to take care of my kids, and didn’t.” (Tr. 38; AE 
A) She added that she moved into a new house in April 2016 and the couple moved her 
and followed her to her new home continuing to live in her house and “did nothing.” (Tr. 
38-39, 77-81; AE A) Applicant also discussed various medical and divorce-related 
issues that occurred in the 2010 to 2012 timeframe as well as relocating in 2012 to 
accept a job in a different state. (AE A) Applicant provided documentation that she was 
repaying an $8,560.98 non-alleged state debt levied against her wages. (Tr. 87; AE A) 
 
Applicant’s annual income is $116,000, and she receives $586 in monthly child 
support from her former husband. Her net monthly check is $6,200 because of 
“deductions.” Applicant added that her former husband is not prompt on paying child 
support. (Tr. 39-40, 83-84) Applicant has been employed full-time since 2000 with 
“about a week of unemployment” in 2012. (Tr. 24) She “pay[s] the bills as they come in 
and try (sic) to live on the rest.” Applicant “rarely” has any money left over after she 
pays her bills. (Tr. 41) Applicant has not sought financial counseling.  
 
Character Evidence  
 
 Applicant submitted a reference letter from the owner of a Medicaid waiver 
provider agency, who corroborated Applicant’s explanation regarding her financial 
situation. In particular, the owner discussed the recalcitrant couple, discussed above, 
who moved into Applicant’s home and became a financial burden on Applicant. The 
owner also discussed Applicant’s dedication to her children. Applicant submitted her 
2016 employee performance review that documented solid performance. She also 
submitted numerous work-related e-mails that discussed her above average work 
performance and her contribution to the company. (AE A) 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
The Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum of November 19, 2004, treats 
ADP positions as sensitive positions, and it entitles applicants for ADP positions to the 
procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. The standard set out in the Manual and the adjudicative 
guidelines assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security. Manual ¶ 7.1a(2); AG ¶ 2.b.   
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
   
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting sensitive 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The documentary evidence submitted at the hearing establishes two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).The following mitigating 
conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 No mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, 
numerous. She provided no evidence of the circumstances under which the 
delinquencies were incurred. She has not sought or received financial counseling. 
Although, Applicant claimed to be working on or paying several debts, she provided no 
documentation to substantiate her claims. She has made no documented payments on 
her debts, except for the involuntary collection of her state debt. She disputed several 
debts, but she again provided no documentary evidence of the basis for her dispute. I 
am not unmindful of Applicant’s situation with regard to her two adult disabled children 
 
6 
 
 
and the time she must dedicate to caring for them as well as the demands of her job. 
However, Applicant was put on notice that her finances had raised a public trust position 
concern as early as June 2012 when she completed her e-QIP and approximately two 
months later during her August 2012 OPM PSI. Approximately four years later, she 
received her March 2016 SOR. It is difficult to accept Applicant’s explanation that in a 
four-year period, given her educational level, experience, and income, that she was 
unable to address her financial situation in a meaningful way. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness 
concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried 
her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with national security to continue her 
eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.v:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conc lusion 
 
 I conclude that is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
