 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08422 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline L, outside activities, 
and Guideline B, foreign influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 4, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline L, outside activities, and Guideline B, foreign influence. The 
DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AGs implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered 
this case under the previous AGs implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same 
using either set of AGs.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 13, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On January 27, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On 
February 27, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for March 15, 2017. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. The Governments exhibit list, discovery letter, and request for administrative 
notice were marked as hearing exhibits (HE) I-III. Applicant testified, and offered 
exhibits (AE) A-D, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on March 23, 2017. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning Israel. Department Counsel 
provided supporting documents that verify, detail, and provide context for the requested 
facts. The specific facts noticed are included in the Findings of Fact.2 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.3 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from U.S Government reports.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations, with 
explanations. Those admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He is a native-born U.S. citizen. He has a Ph.D. in 
engineering. He formerly worked for another government agency as an engineer for 14 
years. He has held a security clearance for over 30 years without incident. He currently 
is employed by a state university, and also works for a laboratory that is a federal 
contractor. He is married with three children.5 
 
                                                          
2 The Government’s request and the supporting background documents were marked as hearing exhibit 
(HE) I. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). 
 
4 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
5 Tr. at 5, 25-26, 39; GE 1-2; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant volunteered his services from 2011 to 2015 to an 
Israeli scientific organization (SIL); that from 2011 to 2012, while on sabbatical, he 
worked for a technology school in Israel; and that he has a friend who is a citizen and 
resident of Israel. 
  
 Applicant began working as a professor in his current job in approximately 2004. 
That position also allows him to perform engineering duties with a government 
contractor affiliated with the school. He began those duties in approximately 2008. 
Starting in approximately 2011, Applicant volunteered his time and expertise to a 
student-run science project involving lunar landing capabilities. This student group was 
sponsored by SIL. SIL is a small non-profit start-up company located in Israel. The 
technical resources used by the student group was “off-the-shelf” and any information 
gathered was from open sources. Applicant visited Israel twice in connection with this 
project, once in 2011 and once in 2013. He reported these trips to his security manager. 
The extent of his contact was more in the earlier years and less as the project 
progressed. At the most, Applicant was in contact by Skype once every two weeks. He 
was not paid for his services by SIL, although his expenses were reimbursed. His 
contacts with the group wound down over time and now he no longer consults with 
them. He has not had contact with SIL in over one year. He has no plans to consult with 
SIL in the future.6 
 
 From 2011 to 2012, Applicant took a sabbatical from his professorial duties. 
During this time, he traveled to and lived in Israel with his family. He also received a 
fellowship to conduct research for an Israeli technical school while he was there. He 
received 80 percent of his teaching salary while on sabbatical and the fellowship 
provided with him with the remaining 20 percent of his income. His work involved 
teaching classes and conducting academic research. None of his work, while on 
sabbatical, involved technologies related to U.S. national security. Examples of his 
research are provided at AE D. Once his sabbatical year was up, Applicant returned to 
his duties at his university. He has not had any contact with the Israeli technical school 
in over one year.7 
 
 While on sabbatical in Israel, Applicant became acquainted with Mr. X who was a 
student in Applicant’s class. They became professional friends and conducted 
theoretical research together. None of the research involved military or sensitive 
technological applications. Examples of their research and correspondence is at AE 4. 
Mr X came to the United States in 2013 for three months and taught at Applicant’s 
university as a visiting professor. He did not live with Applicant during his stay here. 
Applicant considers Mr. X a professional colleague, not a personal friend. His current 
contact with Mr. X is approximately three to four phone calls per year and an email 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 27-29, 31, 45; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 32-33; AE D (attachments B-D); Answer. 
 
 
4 
 
 
every month or two. As far as Applicant knows, Mr. X does not have any ties to the 
Israeli government, except for his required reserve military service.8  
 
 Applicant was aware that Israel sought to obtain sensitive information for U.S. 
sources before he went there on sabbatical in 2011. Because of this awareness, he was 
on the lookout for any type of event or incident that seemed suspicious. He experienced 
no such event. Had he experienced anything, he would have immediately notified his 
security office. He has not returned to Israel in the last two years. He does not intend to 
retire in Israel. He owns a home here, and he and his families’ ties are solely to the 
United States. Applicant presented a reference letter from the president of his 
university’s research foundation. The author described Applicant as a man of honor, 
with high integrity, and a highly respected researcher and teacher.9 
 
 Israel is a parliamentary democracy with strong historic and cultural ties with 
the United States. Commitment to Israel’s security has been a cornerstone of U.S. 
Middle East policy since Israel’s inception. Both countries have a mutual interest in 
a peaceful, secure Middle East. On July 27, 2012, President Obama signed the 
United States-Israel Enhanced Security Cooperation Act. The goal of this legislation is 
to strengthen the military edge that Israel enjoys over its regional enemies.  
 
Israel aggressively targets sensitive U.S. technology. There have been some 
cases of U.S. government employees who have been prosecuted and convicted of 
spying against the U.S. for Israel. In 1998, Israel acknowledged that one of these 
individual’s had been its agent.  
 
The threat of terrorist attacks is growing in ungoverned or minimally 
governed areas near Israel’s borders with Syria, Lebanon, the Sinai Peninsula, and 
Libya. However, some unconventional security threats have been reduced because 
of factors such as heightened security measures vis a vis Palestinians, missile 
defense systems, and cyberwarfare capabilities.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 33-36, 42; AE D (attachments E-F); Answer. 
 
9 Tr. at 36, 47; AE A. 
 
 
5 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline L, Outside Activities 
 
 AG ¶ 36 explains the security concern about “outside activities” as follows: 
 
Involvement in certain types of outside employment or activities is of 
security concern if it poses a conflict of interest with an individual's security 
responsibilities and could create an increased risk of unauthorized 
disclosure of classified or sensitive information. 
 
AG ¶ 37 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
6 
 
 
(a) any employment or service, whether compensated or volunteer, with: 
 
(1) the government of a foreign country; 
 
(2) any foreign national, organization, or other entity; 
(3) a representative of any foreign interest; and 
 
(4) any foreign, domestic, or international organization or person 
engaged in analysis, discussion, or publication of material on 
intelligence, defense, foreign affairs, or protected technology. 
 
 Applicant’s volunteer work with SIF from 2011 to 2015 and his teaching 
sabbatical at an Israeli technical school from 2011 to 2012 fall within this disqualifying 
condition. AG ¶ 37(a) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 38 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns, 
including:  
 
(b) the individual terminated the employment or discontinued the activity 
upon being notified that it was in conflict with his or her security 
responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant terminated his relationship with SIL. He has had no further contact with 
the organization in over one year. Likewise, once his sabbatical concluded, Applicant 
returned to his U.S. teaching position and has not had any further dealings with the 
Israeli school. AG ¶ 38(b) applies. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” as 
follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
7 
 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and  
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make 
the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign 
person, group, government, or country. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member or friend is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against 
the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. The 
relationship between Israel and the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his friend living in Israel does not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist his friend living in Israel who might be coerced by 
governmental entities, or pressured to assist SIL or the technical school in Israel at the 
behest of that government.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”10 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Israel seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or his friend living 
in Israel, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future.  
 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) do not apply to Mr. X because Applicant has had minimal 
contacts with Mr. X and the nature of their relationship is professionally-based as 
opposed to strictly personal. There is insufficient evidence to support that Applicant has 
ties of affection for or an obligation to Mr. X. Similarly, Applicant has severed his ties to 
SIL and the Israeli technical school. He has no further ties or obligations to either entity. 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) do not apply to these contacts either. Applicant last traveled to 
Israel two years ago. When he lived there in 2011 to 2012, he was on the lookout for 
suspicious activity towards him, but discovered none. There is no current conduct that 
makes Applicant vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign person, 
group, government, or country. AG ¶ 7(i) does not apply.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns, 
including:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
Even though I find that Applicant’s actions are not disqualifying under AG ¶ 7, out 
of an abundance of caution, I will also analyze whether mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
8 apply. Mr X is not affiliated with the Israeli government and Applicant’s minimal 
professional contacts with him relate solely to theoretical research unrelated to U.S. 
military or sensitive technological applications or information. Applicant is no longer 
affiliated with either Israel-based organization that led to the SOR allegations. It is 
unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose between Mr. 
X’s, SIL’s, and the Israeli technical school’s interests verses those of the United States. 
AG ¶ 8(a) applies. 
 
Applicant has met his burden to establish his “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He is a native-born U.S. citizen, and with the 
exception of his sabbatical year in Israel, has lived here all his life. He owns a home and 
has raised his family here. He has worked for U.S.-based organizations for over 30 
years, all while holding a security clearance. The evidence supports that Applicant has 
longstanding ties to the United States and would resolve any conflict of interest in favor 
of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support granting Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
towards denying his clearance. I considered that he severed his relationship with the 
two outside activities, and the strong ties he has to this country, thereby demonstrate 
his longstanding loyalty to the United States. Therefore, he provided sufficient evidence 
to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline L, outside 
activities and Guideline B, foreign influence concerns were either not established or 
mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline L:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs     1.a: - 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs     2.a: - 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
