1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )   ISCR Case No. 15-05826 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of criminal conduct, and is currently on probation for his 
latest offense in January 2016. Under these circumstances, it is too soon to conclude that 
he has mitigated the security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On April 29, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guidelines  J, criminal conduct, and  E, personal conduct, and explaining 
why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
On May 27, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations, admitting 
subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 1.e, 1.g through 1.i., 1.k, 2.b, and 2.c. He partially admitted 
subparagraph 2.a and denied the remainder. After requesting a hearing before an 
administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), the case 
was assigned to me on February 13, 2017. On March 2, 2017, I scheduled a hearing for 
April 7, 2017. The hearing was held as scheduled. I received four Government exhibits (GE 
1 – 4), one exhibit from Applicant (AE A), and I considered Applicant’s testimony. At the 
close of the hearing, I left the record open to allow Applicant the opportunity to submit 
additional exhibits. Within the time allotted, he submitted seven exhibits. Department 
Counsel did not object, and I incorporated them into the record as AE B through AE H. The 
transcript was received on April 17, 2017. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1 
 
Preliminary Issues 
 
Department Counsel withdrew SOR subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d, and 1.l. (Tr. 7) In 
addition, on April 5, 2017, Department Counsel filed a notice of amendment (Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I), adding subparagraphs 1.m, 1.n, and 2.e, and amending subparagraphs 1.j, 
2.a, and 2.e. Applicant admitted all of the amended or supplemental allegations except 
subparagraph 1.j, which he neither admitted nor denied. I considered subparagraph 1.j 
denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old single man with one child, age six. He is a high school 
graduate and earned an associate’s degree in electronics and computer engineering in 
2013. Since 2013, he has worked for a defense contractor as a sensor and systems 
technician. He tests avionics equipment to ensure they operate properly. (Tr. 22) 
 
 Applicant is highly respected on the job. A former supervisor characterizes him as 
dependable and ethical. According to a coworker, Applicant has been successful at every 
job he has held and has exceeded the expectations of his supervisors. (AE C) 
 
 Applicant used illegal drugs, including marijuana, cocaine, and prescription drugs, 
with varying frequency from August 2000 to January 2012. (Answer at 2) In December 
2003, he was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana and possession of 
paraphernalia. (Answer at 1) The state did not prosecute the case and the court placed it 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
on the stet docket. (GE 4 at 1) In June 2004, Applicant was charged with failure to drive 
right of center, negligent driving, violating license restriction, and driving while under the 
influence (DUI). (GE 4 at 4) None of the charges except the DUI charge was prosecuted. 
The court deferred judgment on the DUI charge pending Applicant’s completion of 
probation.  (GE 4 at 4) 
 
 In December 2004, while the aforementioned charges were pending, Applicant was 
cited with possession of alcohol by a minor. (GE 4 at 9) He was fined $500 with $450 
suspended. 
 
 In August 2005, Applicant decided to go to a friend’s house to drink beer. (Tr. 65) 
When his girlfriend attempted to prevent him from leaving the home, he shoved her to the 
couch.  Consequently, he was arrested and charged with felony second-degree assault. 
(Answer at 2; GE 3 at 3) The disposition of this charge is unknown from the record. 
 
 In February 2006, Applicant was charged with possession of an alcoholic beverage 
under age 21 and attempting to drive a vehicle while impaired. (Answer at 2; GE 4 at 17) 
He was found guilty. (Tr. 42) Approximately two weeks later, Applicant was charged with 
DUI. He pleaded not guilty, but on or about May 25, 2006, was found guilty and sentenced 
to 60 days in jail, with 60 days suspended.  In August 2006, Applicant was charged with 
first degree assault and DUI. (Answer at 2) In September 2006, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with driving a motor vehicle on a revoked license. (GE 4 at 23) He was sentenced 
to 30 days in jail. 
 
 Between 2004 and 2006, Applicant violated probation multiple times. (Tr. 56) 
Consequently, after the September 2006 arrest, Applicant was sentenced to a year of 
incarceration. He was released after nine months for good behavior. (Tr. 72) In March 
2010, Applicant was charged with disorderly conduct. 
 
 In January 2012, Applicant was terminated from his job after testing positive for 
marijuana. (Answer at 2; GE 1 at 20) He had been smoking marijuana before work that 
morning, and he used marijuana the day after he failed the drug test. (Tr. 51, 77) He has 
not used marijuana in five years. (Tr. 53) 
 
 In April 2014, Applicant was cited for failure to obey a properly placed traffic control 
device. He was found guilty and fined. (CE 1 at 2) 
 
 In January 2016, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI. (CE 1 at 2) He 
voluntarily entered a rehabilitation facility pending trial. Applicant pleaded guilty, and the 
court sentenced him to 30 days in jail, suspended, and ordered him to continue attending 
the rehabilitation program. In addition, the court sentenced Applicant to five years of 
supervised probation. (Tr. 55-56) 
 
 Applicant attended three to four counseling sessions per week, as part of his 
rehabilitation program. He successfully completed aftercare in January 2017. (AE A) Upon 
leaving, the counseling center recommended that he maintain sobriety and drink “no 
4 
 
alcohol whatsoever.” (Tr. 59, 74) Since completely rehabilitation, Applicant has “slipped up 
here and there.” (Tr. 77) He has a strong support group that is helping him “do the right 
thing and remain sober.” (AE D) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under this guideline, criminal activity “creates doubt about a person’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness [and] by its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” (AG ¶ 30) Applicant’s 
5 
 
history of criminal conduct triggers the application of AG ¶ 31(b), “evidence . . . of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or 
convicted.” 
 
 Applicant admits violating probation orders multiple times, and is currently on 
probation for his most recent offense in January 2016. AG ¶¶ 31(d), “individual is currently 
on parole or probation,” and 31(c), “violation or revocation of parole or probation, or failure 
to complete a court-mandated rehabilitation program,” apply. 
 
 Applicant’s strong work record is sufficient to trigger the partial application of AG ¶ 
32(d), “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation: including . . . good employment 
record.” Conversely, his most recent criminal infraction occurred less than two years ago 
and he remains on probation. Given Applicant’s history of violating probation orders in the 
past, it is too soon to conclude that he has mitigated the criminal conduct security concern. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information.” (AG ¶ 15) Applicant’s history of substance abuse and traffic and alcohol 
infractions trigger the application of AG ¶ 16(d)(1), “untrustworthy or unreliable behavior . . 
.,” and  AG ¶16 (d)(3), “a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.”  Applicant has not 
mitigated this security concern for the same reasons that he has not mitigated the criminal 
conduct security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
In assessing the whole person, the administrative judge must consider the totality of 
an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  Considering the nature, seriousness, frequency, and 
recency of Applicant’s conduct, the rehabilitation that he is currently undergoing is 
insufficient to carry the burden. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
                                                 
2 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
6 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    WITHDRAWN 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    WITHDRAWN 
Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.k:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    WITHDRAWN 
Subparagraph 1.m – 1.n:   Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2:a – 2:e:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
