 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-03392    
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Noel, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
public trust position in the defense industry. Applicant’s financial problems were not 
caused by irresponsible, reckless, or negligent behavior. She is making a good-faith 
effort to resolve her delinquent accounts and presented a legitimate basis for 
challenging several of the alleged delinquent debts. Her eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
 
2 
 
national security to grant or continue Applicant’s access to sensitive information and 
recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On June 23, 2016, 
I issued a pre-hearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses. The parties 
complied with the order. At the hearing, which proceeded as scheduled on July 13, 
2016, I admitted Hearing Exhibits I through III, Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
andApplicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, without objection. I left the record open until 
August 31, 2016 to allow Applicant to submit additional documentation regarding her 
finances. On September 13, 2016, she submitted AE C through P, which are also 
admitted without objection. The Defense Office of Hearing and Appeals (DOHA) 
received the transcript (Tr.) on July 21, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant has worked for a federal contractor since February 2012. Her position 
requires access to personally identifiable information (PII), and requires that she obtain 
eligibility to occupy a public trust position. Based on the disclosures in a January 2013 
eligibility application, her March 2013 subject interview, and the credit reports in the 
record (ranging from January 2013 to  March 2016), the SOR alleges that Applicant 
owes $20,000 in delinquent debt on 17 accounts – including $7,600 in unpaid federal 
taxes, and that she previously had debts discharged through Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
2003. Applicant denies all of the SOR allegations.2  
 
 Applicant has supported herself financially since she was a teenager. At 19, she 
became her younger brother’s legal guardian and began supporting her brother and 
mother as the head of the household. Applicant’s mother and brother remained 
members of Applicant’s household after she married in 2004. Although Applicant’s 
mother and brother were working full time, they did not earn enough to live on their own. 
In 2003, when she was 23 years old, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. 
Her debts, mostly credit cards, were discharged in 2003.3  
 
 Between 2003 and 2008, Applicant’s finances remained stable. She worked full 
time as did her husband, who also worked part time as a tow-truck driver. They earned 
a household income of approximately $90,000. In May 2008, Applicant was laid off. 
Three months later, her husband was laid off from both of his jobs. Applicant was out of 
work for four months before she was able to find a part-time position. Applicant returned 
to full-time employment by August 2008, and continued working her part-time job. Her 
husband was unemployed for a year.  In 2010, the couple decided to relocate with their 
                                                          
2 GE 1-5; Answer. 
 
3Tr. 17-21.  
 
 
3 
 
child to a location with a lower cost of living. They moved believing they could find jobs 
in their new city. Applicant’s mother and brother did not relocate with Applicant.4  
 
 In this new location, Applicant found full-time employment after four months and 
her husband began working part-time. Applicant’s husband secured full-time 
employment in 2012. That year, Applicant and her husband decided to file for 
bankruptcy protection. They retained an attorney, and began making payments toward 
the attorney’s $2,000 retainer fee. During her March 2013 subject interview, Applicant 
informed the investigator that she had a $75 balance on the retainer fee and expected 
the attorney to file the bankruptcy petition in April 2013. However, when she tried to 
make the last payment, she could not find the attorney. Applicant later learned that he 
abruptly left the state. In December 2015, the state bar disbarred the attorney effective 
January 2016. Unbeknownst to Applicant, at the time she retained him, the attorney was 
practicing under a probationary order from the state bar for previous ethics violations.5, 6  
 
 Applicant and her husband could not afford to pay another attorney and decided 
to resolve the debts on their own.  In 2013, they resolved their $7,600 in outstanding 
federal tax debt. In June 2016, Applicant obtained a credit report from each of the 
reporting agencies and began contacting her creditors reporting derogatory information. 
Deciding to resolve only those reported accounts, Applicant has arranged payment 
plans with the creditors alleged in ¶¶ 1.b and 1.p as well as two non-SOR accounts. She 
successfully disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.g. The remaining 
SOR debts do not appear on the most recent credit reports.7  
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”8 
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the national 
interests.”9 Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made.10 An administrative judge’s objective is a fair, impartial, and 
                                                          
4 Tr. 22 - 26. 
 
5 As noted in the record, I have taken administrative notice of a press release issued by the state bar 
where this attorney was licensed to practice regarding his disbarment. The press release is appended to 
the record as HE IV.  
 
6 Tr. 26-30, 40-41, 54-55; GE 2; AE D.  
  
7 Tr. 30-32, 41-53, AE A-N. 
 
8 Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
9 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
10 See Regulation ¶C8.2.1. 
 
 
4 
 
commonsense decision that embraces all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious concern because failure to “satisfy debts 
[or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect sensitive information.”11 
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information. 
  
The SOR alleges that Applicant filed for bankruptcy protection in 2003 and that 
since then she has accumulated approximately $20,000 in delinquent accounts, 
including $7,600 in unpaid federal taxes. Although Applicant denies the SOR 
allegations, the credit reports in the record establish the Government’s prima facie case. 
Applicant has demonstrated an inability to pay her bills and a history of financial 
problems resulting in unresolved delinquent debts.12 However, Applicant has submitted 
sufficient information to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns. 
  
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by events beyond her control and 
she has acted responsibly to address them.13 Applicant experienced financial problems 
in her late teens and early 20s as she became head of household, supporting her 
younger brother and mother without the benefit of significant life or money management 
experience. Her most recent spate of financial problems were caused by a lengthy 
                                                          
11  AG ¶ 18. 
 
12 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
13 AG ¶ 20(b) 
 
5 
 
period of unemployment and underemployment she and her husband experienced 
between 2008 and 2014. Applicant demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve her 
delinquent accounts.14 Given her circumstances, Applicant’s decision to seek 
bankruptcy protection again in 2012 was reasonable. Accumulating the funds for the 
$2,000 retainer fee was a significant financial commitment demonstrating Applicant’s 
intention to rehabilitate her finances. The loss of that fee represented a significant 
financial set back. Although it took Applicant some time to recover, she has since taken 
steps to resolve her delinquent accounts by establishing payment plans with the 
creditors reporting derogatory information on her June 2016 credit reports, including two 
non-SOR accounts.  She also successfully disputed two accounts.15  
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about her suitability for access to 
sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicants are not held to a standard of perfection. 
Although Applicant has not taken action on the debts alleged in the SOR that no longer 
appear on her most recent credit reports, this does not detract from her efforts to 
rehabilitate her finances. Although Applicant remains responsible for these old debts,  
the fact that they are no longer being reported suggests that the creditors have ceased 
collection efforts and the accounts do not represent a current source of vulnerability or 
exploitation. Applicant has shown an intent to repair and rehabilitate her finances and 
has taken definitive actions to that end. Accordingly, her request for access to sensitive 
information is granted.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.r:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. 
Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of trust is granted. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
14 AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
15 AG ¶ 20(e)  
