 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-04664 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred 31 delinquent debts, totaling more than $27,000, most of 
which remain outstanding. She did not mitigate resulting trustworthiness concerns. 
National security eligibility to occupy a sensitive public trust position is denied. 
 
On March 20, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On December 13, 2015, the Department of 
Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). (Item 1.) The 
action was taken under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006. 
  
On February 1, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) On May 6, 2016, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) mailed Applicant a complete copy 
 
2 
 
 
of the FORM on May 9, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on July 1, 2016, and was 
provided 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional information. 
She submitted her receipt for the FORM within the time provided. On August 25, 2016, 
she submitted a letter clarifying that she intentionally chose to return only that receipt 
because she had no objection to consideration of any contents of the FORM, and did 
not request that any changes be made to its contents. On April 24, 2017, DOHA 
assigned the case to me.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s trustworthiness and national security eligibility. My decision 
would be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued 
pursuant to the new SEAD 4 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. She has worked for a Government healthcare services 
contractor since March 2014. She is a high school graduate, and has taken some 
community college classes. She has never served in the military or held a civilian 
position with the Federal Government. She was eligible to hold a public trust position 
during her previous employment with a different healthcare contractor between 2001 
and 2010. At the close of the record in 2016, she was married but going through divorce 
proceedings. She has one eight-year-old child. (Item 3; Item 4.)  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had 31 delinquent debts, totaling $27,208. The 
debts range from a $15,560 charged-off auto loan account to a $50 waste collection bill. 
Sixteen of these debts were for less than $200, including eight that were less than $100.  
Record credit reports indicate these debts became delinquent between 2008 and 2014.  
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted to all of the debts with some 
explanations. 
 
 In general, Applicant said that her husband managed their family finances before 
initiation of their divorce proceedings, and she trusted that their bills were being taken 
care of. She said that she intended to rectify her debts, had reached out to a debt 
management company, and was working on a financial “plan to start by paying off the 
lowest bills first and move up from there.” (Item 2.) She provided no documentation of 
contact with a debt management company, of a financial plan, or of a workable budget.  
                                                          
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
3 
 
 
 The only record documentation that Applicant provided to demonstrate resolution 
of an SOR-alleged debt is an October 15, 2015 court document showing that she fully 
satisfied the $230 judgment debt to a payday loan company, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t. She 
claimed, without providing documentation, that she had resolved the $581 debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.e, and the $50 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.s. She also claimed, without 
documentation, that she contacted the collection agency that reported the $723 and 
$336 collection accounts, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.u and 1.v, and was advised that both 
accounts had a zero balance. Finally, she said that she had disputed the $715 and 
$1,627 debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.ee, but failed to provide and documentation 
of such disputes or a legitimate basis therefor. She admitted, without further 
explanation, that she owes the remaining 24 SOR-alleged delinquent debts totaling 
$22,946. (Item 2.) 
 
   Applicant submitted no evidence of financial counseling, or of budget estimates 
from which to analyze her current financial situation. No character references were 
submitted to describe Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was 
unable to evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she elected to 
have her case decided without a hearing.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP-I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions,” and 
require a national security eligibility trustworthiness determination. The Deputy Under 
Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) Memorandum, dated 
November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will apply to cases 
forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. DoD contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in AG 
¶ 2, describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
 
4 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive ADP information seeks to enter into 
a fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt since 2008, which she has 
been unable or unwilling to repay. This evidence raises trustworthiness concerns under 
these disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
  
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Over the past nine years, Applicant accumulated more than $27,000 in 
delinquent debts that were alleged in the SOR. She did not provide evidence that these 
debts arose from conditions beyond her control, or that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. She documented no counseling to assist with debt resolution, nor did 
she demonstrate an ability to avoid recurrence of financial problems. According to the 
record evidence, all but one of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.ee remain 
unresolved, and no documented basis to dispute the legitimacy of any of them was 
provided. Applicant therefore failed to establish mitigation of trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
 
6 
 
 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual who is 
accountable for the decisions and choices that led to her financial difficulties. She failed 
to demonstrate a basis for finding current good judgment, or permanent behavioral 
change, concerning her history and pattern of financial irresponsibility. Her ongoing 
delinquent debts establish continuing potential for pressure, coercion, or duress.  
    
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability to occupy a sensitive public trust position. 
For these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not meet her burden to mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns arising from her financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.s:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.t:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.u through 1.ee:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a 
public trust position. National security eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information 
is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
