 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01319  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant incurred delinquent debt under 
circumstances that do not reflect negatively on his security worthiness. Clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 18, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the financial considerations and personal conduct 
guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance and recommended his case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for consideration. 
 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on December 30, 2015. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He 
received the FORM on January 21, 2016, and provided a response. The documents 
appended to the FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and 6 
through 7, without objection. GE 5 is omitted as discussed below. Applicant’s FORM 
response and attachments are admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through D, without 
objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 GE 5 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing the interview Applicant had 
with an investigator in December 2012. The interview, which contains adverse 
information, is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. Footnote 
1 of the FORM advised Applicant of that fact and further cautions him that if he failed to 
object to the admission of the interview summary in his response to the FORM that his 
failure may be taken as a waiver of the authentication requirement. Even though 
Applicant responded to the FORM, his failure to respond Footnote 1, specifically, does 
not demonstrate that he understands the concepts of authentication, waiver, and 
admissibility. It also does not establish that he understands the implications of waiving 
an objection to the admissibility of the interview. Accordingly, GE 5 is inadmissible and I 
have not considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant has worked for a federal contractor since July 2005. He previously 
served in the Army, separating in 2001 after 13 years of service. Applicant completed a 
security clearance application in October 2012. The ensuing investigation revealed 
delinquent accounts. Those accounts and Applicant’s failure to disclose them on his 
security application serve as the basis for the SOR allegations.3  
 
 In May 2005, Applicant purchased a home secured by two mortgages. In 2008, 
Applicant learned that his employer was moving the facility where he was employed 
from State 1 across the country to State 2. After evaluating his employment prospects 
and weighing the financial impact of a job search, he decided to relocate to State 2. As 
a result of the national economic downturn, Applicant’s home decreased in value and 
was worth less than the outstanding mortgages. In April 2008, Applicant wrote a 
hardship letter to his primary mortgage lender. He asked the lender to convert the 
mortgage from an adjustable rate mortgage to a fixed interest rate loan or to allow 
Applicant to execute a short sale on the property.  For the next year, with the help of a 
real estate agent, Applicant attempted to sell the house. Applicant received several 
offers from interested buyers to purchase the home. However, the primary mortgage 
lender either failed to respond to the proposed offers or, in at least one case, took so 
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
3 GE 4, 6-7. 
 
3 
 
long to approve the sale that the buyer withdrew the offer and bought a different 
property.4  
 
 Applicant paid the mortgages on the home until October 2008, when he could no 
longer afford to pay the mortgages in addition to his living expenses in State 2. The 
house sat empty until the primary mortgage holder initiated foreclosure proceedings in 
July 2011. The resulting foreclosure sale satisfied the primary mortgage. When 
Applicant completed the October 2012 security clearance application, he did not know 
that second mortgage remained unresolved.5 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to two mortgage lenders on separate 
accounts, both with balances of $107,321 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b).6 The lender that 
originated the second mortgage in 2005 sold the loan to Lender A, who serviced the 
loan as Lender A Servicing Company. In September 2011, Lender B, acquired Lender A 
and its servicing company, which ceased operations in the fourth quarter of 2011.7 The 
credit reports in the record, GE 6 and 7, show that Applicant has accounts with Lender 
A, Lender A Servicing Company (SOR 1.a), and Lender B (SOR 1.b) for the same 
mortgage loan. In December 2013, Lender B agreed to a multi-state legal settlement, 
resolving allegations of mortgage servicing misconduct against Lenders A and B in 49 
states, including State 1 and D.C., between 2009 and 2012.8 
 
 Over the years, Applicant has experienced difficulty obtaining information or 
assistance from his mortgage lenders. Applicant’s most recent inquiry about the status 
of the second mortgage received the following response from Lender B:  
 
A review of our records indicates that the aforementioned loan was 
liquidated with [the servicing entity of Lender A Servicing Company; we 
[Lender B] did not service the aforementioned loan. Therefore, we are 
unable to provide any information with regards to the last activity date and 
foreclosure status of the property.9 
 
                                                          
4 GE 3. 
 
5 GE 3, 6-7. 
 
6 Given the nature of the SOR allegation and the evidence offered by the parties, I have, sua sponte, 
done additional research and taken judicial notice of facts about Lender A and B as reported in Lender 
B’s mandatory filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission and press releases from State 1’s 
Attorney General’s office.  
 
7 Lender B, Annual Report (FORM 10-K), (Feb. 29, 2012). 
 
8https://oag.ca.gov/news/press-releases/attorney-general-kamala-d-harris-announces-21-billion-
mortgage-settlement-ocwen (Dec. 19, 2013). 
 
9 GE 3; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
Lender B also provided Applicant with a 2015 IRS FORM 1098: Mortgage Interest 
Statement, showing a “payoff-charge off” of $107,321 in principal and $64,361 in 
interest in February 2015, as well as a zero balance on the loan.10  
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant had two outstanding property tax liens 
related to a property in State 1 that he purchased in 2003. The liens for $162 (SOR ¶ 
1.c) and $160 (SOR 1.d), respectively, were recorded in November 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.a) 
and November 2012 (SOR 1.d). Even though Applicant relinquished ownership of the 
property in 2005, transferring the deed to another person, he paid both liens. State 1 
released the liens in late 2015.11  
 
 In January 2016, Applicant purchased a home using a loan program sponsored 
by the Department of Veterans’ Affairs. According to the most recent credit report in the 
record, GE 7, dated January 2015, Applicant’s only unresolved delinquent accounts 
relate to those alleged in the SOR. His other open consumer credit accounts are in 
good standing.12  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
10 AE B.  
 
11 GE4, 6-7; AE C. 
 
12 AE D. 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”13  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes four delinquent accounts. However, SOR ¶ 
1.a is duplicative of SOR ¶ 1.b; accordingly, the former is resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
GE 6 and 7 substantiate the remaining SOR allegations, establishing the Government’s 
prima facie case that Applicant has a history of not paying his creditors as well as an 
inability to pay his debts.14 Applicant has provided enough information to explain, refute, 
and mitigate the SOR concerns. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent accounts were not caused by irresponsible or reckless 
behavior, but by market factors beyond his control: his employer’s decision to leave 
State 1; a national financial crisis; and, business practices by his mortgage lenders that 
inhibited his ability to sell the property or obtain clear information on the loans. Applicant 
acted responsibly in light of these circumstances. He communicated with his primary 
mortgage lender about his impending financial hardship.  Applicant continued to pay the 
mortgage for as long as he was able. He engaged a real estate professional to sell the 
home and serve as a liaison with his mortgage lenders. Furthermore, the record 
contains sufficient evidence to show that the remaining SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d 
have been resolved. In particular, the FORM 1098 Lender B issued to Applicant 
indicates there is a zero balance on the account. The Government did not object to the 
form, challenge its meaning, or provide an alternative explanation of its purpose.  The 
examination of the financial documentation in the record shows no ongoing financial 
problems. Applicant’s finances are under control.15  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Conduct involving a lack of candor or dishonesty,  particularly, a failure to provide 
truthful and candid answers during the security process, raises questions about an 
                                                          
13  AG ¶ 18. 
 
14 AG ¶¶ 19 (a) and (c). 
 
15 AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (c). 
  
 
6 
 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.16 The 
SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his delinquent debt on his 
October 2012 security clearance application. Applicant denies the allegation. Proof of 
omission, alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when 
he completed the application. The record does not establish that Applicant intended to 
conceal adverse information from the Government. None of the personal conduct 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
Based on the record, I have no doubts regarding Applicant’s ability to properly 
handle and safeguard classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also 
considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Other than the four debts alleged in 
the SOR, Applicant’s credit reports do not show a history of financial mismanagement. 
On the contrary, Applicant has a history of responsibly handling his consumer debt 
obligations. The SOR debts were caused by events that Applicant could have neither 
foreseen nor controlled. The resulting delinquent debts are not indicative of behavior 
that raises a security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted.                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
16 AG ¶ 15. 
