 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08127 
 ) 
Applicant for a Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under foreign influence and foreign 
preference. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B Foreign 
Influence and Guideline C, Foreign Preference. The action was taken under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. The AGs implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006, have been replaced by AGs implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017.  
The decision in this case is based on the new AGs, effective June 8, 2017. I also 
considered this case based on the AGs implemented on September 1, 2006. The 
outcome of my decision would have remained the same if adjudicated under the former 
AGs.  
 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 1, 2015, and requested that his case be 
decided on the administrative record. On August 8, 2016, Department Counsel 
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on 
August 19, 2016. Applicant timely responded to the FORM and submitted matters. His 
response to the FORM is marked and admitted as Item 5. In a memorandum dated 
September 26, 2016, Department Counsel indicated no objection to Applicant’s 
Response to the FORM. (Item 6) The file was forwarded to the DOHA Hearing Office on 
September 28, 2016. The case was assigned to me on May 18, 2017.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning Taiwan. 
Department Counsel provided supporting documents to show detail and context for 
those facts. Applicant did not object, and I granted Department Counsel’s request. 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative 
proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR 
Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 
89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice). Various facts pertaining to Taiwan were derived from 
Department Counsel’s country summary and accompanying documents as indicated 
under subheading “Taiwan” of this Decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of the evidence, 
I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since April 2011. He is applying for eligibility to hold a security 
clearance. He is single and has no children. (Item 3; Item 5) 
 
 Applicant was born and raised in Taiwan. He was awarded an associates degree 
from a Taiwan University in June 1998. From November 1998 to June 2000, Applicant 
served mandatory military service in the Republic of China (Taiwan) Army. His highest 
rank was the equivalent of corporal. He worked in military supplies. He was responsible 
for maintaining the food and clothing inventory in the unit. He does not maintain contact 
with anyone he knew during his military service. In June 2003, he was awarded a 
bachelor’s degree from a Taiwan University. He moved to the United States in August 
2004 for graduate school. He was awarded a master’s degree from a U.S. university 
and has lived in the United States since 2004.  He became a U.S. citizen on February 
13, 2015. He was issued a U.S. passport on March 6, 2015. (Item 3; Item 5) 
  
 
3 
 Under Foreign Preference, it is alleged Applicant possesses a Taiwanese 
passport that does not expire until November 2019.  Applicant admitted the allegation, 
but indicated he was willing to surrender his Taiwanese passport. In response to the 
FORM, Applicant provided copies of both his Taiwanese and U.S. passports. He also 
provide proof that his Taiwanese passport was surrendered to his Facility Security 
Officer. (FSO). Before he became a U.S. citizen in February 2015, he traveled using his 
Taiwanese passport. He now uses his U.S. passport when traveling abroad. Under the 
new AGs effective June 8, 2017, Applicant is required to report to an appropriate 
security official the possession of an identity card issued by any country other than the 
U.S. He is also required to use a U.S passport when entering and exiting the United 
States.  
 
 Under Foreign Influence, the SOR alleges Applicant’s father, mother, and brother 
are citizens and residents of Taiwan.  Applicant admits these allegations. (Item 2) 
Applicant’s father works at a private financial company. His mother is a housewife. His 
brother works at an elementary school. (Item 3) Applicant contacts his parents about 
once a week. He contacts his brother about once a month. He travels to Taiwan to visit 
family about once a year.  (Item 5)  
  
 Before becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant voted in the Taiwan Presidential 
election in March 2012. He disclosed this in his security clearance application. (Item 3) 
Applicant’s parents gave him mutual funds in Taiwan as gifts in the past. They also 
opened back accounts and deposited cash in the accounts for him while he was a 
student. Applicant indicated on his e-QIP that upon becoming a U.S. citizen, he 
transferred all funds and bank accounts held in Taiwan to his parents and the accounts 
are closed. (Item 3; section 20A)  
   
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant provided copies of his Taiwanese 
passport, his U.S. passport, and his Naturalization certificate. He also provided a 
statement from his FSO verifying that he surrendered his Taiwanese passport on 
September 6, 2016. Applicant states he is a loyal U.S. citizen. (Item 5)   
 
Taiwan 
 
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy. The United States does not support Taiwan’s 
independence, in keeping with the “one China” policy; however, “maintaining strong, 
unofficial relations with Taiwan is also a major U.S. goal, in line with [the U.S.] desire to 
further peace and stability in Asia.” The United States supports Taiwan’s membership in 
appropriate international organizations where statehood is not a requirement for 
membership and encourages its meaningful participation in appropriate international 
organizations, such as the World Trade Organization, Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (APEC) forum, and the Asian Development Bank. Maintaining diplomatic 
relations with the People’s Republic of China (PRC) has been recognized to be in the 
long-term interest of the United States by six consecutive administrations.  
 
There are significant economic ties between Taiwan and the PRC, which are 
attributable to their physical proximity and history. Because of its location, Taiwan has a 
 
4 
particular interest in information from the United States that could aid it in its own 
defense. Taiwan’s primary defense goal is to deter invasion from the PRC. The PRC 
maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals 
with Taiwanese connections. Unlike the PRC, however, the constitutional basis of the 
Taiwanese government suggests that resort to coercive measures against its citizens to 
collect economic intelligence is unlikely. 
 
Taiwan’s commercial ties with the United States have expanded since 1979. 
Export-Import Bank financing, Overseas Private Investment Corporation guarantees, 
normal trade relations (NTR) status, and ready access to U.S. markets have enhanced 
the Taiwan economy. “In recent years, AIT[1] commercial dealings with Taiwan have 
focused on expanding market access for American goods and services. AIT has been 
engaged in a series of trade discussions that have focused on protection of intellectual 
property rights and market access for U.S. goods and services.”   
 
The record references various cases involving the illegal export or attempted 
illegal export of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to and/or through Taiwan. One 
report to the U.S. Congress concerns foreign economic collection and industrial 
espionage. That report notes that Taiwan was then known to be an active collector of 
U.S. economic intelligence. The report ranked Taiwan after China, Japan, Israel, 
France, and Korea as an active collector of such information. Although some of the 
record information about Taiwan’s intelligence activities targeting U.S. classified or 
sensitive information is more than 10 years old, several exhibits address more recent 
espionage by Taiwan’s National Intelligence Bureau (NSB). There is some evidence 
that Taiwan has specifically targeted U.S. citizens in the last five to seven years to 
obtain protected and classified information.  
 
The United States is committed to assisting Taiwan with maintenance of 
Taiwan’s defensive capabilities. “The United States has continued the sale of 
appropriate defensive military equipment to Taiwan in accordance with the Taiwan 
Relations Act, which provides for such sales and which declares that peace and stability 
in the area are in U.S. interests. Sales of defensive military equipment are also 
consistent with the 1982 U.S.-P.R.C. Joint Communique.”  
 
Taiwan is a modern democracy with vibrant public participation during which 
demonstrations may become confrontational. The U.S. State Department urges caution 
within the vicinity of any political demonstrations. Overall crime is noted as low.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
1 The American Institute in Taiwan (AIT) is a private nonprofit corporation with its headquarters in 
the Washington, DC area and offices in Taipei and Kaohsiung. It is authorized to issue visas, accept 
passport applications, and provide assistance to U.S. citizens in Taiwan. (HE 5 at 7) 
 
5 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
GUIDELINE B: FOREIGN INFLUENCE 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern under Foreign Influence:   
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
 
6 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying. 
They include: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign  country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
(c) failure to report or fully disclose, when required, association with a 
foreign person, group, government, or country; 
 
(d) counterintelligence information, whether classified or unclassified, that 
indicates the individual's access to classified information or eligibility for a 
sensitive position may involve unacceptable risk to national security; 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest;  
 
(g) unauthorized association with a suspected or known agent, associate, or 
employee of a foreign intelligence entity;  
 
(h) indications that representatives or nationals from a foreign country are 
acting to increase the vulnerability of the individual to possible future 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
7 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling or residing outside the U.S., that may 
make the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a 
foreign person, group, government, or country. 
 
In Applicant’s case, AG ¶ 7(a) and AG ¶ 7(b) apply. The mere possession of 
close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country 
and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create 
the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); 
ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant has frequent contact with 
his parents and brother in Taiwan. His relationship with his family creates a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because 
Taiwan is known to conduct espionage against the United States. Applicant’s contacts 
with his family in Taiwan also creates a potential conflict of interest between his 
obligation to protect classified information and his desire to help his family members by 
providing that information.  
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of disqualifying conditions AG 
¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) as a result of Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. The 
burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.  
  
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns. They include: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
  
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
 
8 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 I find AG ¶ 8(a) and AG ¶ 8(b) apply to Applicant’s case. It is clear that Applicant 
has close ties of affection and obligation to his immediate family members who reside in 
Taiwan. However, it is unlikely Applicant will have to choose between the interests of his 
family and the interests of the United States. Applicant’s family members are not 
associated or affiliated with the Taiwanese government. His father works for a private 
financial company, his mother is a housewife, and his brother works for an elementary 
school. Applicant lives in the United States and moved all of his assets here. He has 
lived in the United States since 2004.   
  
 AG ¶ 8(b) applies because Applicant has deep and longstanding ties in the 
United States. Applicant has lived in the United States for over 13 years.  He attended 
graduate school here. He became a US citizen in 2015. He transferred his assets in 
Taiwan back to his parents. All of his financial assets are located in the United States. 
Aside from his family members, all of Applicant’s ties are in the United States. He can 
be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of U.S. interest.  
 
GUIDELINE C: FOREIGN PREFERENCE 
 
AG ¶ 9 explains the Government’s concern under Foreign Influence:   
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
AG ¶ 10 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying. 
They include: 
 
10(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country; 
 
 
9 
10(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by 
any country other than the United States; 
 
10(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; 
 
10(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, position, 
or political office in a foreign government or military organization; and 
 
(2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in any way that conflicts with U.S. national 
security interests; 
 
10(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country in violation of U.S. law; and 
 
10(f) an act of expatriation from the United States such as declaration of 
intent to renounce U.S. citizenship, whether through words or actions. 
 
Under the former AGs, effective September 1, 2006, Applicant’s possession of 
his valid Taiwanese passport would have raised a security concern.  Under the new 
AGs, effective June 8, 2017, Applicant’s possession of a valid Taiwanese passport is no 
longer a concern because he disclosed that he had a foreign passport on his security 
clearance application. It is noted that Applicant would have mitigated concerns under 
the former AGs because he surrendered his passport to his FSO.  I find for Applicant 
under Guideline C. None of the disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
10 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under the guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s work history, his candor on his security clearance 
application, his willingness to renounce his Taiwanese citizenship as well as his 
willingness to surrender his Taiwanese passport. Since 2004, Applicant has made a life 
for himself in the United States. I have also carefully considered Applicant’s family 
connections in Taiwan. I considered that Taiwan actively seeks U.S. classified and 
industrial/economic information. Based on the facts of this case, the mitigating factors 
outweigh the disqualifying factors. Applicant has made his life and future in the United 
States. There is no derogatory evidence in Applicant’s background investigation. All of 
his financial assets are in the United States.  Based on Applicant’s longstanding ties to 
the United States, I conclude Applicant would resolve any attempt to exert pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of the U.S.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility access to classified 
information.  Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
                                                  
______________________ 
Erin C. Hogan 
Administrative Judge 
