 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-03729 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 28, 2013. On 
November 6, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 26, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on April 29, 2016. On May 3, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was sent to Applicant (including documents identified as Items 1 through 6), 
who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on July 6, 2016, and 
 
2 
 
did not respond. Item 1 contains the pleadings in the case. Items 2 through 6 are 
admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on May 18, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 46 years old and has never been married. She has two children who 
are 23-year-old twins. Applicant has cohabited with their father since 1994. She has 
taken college courses on and off for the last twenty years.2  
 
Applicant has been employed full time by her current employer since 2004. She 
was unemployed for five months in 2004 after she was laid off from her employer of 
almost four years, during which time she received unemployment compensation. She 
took a medical leave of absence for almost three months in 2013 to recover from 
surgery, during which time she received short-term and long-term disability insurance 
benefits. 
 
Applicant failed to file her 2011 federal income tax return (SOR ¶ 1.a), and failed 
to pay federal taxes of approximately $7,000 that she owed for tax years 2011 and 2012 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c). Applicant claims that she timely filed her 2011 return online, but 
was advised in 2013 that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) never received it. She 
incurred the tax debt due to a change in how she and her cohabitant claimed their 
children as dependents. Applicant has since made the necessary adjustments to her 
withholdings to avoid a similar issue in the future. In July 2013, Applicant was in the 
process of refiling her 2011 return.3 In her SOR answer, Applicant claimed that she had 
refiled her 2011 return and established a payment plan for her 2011 and 2012 unpaid 
taxes. However, she did not provide any corroborating documents. Moreover, she did 
not provide evidence of any payments made pursuant to a payment plan.4  
 
Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2012 that discharged debts totaling 
approximately $10,034 (SOR ¶ 1.d). The tax debt owed to the IRS, totaling $5,659 for 
tax years 2010 and 2011, was not discharged. There are no details in the record 
concerning the status of her 2010 taxes or why she incurred them, nor were they 
alleged in the SOR.5  
                                                          
1 I extracted these facts from Applicant’s answer to the SOR (Item 1) and the SCA (Item 2), unless 
otherwise indicated by citation to another item in the record.  
 
2 See also Item 6. Because Applicant did not respond to the FORM and affirmatively waive any objection 
to Item 6, I will consider only those facts in Item 6 that are not adverse to the Applicant unless they are 
contained in other evidence or based upon Applicant’s admissions in her answer. 
  
3 Item 6. 
 
4 See also Item 6. 
 
5 Item 5. Since the Government did not allege this debt in the SOR, I will consider it only for the purpose 
of evaluating mitigation.  
 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant opened a credit-card account in 2012 with a credit limit of $300. The 
account became delinquent in 2015. As of October 2015, Applicant was 120 days or 
more past due in the amount of $200 with a remaining balance of $437 (SOR ¶ 1.e).6 In 
her SOR answer, Applicant denied this debt without providing a reason.  
 
In 2008, Applicant lost her home to foreclosure. Applicant accrued several post-
bankruptcy debts that were not alleged in the SOR, including: federal student loan 
accounts, totaling $110,455, that were 90 days or more past due; a $182 satellite-
television bill in collection status; and a $60 medical bill in collection status. As of 
October 2015, the student loans were in deferment status. In May 2015, Applicant 
borrowed $750, with a balance of $188 as of October 2015. She pays this loan as 
agreed.7  
 
Applicant’s health problems that began in 2010 resulted in ongoing medical 
expenses, which caused her trouble keeping up with her other monthly financial 
obligations. As of July 2013, Applicant averred that her earnings were enough not only 
to meet her monthly financial obligations, but also to pay outstanding debt.8  
 
The record contains no evidence that Applicant has either sought or received any 
credit counseling, except as can be presumed to have been required during her 
bankruptcy proceedings. In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that she 
failed to provide any documentation to support the assertions outlined in her answer to 
the SOR. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”9 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”10 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”11 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
                                                          
6 Items 4 and 5. 
 
7 Item 3 and 4. Since the Government did not allege this debt in the SOR, I will consider it only for the 
purpose of evaluating mitigation. 
 
8 Item 6. 
 
9 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
10 Egan at 527. 
 
11 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
4 
 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”12 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.13 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”14 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.15 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.16 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.17 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”18 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”19 
                                                          
12 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
13 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
14 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
15 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
16 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
17 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
19 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her credit bureau reports, establish three 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”), AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”), and AG ¶ 
19(g) (“failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the 
fraudulent filing of the same”). 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the 
following potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent tax debts remain 
unresolved and I cannot conclude that she has filed her 2011 tax return based on the 
evidence.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant’s 2004 layoff and ongoing medical 
expenses were circumstances beyond her control. However, the record is insufficient for 
me to determine the extent to which those circumstances contributed to the unresolved 
financial concerns alleged in the SOR, especially in light of her bankruptcy discharge. 
Moreover, Applicant has failed to meet her burden to show that she acted responsibly to 
address those concerns.   
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant presumably received financial 
counseling during her bankruptcy proceedings. However, I cannot conclude that there 
are clear indications that the problems underlying her failure to timely file tax returns or 
pay delinquent tax debts are under control. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established.  Applicant is credited with tackling her delinquent 
debts through bankruptcy. However, that action alone does not suffice to mitigate the 
current concerns. Because her claims were unsubstantiated by corroborating 
documentary evidence, I cannot conclude that Applicant filed her 2011 tax return, 
established a payment plan for her unpaid taxes for tax year 2011 and 2012, or made 
any payments pursuant to that plan.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by her failure to timely file her federal tax return and pay her delinquent 
 
7 
 
federal income taxes. Accordingly, she has not carried her burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c: Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.  Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
