1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 16-01075 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
June 16, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant is alleged to be delinquent on 15 debts, in a total exceeding $38,000. 
He is making payments on one debt, but the rest remain unresolved. Applicant failed to 
introduce documentation to show that his history of financial delinquencies does not 
cast doubt on his current judgment. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On July 30, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 8, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on December 
 
2 
 
19, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on December 20, 2016, scheduling the hearing for February 10, 2017. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. 
Applicant presented two documents, which I marked and admitted without objection as 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B. The record was left open until March 10, 2017, for 
receipt of additional documentation. On February 13, 2017, the Government presented 
an additional exhibit, marked GE 5. I emailed Applicant on February 15, 2017, and 
requested he notify me of any objections to GE 5. He did not respond directly to that 
email, but did submit an email dated March 9, 2017, containing a narrative statement. 
His narrative statement was marked as AE C. Department Counsel had no objections to 
AE C. Both GE 5 and AE C are admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on February 23, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issue  
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-
4), establishing a “single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to 
hold a sensitive position.”1 The National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (hereinafter 
“adjudicative guidelines” or “AG”), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, are to be 
used in all security clearance determinations made on or after June 8, 2017.2 In light of 
this explicit direction and absent lawful authority to the contrary, I have applied the new 
adjudicative guidelines.3 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) 
(security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards).4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.o. He failed to 
admit or deny SOR allegation ¶ 1.a, and as a result, it will be treated as a denial. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed with the defense contractor for two years. He served in the Marine Corps for 
15 years and achieved the rank of staff sergeant. He held a security clearance for eight 
years in connection with his service in the Marine Corps. He was honorably discharged. 
                                                          
1 SEAD-4, ¶ B, Purpose.  
 
2 SEAD-4, ¶ C, Applicability.  
 
3 Nonetheless, I have considered the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines and my ultimate 
decision in this case would have been the same. 
 
4 See also ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007) (when the guidelines were last revised, 
the Board stated the following, “Quasi-judicial adjudications must be made within the bounds of applicable 
law and agency policy, not without regard to them.”) 
 
3 
 
He is married to his second wife, and has a total of eight children: three from his first 
marriage, one from his second marriage, and four step children. (Tr. 26-38.) 
 
 Applicant is alleged to be delinquent on 15 debts, in a total exceeding $38,000. 
The debts are documented in credit reports dated September 2015; June 2016, and 
February 2017. Records reflect that Applicant was not well informed regarding the 
details of his finances prior to 2015, because his wife managed their finances when he 
was deployed. He learned of many of the delinquencies during his subject interview in 
October 2015. He promised to resolve his delinquencies at that time. (GE 2; GE 3; GE 
4; GE 5.) 
 
 Applicant attributes his debts to circumstances beyond his control. His son is 
disabled. Applicant’s wife had to stop working for two and a half years to care for their 
son. He and his wife maintain separate residences, because his job is in an area with a 
higher cost of living. However, his two youngest children recently moved in with him. 
Applicant also recently sustained a financial setback after his wife’s vehicle was 
vandalized and set on fire. (GE 2; AE C; Tr. 22-24.) 
  
 Applicant presented a letter, dated April 8, 2017, from a credit repair service that 
indicates he retained the service “to audit and verify the status of the information within 
his credit reports.” He hired the credit repair service in October 2016, and pays them 
$99 monthly. The April 8, 2017 letter did not identify which debts the service was 
verifying. Applicant testified that the credit repair service disputed the debts identified in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b (for $446); 1.f (for $258); 1.j (for $1,224); and 1.o (for $134) on his behalf 
because they were “old debt.” (Tr. 40-41.) Applicant’s credit report dated February 13, 
2017, reflects Applicant disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a (for $1,508); 1.d (for 
$216); 1.j (for $1,223); 1.k (for $6,680); and 1.l (for $5,740). However, they remain on 
Applicant’s credit report as delinquent or charged-off accounts after his dispute. SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.o remain unresolved. (GE 5; AE A; Tr. 64-65.) 
 
 Applicant claimed to have resolved the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.h, and 1.i. 
in the amounts of $171, $257, and $172, respectively. (Tr. 41.) Applicant failed to 
introduce documentation to support his claim that these debts are resolved. His 
February 13, 2017 credit report reflects SOR ¶ 1.e is unresolved. (GE 5.) The debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i are not listed on the February 13, 2017 credit report, but 
do appear on his June 21, 2016 credit report. (GE 4.) None of Applicant’s medical debts 
have been documented as resolved. 
 
 Applicant claimed to be making payments on the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
(for $1,508); 1.k (for $6,680); and 1.m (for $14,175). As previously noted, SOR ¶ 1.a is 
listed as unpaid on his February 13, 2017 credit report. He failed to produce evidence 
that he is satisfying that debt. Similarly, the debt in 1.k is listed on his February 13, 2017 
credit report with a growing balance of $7,317. Applicant failed to meet his burden to 
show he is resolving these two debts. However, Applicant’s past-due balance on the 
debt identified in SOR ¶ 1.m, has been reduced to $921. Applicant is resolving that 
debt. (GE 5.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant has not made payments on the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.g, or 
1.n. He testified he is “still working” with the creditor in ¶ 1.c to arrange payments for 
that $1,672 debt. (Tr. 19.) He testified he was not satisfied with the performance of the 
law firm to whom he owes the $380 alleged in ¶ 1.g, and is “still in the process of trying 
to fix that.” (Tr. 20.) He explained that his wife was taking care of the $5,000 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n, and he needed to get information from her about it. (Tr. 22.) None 
of these debts are resolved. 
 
 Applicant’s pay is being garnished until his child support payments to his ex-wife 
are satisfied. (Tr. 48-49.) His February 13, 2017 credit report identifies an additional 
delinquent debt for an unpaid utility bill in the amount of $258. (GE 5.) 
 
 Applicant testified he no longer has credit cards. He claims he does not make 
purchases that he cannot pay off. (Tr. 59.) His credit repair service sends him emails 
about budgeting. (Tr. 65.) He intends to resolve all of his debts and maintain a budget. 
(AE C.) 
 
 Applicant received the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal; the 
Presidential Unit Citation-Navy; four Navy Unit Commendations; five Marine Corps 
Good Conduct Medals; and the National Defense Service Medal, among his many 
citations and decorations. (AE B.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 
5 
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on 15 debts, in a total exceeding $38,000. 
He documented he is making payments on only one of those debts. He has been aware 
of his debts since at least 2015, but has taken little action to resolve them. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. He has been aware of his 
delinquencies since 2015, but failed to follow through on his promise to address his 
delinquent accounts. He has not demonstrated that future financial problems are 
unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant attributed his recent delinquencies to his son’s disability, his wife’s 
unemployment, maintaining two residences, and the vandalism of his wife’s vehicle. 
These are circumstances beyond his control. However, he failed to establish that he 
acted reasonably or responsibly with respect to his debts. As previously noted, he has 
known of his debts since 2015, yet he has yet to document he has taken action on 14 of 
his delinquent accounts. He has not demonstrated that he addressed these debts in a 
responsible or timely manner. Full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not been 
established. 
 
 Applicant did not document that he received financial counseling from a 
legitimate and credible source. Further, there are no clear indications that his financial 
problems are being resolved or are under control. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) or (d) 
has not been established. 
 
 Applicant contested the delinquencies in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 
and 1.o with the credit reporting agencies, because they were “old debt[s].” The age of 
his delinquencies may legally bar collections and reporting from a credit report, but do 
not demonstrate a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt. 
Applicant failed to provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of any dispute 
with his creditors or provide evidence of actions he has taken to resolve the issues. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) was not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
8 
 
Applicant served honorably in the Marine Corps. He successfully held a security 
clearance for eight years. However, he has yet to address the majority of his financial 
delinquencies. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
