 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02319 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jim Green, Esq. 
 
 
June 1, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was alleged to have engaged in two separate instances of criminal 
conduct, one in 2010 and one in 2013. He was convicted in 2014 for some of his 2013 
conduct and is still on probation. His conduct raised unmitigated security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 14, 2014, Applicant submitted a signed Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 30, 2016, the Department of Defense 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 23, 2016, (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 20, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on December 20, 2016, scheduling the hearing for February 10, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, called one witness, and submitted 
nine exhibits (AE), marked AE A through AE I. Department Counsel had no objections 
to AE A through AE I, and they were admitted. The record then closed. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 23, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He served in the Air Force from 2002 to 2006. He 
served in the Air National Guard from 2006 to 2013. He achieved the rank of staff 
sergeant. He has held a security clearance since 2004. He has worked for his current 
employer, a government contractor, since August 2010. He was married in 2004 and 
divorced in 2015. He has one minor son and a minor step-daughter. (GE 1; AE G; Tr. 
15-23, 42, 46-47, 55.) 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant engaged in two separate instances of criminal 
conduct. Applicant admitted to both of the criminal allegations contained in the SOR. 
They are as follows: 
 
 Applicant was arrested on September 17, 2013 and charged with: (1) Sex 
Assault-Submit-Force/Threat/Other; (2) 2nd Degree Kidnapping-Seize/Carry Victim; (3) 
Sexual Contact-No Consent-Force/Threat; (4) Felony Menacing-Real/Simulated 
Weapon; (5) 3rd Degree Assault-Know/Reckless Cause Injury; (6) Telephone-Obstruct 
Service; and (7) Harassment-Strike/Shove/Kick. He was subsequently also charged 
with: two counts of Tampering with Witness/Victim; two counts of Attempting to 
Influence Public Servant; violation of Bail Bonds Conditions; and Violation of Criminal 
Protection Order. On October 3, 2014, Applicant was convicted of: Telephone-Obstruct 
Service; both counts of Tampering with Witness/Victim; Violation of Bail Bonds 
Conditions; and Violation of Criminal Protection Order. He was sentenced to 59 days in 
jail and placed on probation for four years. He is currently on supervised probation for 
these convictions. He meets with a parole officer once per month and is subject to 
house inspections. (GE 3; GE 5; Tr. 29-55.) 
 
 Applicant explained that he was acquitted of (1) Sex Assault-Submit-
Force/Threat/Other; (2) 2nd Degree Kidnapping-Seize/Carry Victim; (3) Sexual Contact-
No Consent-Force/Threat; (4) Felony Menacing-Real/Simulated Weapon; (5) 3rd Degree 
Assault-Know/Reckless Cause Injury; (6) Telephone-Obstruct Service; and (7) 
Harassment-Strike/Shove/Kick during a trial before a jury. Applicant testified that he was 
arrested after a normal evening spent with his family. He and his wife were 
consensually intimate. However, during their encounter an argument broke out between 
Applicant and his wife, because she was cheating on him. His wife was allegedly drunk 
 
3 
 
and was yelling at the time of the incident. She has a history of previous arrests for 
assaulting Applicant. (GE 6; GE 7.) His step-daughter and his brother-in-law pounded at 
the door of the bedroom and Applicant opened the door. He then left the residence, but 
returned the next morning to get his cell phone. When he returned, he was arrested for 
the allegations, which his wife allegedly made up. (Tr. 36-39.) During their testimony at 
trial, Applicant’s wife and step-daughter recanted their initial statements to the police 
that led to the above charges. (Tr. 29-52.)  
 
As stated, despite Applicant’s acquittal on the above charges, he was convicted 
of Telephone-Obstruct Service; both counts of Tampering with Witness/Victim; Violation 
of Bail Bonds Conditions; and Violation of Criminal Protection Order, as a result of his 
talking to his mother-in-law and asking her to convince his wife to tell “the truth,” so that 
the charges against him would be reduced. (Tr. 39-40.) Applicant testified that he has 
appealed his conviction and expects to prevail on appeal. (AE I; Tr. 40-41.)  
 
 In July 2010, Applicant was the subject of a joint investigation in which he was 
alleged to have committed sexual assault against a minor child. The minor child he was 
accused of molesting was his 13-year-old step-daughter. Applicant claimed that his 
step-daughter made these accusations because she did not want to move as a result of 
his job in a new location. He claimed that the charges were dropped after his step-
daughter admitted to making a false statement to the police. (Tr. 24-29.) The Sheriff’s 
Office investigating this incident included a summary of a recorded phone conversation 
between the Victim and Applicant. It reported: 
 
[Victim] called [Applicant] who answered the phone[.] [Victim] explained to 
[Applicant] that she needed to speak with him and advised she did not feel 
comfortable coming home anymore because of what was happening. 
[Victim] began to describe the incident that occurred in her bedroom while 
watching [a movie]. [Applicant] stopped [Victim] and asked where she was 
at. [Applicant] explains that [Victim] needs to come home so they can talk 
about it. . . . [Victim] talks with [Applicant] about another incident where 
[Applicant] cuddled with her and asked [Victim] to take off her pants. As 
[Victim] described the incident [Applicant] replied, “OK.” [Victim] then 
explains to [Applicant] that he [Applicant] then took his clothes off. 
[Applicant] replied, “No I had my underwear on.” . . . [Victim] also 
explained to [Applicant] that he gets “hard” sometimes when they cuddle. 
[Applicant] explained that he did not know what to tell [Victim] about that. 
(GE 4.) 
 
 After the investigation, Appellant learned that Victim recanted what she said. (Tr. 
48.) As a result, no charges were filed. However, his criminal conduct outlined above 
during the recorded call, raises concerns about his judgment.  
 
 Applicant’s girlfriend of three years testified that Applicant is “calm, loving, [and] 
attentive.” She reported that they do not fight and have no arguments. (Tr. 57-61.) 
Applicant presented copies of medals, certificates, letters of appreciation, and 
 
4 
 
performance reports which praise his outstanding achievements in the Air Force and the 
workplace. (AE A; AE C; AE D; AE E; AE G.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision. 
  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
5 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) the individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
Applicant was alleged to have engaged in two separate instances of criminal 
conduct, including serious crimes and lesser offenses. His interactions with his step-
daughter caused a criminal investigation and showed poor judgment, despite the fact 
that he was not formally charged for that conduct. He was convicted of Telephone-
Obstruct Service; both counts of Tampering with Witness/Victim; Violation of Bail Bonds 
Conditions; and Violation of Criminal Protection Order. He was sentenced to 59 days in 
jail and placed on probation for four years. He is currently on supervised probation for 
these convictions. These offenses give rise to concerns about Applicant’s judgment and 
reliability, both because of the nature of the offenses and the quantity of criminal 
offenses. The aforementioned disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
Four Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life; 
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
 
7 
 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal past continues to cast doubt on his trustworthiness and 
judgment. His offenses are recent, and he is currently on supervised probation. AG ¶ 
32(a) does not provide full mitigation. 
 
 Applicant failed to present evidence to show that he was pressured into criminal 
acts. While he is now divorced from his wife and no longer has contact with her, he was 
not pressured into asking her to alter her police statement. He admitted each of the 
allegations. He was convicted of Telephone-Obstruct Service; both counts of Tampering 
with Witness/Victim; Violation of Bail Bonds Conditions; and Violation of Criminal 
Protection Order. Neither AG ¶¶ 32(b) nor 32(c) provide mitigation. 
 
 Applicant failed to introduce sufficient evidence of rehabilitation. While he 
introduced evidence of outstanding work performance during his military service and his 
civilian career, not enough time has passed since his conviction, given that he is 
currently on supervised probation under the watchful eye of the court. AG ¶ 32(d) does 
not provide full mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant’s 
criminal behavior continues to lead to questions about his trustworthiness and reliability. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
 
8 
 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Criminal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
