 1 
           
             
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 16-00066 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Due to circumstances largely beyond her control, primarily a period of 
uncompensated disability, Applicant experienced financial difficulties, but mitigated the 
concern by acting responsibly under the circumstances. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on June 1, 2015. On 
May 18, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
This case was adjudicated under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The 
DOD implemented amended adjudicative guidelines (AG) on June 8, 2017, while this 
 2 
decision was pending. The applicable AG in this case is Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations.) This decision will be decided based on the amended AG effective June 
8, 2017. The outcome of this case would have been the same if decided based on the 
former AG.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 10, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on July 26, 2016. On July 28, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM,) which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5, was sent to Applicant, 
who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on August 1, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received her Response on August 8, 
2016. The case was assigned to me on May 3, 2017.  
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts totaling $20,293. In her Answer, Applicant 
admits two of the debts, and denies four of the debts. The debts are reflected in 
Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) from May 2016 and June 2015. (GX 4; GX 5.) 
Her admissions in her Answer are incorporated in my findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old defense industry employee since at least 2005, working 
for her current employer since June 2015. She and her current husband married in 2003, 
and have a 15-year-old son. Applicant has two adult children from a previous marriage. 
She has held a security clearance since 2008. (GX 2; GX 3.)  
 
Applicant began experiencing financial difficulties in about 2006. She suffered an 
illness and was unable to work from May to August 2006. Due to a problem with the 
paperwork, she did not receive disability payments, and fell behind on many of her 
financial obligations. (GX 3; GX 2.) Applicant began her efforts to pay her delinquent debts 
in 2014, when her financial circumstances became more stable. In early 2016, she 
engaged a free credit-monitoring company to contest the validity of the accounts listed on 
her CBR, and to regularly monitor its accuracy. Between January and July 2016, 16 
derogatory entries, several of which were duplicates, were removed from Applicant’s 
CBR. These entries include the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.g through 
1.i. (Response.)  
 
Applicant denies the $858 credit-card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, asserting that it 
is the underlying debt of the $1,262 collection-account debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, which 
she admits. This assertion is supported by her June 2015 CBR (GX 5.) Although there is 
no evidence that Applicant paid SOR ¶ 1.c, it was removed from her CBR in February 
2016. (Response.) 
 
Applicant admitted, without explanation, the $15,670 collection-account debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. The last activity on this account was February 2009. (GX 5.) She 
previously stated that she did not recognize the debt, and there is no record evidence that 
identifies the original creditor or the nature of the debt. (GX 2; GX 4; GX 5.) The debt last 
 3 
appeared on the June 2015 CBR, and was actively removed by the credit-monitoring 
company in February 2016. Although there is no record evidence that Applicant paid this 
debt, it is no longer in collection status. (GX 3; Response.) 
 
Applicant paid the $1,017 judgment (SOR ¶ 1.b), the $446 credit-card debt (SOR 
¶ 1.e), and the $474 credit-card debt (SOR ¶ 1.g.) She denied the $278 pharmacy debt 
(SOR ¶ 1.f), the $223 collection-account debt (SOR ¶ 1.h), and the $66 medical debt 
(SOR ¶ 1.i.) These were removed from her CBR in 2016. (Response.) 
 
Applicant lives within her means and has not incurred any significant delinquent 
debt since 2009. (GX 5; Response.) She is current on her student loan payments, and 
other ongoing financial obligations. She paid two unalleged collection accounts and a 
medical debt, originally totaling about $1,155, between May 2014 and January 2015. (GX 
4; Response.) Applicant stated in her Response that although she had past financial 
issues, she has “made a conscious effort to satisfy all debts and meet all financial 
obligations.” 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
 4 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 5 
 The record evidence establishes that SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c are the same debt. 
Therefore, I have not considered the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a when evaluating 
Applicant’s financial status. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under 
the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s 
favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged 
twice).   
 
 The record evidence establishes two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”). The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially 
applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s past financial problems arose in 2006, and were attributable to matters 
largely beyond her control. Specifically, her unpaid three-month illness-related disability. 
This lack of income had a significant impact on her ability to maintain her finances. 
Applicant acted responsibly by beginning to pay her delinquent debts in 2014. She paid 
three of her SOR debts totaling $1,937, including a $1,262 judgment. She further 
demonstrated her financial responsibility by maintaining her ongoing financial obligations 
including her student loan payments, and not incurring any significant delinquent debt 
since 2009. She also repaid three unalleged debts totaling $1,155 between 2014 and 
2015. She engaged a credit-monitoring company which had 16 derogatory entries, 
including five of the eight SOR debts, removed from her CBR. The removed debts are 
uncollectable and are therefore, not a source of vulnerability.  
 
 Applicant acted in good faith by paying or otherwise resolving each of the SOR 
debts. “Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 
 6 
at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an 
individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. 
ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The 
adjudicative guidelines do not require that an individual make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).  
  
 Applicant did not merely wait for her debts to drop off her CBR. Rather, she took 
affirmative action in 2014 to begin paying her debts as soon as she was financially stable. 
In 2016, she engaged a credit-monitoring company to contest the validity of the accounts 
listed on her CBR. Between these two courses of action, she resolved all of the SOR 
debts. The circumstances under which Applicant incurred delinquent debt occurred 
between 2006 and 2009, are unlikely to recur, and do not cast doubt on her current 
security worthiness. Although Applicant experienced past financial issues, she paid or 
otherwise resolved all of her delinquent debts, has not incurred any recent delinquent 
debt, and lives within her means. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(d), 20(d), and 20(e) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but I have also 
considered the following: 
 
 Applicant has been employed in the defense industry since 2005, and has held a 
security clearance since 2008. She maintains her student loans and other financial 
obligations and has resolved her delinquent debts. Such actions are indicative of an 
 7 
individual who is reliable and trustworthy and who exercises good judgment. I am 
confident that Applicant will continue her efforts to maintain financial stability. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:    For Applicant. 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
