 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00088 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 19, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D, Administrative Judge: 
 
    Statement of the Case 
 
 On February 2, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On June 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 27, 2016. He denied all of the SOR 
allegations concerning his bankruptcy filings and delinquent debts, and requested that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 1.) On August 12, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 4 Items, was 
 
2 
 
mailed to Applicant on August 15, 2016, and received by him on August 24, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM.   
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM on September 22, 2016, and submitted a one 
page document, admitted without objection. He did not object to Items 1 through 4 of 
the FORM.  DOHA assigned the case to me on June 5, 2016.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 38 years old. He is married with three children and two adult step 
children. He has a high school diploma and some college and technical school training.  
He is employed with a defense contractor as a Instrumentation Technician.  He is 
seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified six debts totaling approximately $69,000.  These debts include a past due 
mortgage account in the amount of $65,000 and approximately $3,868 in other 
miscellaneous debts.  Credit Reports of Applicant dated August 26, 2015, confirm this 
indebtedness.  (Applicant’s Exhibit 3.)  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to his failed efforts to maintain two 
homes during a period when he was accommodating his wife’s efforts to care for his 
wife’s sister who had cancer in 2010.  Applicant states that he was already having 
problems paying his bills.  As a first time home buyer, Applicant was not experienced 
with the mortgage adjustments; and when his adjusted, without a loan modification, he 
was unable to meet his obligations. As a result, several debts became seriously 
delinquent.  (Answer to SOR.)   
 
3 
 
 
1(a) One of the homes was foreclosed upon.  Applicant is indebted to a mortgage 
account in the amount of $65,000.  Applicant states that he is presently in the process 
of discussing damage-mitigation options with a VA representative.  (Answer to SOR, 
and Response to FORM.) 
 
1(b) Applicant is indebted for a delinquent credit card account in the amount of $2,703.  
Applicant claims that he has paid the debt.  No evidence of the debt satisfaction has 
been provided.  (Answer to SOR, and Response to FORM.)  
 
1(c) Applicant is indebted for a medical account that was placed in collection in the 
amount of $652.  Applicant claims that he has paid the debt.  No evidence of the debt 
satisfaction has been provided.  (Answer to SOR, and Response to FORM.) 
 
1(d) Applicant is indebted to a cable company for an account that was placed for 
collection in the amount of $374.  Applicant claims that he has paid the debt.  No 
evidence of the debt satisfaction has been provided.  (Answer to SOR, and Response to 
FORM.) 
 
1(e) Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection 
the amount of $126.  Applicant claims that he has paid the debt.  No evidence of the 
debt satisfaction has been provided.  (Answer to SOR, and Response to FORM.) 
 
1(f) Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that has been placed for 
collection in the amount of $31.  Applicant claims that he had paid the debt.  No 
evidence of the debt satisfaction has been provided.  (Answer to SOR, and Response to 
FORM.) 
 
 Applicant admits that at one time he was financially overextended.  He ignored 
his debts for a period and focused on taking care of his family of five, not including the 
random assistance he gives his step children.  When he learned that his security 
clearance may be in jeopardy, he tapped into his 401K retirement account in an effort to 
address the debts.  He states that with the exception of the home foreclosure, he has 
resolved all of his other debts.  He further states that his finances have been stable 
since the passing of his sister in law.  (Answer to SOR, and Response to FORM.)   
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
 
4 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
 
5 
 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence.  An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  Affluence 
that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a security 
concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity including espionage.   
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s home was foreclosed upon, and he fell seriously delinquent with other 
creditors. He accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt. His actions 
demonstrated both a history of not addressing his debt and an inability to do so. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  There are no mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations guideline 
that are applicable here.  Applicant claims that he has paid four of the five debts, 
however, he has provided no payment receipts or anything else to prove that he has 
resolved the debts.  He was given the opportunity to provide these documents and 
failed to respond.  It does cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.~f.:  Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
