 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00179 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On May 18, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on August 12, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on October 11, 2016, and 
had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided a 
 
2 
 
 
detailed 19 page response to the FORM, with attachments.1 The Government’s 
evidence, identified as Items 1 through 7, is admitted into evidence without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2017.  
 
  Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant is 49-years old. He obtained his bachelor’s degree in 2005. Applicant 
has been employed by a federal contractor since February 2015. He previously owned 
and operated his own home-based computer business from 2004 to 2015. Applicant 
reports no military service and he was married from 1999 to 2007, when he got 
divorced. Applicant is up to date on his re-payment of approximately $50,000 in student 
loans. He reported delinquent debts, including approximately $25,000 owed to a creditor 
because his business was the victim of fraud in 2012, in section 26 of his Security 
Clearance Application (SCA).3 This is his largest-delinquent debt by far, alleged at SOR 
¶ 1.d. He also disclosed a hospital bill, and that he had deferred-student loans awaiting 
repayment once he obtained full-time employment.  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all four of the alleged delinquent 
debts. He averred that the primary reasons for his financial difficulties were his divorce 
in 2007, and the subsequent downturn in the economy with the recession of 2008. 
Applicant provided his tax returns, showing that he earned below the poverty level at all 
relevant times.4 Specifically, Applicant provided a three-page statement as his Answer 
to the SOR with attached documents.5 The attachments included a 2007 dissolution 
agreement and letters from creditor in SOR ¶ 1.c indicating that his ex-wife had filed for 
bankruptcy protection in 2009. This left Applicant solely responsible for the debt, 
although he gave her the house. Credit reports show that this debt in SOR ¶ 1.c was 
charged off in 2009. Applicant has been in contact with the creditor and is attempting to 
resolve this debt. It is currently reported as being in voluntary payment status.6 This 
debt has been resolved.  
 
                                                          
1 Attachments include: 7 p. bank statement for 2016; 21 p. bank statement for 2015-’16; a 2 p. account 
debit to pay a Hospital; a 1 p. letter from C R G(Intuit) dated Aug 31, 2016; a 1 p. email from Intuit; a 1 p. 
September 2016 payment history showing 4 payments to Innovative Merchant Solutions (Intuit) totaling 
$500; 6 pp. of charge-back-debit advice letters dated May 2, 2012, from Intuit showing fraud; a divorce 
judgment order dated December 14, 2007; a payment history showing student loans are current; and 
poverty guidelines.   
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s August 25, 2014 
SCA. (Item 4). 
 
3 Item 4, page 34.  
 
4 Attached to FORM response.  
 
5 Item 3. 
 
6 Response to FORM, p. 13. 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b have also been resolved. Applicant attached bank 
statements to his response to the FORM, showing payment of $399.37 to the creditor at 
SOR ¶ 1.a on May 19, 2016. The same bank statements show a payment to the creditor 
at SOR ¶ 1.b of $145 on June 10, 2016. With respect to the delinquency alleged at SOR 
¶ 1.d, Applicant explained in his answer to the SOR that his company was the victim of 
credit-card fraud. Customers had used stolen credit cards to purchase products online 
through Applicant’s website store. Applicant’s company processed these credit cards 
through this creditor which purported to validate and verify the authenticity of his online 
payments. These credit cards were approved by VISA/MasterCard in March 2012. So, 
approximately $23,000 in products were sent out to the fraudulent customers. About two 
weeks later, Applicant learned that this creditor was implementing a charge-back 
against Applicant’s company for the $23,000 since it turned out that the credit cards 
were not valid.   
 
Applicant attached to his FORM response an August 31, 2016 letter from the 
creditor in SOR ¶ 1.d agreeing to accept payments of $100 per month starting in 
September 2016 to resolve this debt. He also attached email correspondence from the 
creditor, bank statements, and a payment history showing that $500 in payments had 
been made by the end of 2016 toward resolving this delinquency. This track record 
persuades me that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is being resolved.   
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant admitted to the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. They are also 
confirmed by his credit reports. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.7 Applicant has met that burden. All of the delinquent debts have been resolved.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;     
 
(c) the person has received, or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant endured a divorce, a business downturn, and his home-based business 
was the victim of fraud in early 2012. He struggled as his income was frequently below 
the poverty level. These conditions were beyond his control. He has demonstrated that 
he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has now paid off or made 
progress toward resolving all of the four delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
has met his burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are 
under control, and that his debts were incurred under circumstances unlikely to recur. 
The mitigating conditions enumerated above apply.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
                                                          
7 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline.  
 
Applicant’s finances no longer remain a security concern. There is sufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He has met 
his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts 
as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:             For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
7 
 
 
 
