 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01151 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant experienced financial difficulties due to circumstances largely beyond 
her control, but mitigated the concern by acting responsibly. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on June 29, 2015. On 
July 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant submitted her Answer to the SOR on July 16, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
September 21, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on December 19, 2016. On 
December 21, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
 
2 
 
Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for January 13, 2017. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through L were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 24, 2017. 
 
This case was adjudicated under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The 
DOD implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. 
This decision will be decided based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017. The 
outcome of this case would have been the same if decided based on the former AG.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old executive assistant currently employed by a defense 
contractor since January 2015. She completed one year of college. She divorced in 1998 
and has a 19-year-old son who currently resides with his father. She previously held a 
position of trust, however this is her first application for a security clearance. (GX 1; Tr. 
29-33.)  
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges 16 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$24,230, and a 1997 chapter 7 bankruptcy. The delinquent debts consist of: four 
judgments totaling $11,752; four medical accounts totaling $3,808; an $868 delinquent 
vehicle loan; and various consumer debts. In her Answer, Applicant admits the 
bankruptcy and three of the debts, and denies the remaining debts asserting that she 
paid, is paying, or has disputed eight of the debts. Her admissions are incorporated in my 
findings of fact. The delinquent debts are reflected in Applicant’s credit bureau reports 
(CBR) from March 2016 and July 2015. (GX 3; GX 4.)  
 
Applicant began experiencing financial difficulties while married, as a result of her 
husband’s excessive and irresponsible spending. He incurred substantial jointly-held debt 
in his and Applicant’s names, which led to the 1997 Chapter 7 bankruptcy and their 1998 
divorce. Following the divorce, Applicant moved back to her home state as a single 
parent, where she was unemployed for several months. In 2000, she began working for 
a defense contractor. She struggled financially, but was assisted and advised by her 
mother. When her mother passed away in 2005, Applicant lost her emotional and financial 
support. She moved to a more expensive area to be closer to her sister, who agreed to 
provide after-school-care for Applicant’s son. However, the after-school-care did not work 
out, and the increased cost-of-living and childcare expenses created even greater 
financial strain. In April 2013, she was laid off from her defense contracting job. (Tr. 33-
34.) 
 
In July 2013, Applicant incurred the expenses of moving to her current state of 
residence, drawn by a lower cost-of-living, subsidized after-school-care, and some family. 
She was unemployed from April until November 2013, which further strained her limited 
finances. She took the first job offered to her, at a reduced income, and was 
underemployed from November 2013 until January 2015, when she began working for 
her current employer. It then took Applicant about six months to reach financial stability. 
 
3 
 
(Tr. 34-37.) Applicant was a single parent for over 17 years, until about January 2016, 
when her son moved in with his father. Although Applicant pays monthly child support of 
$402, on which she is current, her overall monthly expenses are significantly lower. (Tr. 
28; Tr. 49.)  
 
Applicant is current on her previously $868 past-due vehicle loan (SOR ¶ 1.b), 
which will be paid off in March 2018. (AX A; Tr. 38-39.)   She paid the seven debts alleged 
in  SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, 1.i, 1.k, 1.o, 1.p and 1.q, totaling $9,797. (AX C; AX D; AX F; AX H; 
AX I; AX J; AX L; Answer; Tr. 36-46.) She has been repaying the $4,250 judgment (SOR 
¶ 1.n) through automatic $100 monthly payments since January 2015. (Tr. 43-45; AX G.) 
She successfully disputed the $1,607 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, and it has been removed 
from her credit report. (AX B.) She disputed the $1,726 debt (SOR ¶ 1.d) with the credit 
reporting agencies. (Tr. 54.) She contacted the creditors of the $569 debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.g and the $521 debt for her son’s medical treatment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h, and is 
awaiting documentation from the creditors to verify the accounts and arrange repayment. 
(Tr. 54-55; Tr. 51.) The $202 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.j) is owed by her husband for her 
son’s medical treatment. Applicant contacted the hospital and the collection agency and 
provided her husband’s insurance and contact information. (Answer; Tr. 27.)  
 
Applicant does not recognize the $2,275 judgment owed to a collection agency 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m and it remains unresolved. She disputes the $2,415 judgment owed 
to an apartment complex, stating that she followed the requisite protocol before moving 
out, the apartment complex retained her security deposit, and she was never contacted 
about owing any additional monies. (Tr. 41-43.) She will attempt to resolve this debt. (Tr. 
56.) 
 
Applicant has not incurred any recent delinquent debt, and lives within her means. 
(GX Tr. 47-50.) Her 2016 mid-year employment review shows that Applicant is an 
exemplary employee, and her 2015 review rated her a Performance Category 5 – 
Significantly Exceeds Expectations. (AX K.) She accepts responsibility for her past 
financial issues, and will repay the debts for which she is responsible. (Tr. 53; Tr. 59.) 
She was candid, sincere, and credible while testifying. 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
 
4 
 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 Applicant’s testimony, corroborated by the record evidence, establishes two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 However, a person can mitigate concerns about his ability to handle and safeguard 
classified information raised by his financial circumstances by establishing one or more 
of the mitigating conditions listed under the guideline. The relevant mitigating conditions 
in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties arose from circumstances largely beyond her 
control. Specifically, her former husband’s reckless spending habits caused significant 
joint-debt, resulting in bankruptcy and their divorce. Applicant was a single parent for 
nearly 17 years. Between April 2013 and January 2015, she was unemployed for four 
months, during which time she relocated, and was underemployed for thirteen months. 
Beginning in January 2015, she acted responsibly and in good faith by starting a 
repayment plan for the $4,250 judgment, bringing her vehicle loan current, paying seven 
SOR debts, disputing two debts, contacting three of her five remaining creditors. These 
actions resolved ten of the sixteen SOR debts, totaling $18,248, or more than 75% of the 
SOR debt. She lives within her means and has not incurred any recent delinquent debt. 
 
 “Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 
at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. 
ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The 
adjudicative guidelines do not require that a person make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
  
 The circumstances which led to Applicant’s indebtedness are unlikely to recur, and 
do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 
20(a) through 20(e) apply. Overall, she has addressed her debts in a responsible manner, 
and will continue to do so. Although her financial record is not perfect, she has 
implemented a reasonable plan to resolve her financial issues within her means. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but I have also 
considered the following: 
 
 Applicant was a single parent for almost 17 years. She has made extensive 
progress on implementing her plan to resolve her delinquent debts. She has received 
positive performance evaluations from her employer, and previously held a position of 
trust. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.q:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
