 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00298 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 6, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 11, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On June 9, 2016, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 5, 2015 (Answer), and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. In his Answer, he admitted all of the allegations with 
some explanations. The case was assigned to me on August 31, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 12, 
2016, scheduling the hearing for September 28, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 3, which were admitted 
 
2 
 
without objection. Despite my leaving the record open until October 28, 2016, Applicant 
has offered no exhibits. However, Applicant did testify on his own behalf. The record 
closed on October 28, 2016. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on 
October 7, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 45 years old. He has been employed with a Government contractor 
for six years. (TR at page 14 line 3 to page 16 line 5.)  He is divorced and has three 
children. (Id.)  Applicant attributes his present past-due indebtedness to periods of 
unemployment stretching from June of 2009 until December of 2010, and to his divorce 
(TR at page 16 line 16 to page 18 line 1, at page 18 lines 14~24, and GX 1 at pages 
11~16 and 20~21.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified 13 debts totaling approximately $36,167, and a Federal tax lien totaling about 
$13,498.  
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 1.a., 1.b., 1.e.~1.m.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to 11 creditors for past-
due debts totaling about $30,000. (TR at page 19 line 4 to page 20 line 8, and at page 
22 line 3 to page 27 line 10.)  Despite having been given one month to submit additional 
documentation regarding the status of these debts, Applicant has submitted nothing.  
These allegations are found against Applicant. 
 
 1.c. and 1.d.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor C for two past-due 
debts totaling about $218.  (TR at page 20 line 9 to page 22 line 2.)  He avers that he is 
making monthly payments of $45 towards these debts, but has submitted nothing in 
support of his averment.  These allegations are found against Applicant. 
 
 1.n.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to the Federal Government on a tax lien 
totaling about $13,498 for tax years 2009, 2010, and 2012. (TR at page 18 lines 2~10, 
and at page 27 line 16 to page 31 line 11.)  He avers that he is making monthly 
payments of $175 towards this lien, but has submitted nothing in support of his 
averment.  This allegation is found against Applicant. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
3 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
4 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt. His actions 
demonstrated both a history of not addressing his debt and an inability to do so. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Two Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant has significant past-due debts and a 
substantial Federal tax lien. He provided no documentation showing efforts to repay or 
otherwise resolve these debts. Furthermore, his behavior did not happen a long ago, 
but is continuing.  It does cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), and 20(d) are not mitigating. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
5 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.~n.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
