1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
-------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-01544 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
On August 18, 2015, Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 8, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns alleging facts that raise security concerns 
under Guidelines C and B.1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017.   
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 13, 2016. She answered the 
SOR in writing on July 18 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
2 
 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 1, 2017, and I 
received the case assignment on February 27, 2017.  
 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 27, 2017, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on March 14, 2017. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 3, 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A 
through J, without objection. 
 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 22, 2017. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR Subparagraph 1.a, and 2.a to 2.d. 
She denied SOR allegation Subparagraph 2.e. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 35 years old and divorced. She has one child who is 12 years old. 
Applicant was married and divorced from two U.S. citizens. She seeks a security 
clearance to obtain a linguist position with a U.S. government contractor. Applicant has 
a college degree in criminal justice. She served in the U.S. Army from 2002 to 2006 and 
received an Honorable Discharge. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen on June 
8, 2004. She was born in Romania and departed there at the age of 17. (Tr. 11-32, 52; 
Exhibits 1-3) 
 
 Applicant lived in Romania from 2013, after her second divorce, until she 
returned to the United States in May 2015. She did not find a worthwhile job situation in 
Romania in those years and sought more opportunity in the United States. While in 
Romania she had a low-paying job with a transportation company. Her son went with 
her to Romania and remained there until May 2016, when he returned to the United 
States. He is enrolled in school in Applicant’s town of residence (Subparagraph 2.c). 
Her son is a native-born U.S. citizen who is fluent in English and Romanian. He prefers 
the United States. When Applicant and her son lived in Romania they lived with her 
parents. Now Applicant and her son live in an apartment in the United States. (Tr. 32-
37, 43; Exhibits 1-3) 
 
 Applicant is a U.S. citizen, but presently is considered by Romania to be a dual 
U.S.-Romania citizen. She is willing to renounce her Romanian citizenship. She turned 
in her expired Romanian passport two years ago to her employer for destruction. While 
living in Romania from 2013 to 2015, she obtained a Romanian identity card she could 
use to open bank accounts and transact other business in Romania. She provided a 
copy of the card as part of the U.S. government background investigation. Applicant 
opened a Romanian bank account while she lived there so that she had an account into 
which she could deposit the child support money sent to her by her former husband. 
3 
 
She closed that account in 2015, when she returned to the United States 
(Subparagraph 2.e). (Tr. 38-43, 49; Exhibits 1-3)  
 
 While living in Romania she went with her parents and voted in the Romanian 
presidential election in November 2014 (Subparagraph 1.a). That was the only 
Romanian election in which she voted. She has voted in U.S. Federal and state 
elections since 2008. (Tr. 43, 60, 61; Exhibits 1-3) 
 
 Applicant’s father is a retired colonel in the Romanian Army. Her father attended 
the U.S. Army Armor School at Ft. Knox, Kentucky, and then served as a military staff 
member at the Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe (SHAPE) in Belgium for 
four years. Applicant attended high school in Belgium while her father was stationed 
there. Applicant submitted exhibits showing her father’s military record. He receives a 
military pension from the Romanian government. Applicant’s mother formerly worked in 
a bank in Romania but now is retired. Applicant also has a brother living and working in 
Romania. He is employed by a transportation company. All three of her family members 
are citizens of and residents in Romania (Subparagraphs 2, a, b, and d). Applicant 
speaks by telephone or email to her mother daily, her father weekly, and her brother 
monthly. (Tr. 44-65; Exhibits 1-3, A-I) 
  
 Applicant submitted a character reference letter from a former instructor at the 
university from which she obtained her criminal justice degree in the United States. The 
instructor wrote that Applicant was conscientious, hard-working, and an excellent critical 
thinker. She also describes Applicant as compassionate and fair-minded person, who is 
a good parent to her son. (Exhibit J) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself, the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
5 
 
(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country; 
 
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by 
any country other than the United States; 
 
(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; 
 
(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, 
position, or political office in a foreign government or military 
organization; and 
 
(2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in any way that conflicts with 
U.S. national security interests; 
 
(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country in violation of U.S. law; and 
 
(f) an act of expatriation from the United States such as declaration of 
intent to renounce U.S. citizenship, whether through words or actions. 
 
  Applicant may be a dual citizen of the United States and Romania, but she has 
surrendered her Romanian passport and considers herself only a U.S. citizen. Her son 
is a U.S. citizen. Her Romanian citizenship came from her birth 35 years ago in that 
country. Applicant reported and provided a copy of a Romanian identity card she used 
while after living there briefly after her second divorce. There is no evidence that she 
used her Romanian citizenship for financial advantage or acted in any way to indicate a 
preference for Romania over the United States. She has been a U.S. citizen since 2004. 
The evidence is insufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are described 
under AG ¶ 11. None are potentially applicable because there is no disqualifying 
condition that applies to Applicant. If any mitigating condition were to apply, then AG ¶ 
11 (a to f) would apply. The mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11 are: 
 
(a) the foreign citizenship is not in conflict with U.S. national security interests; 
 
(b) dual citizenship is based solely on parental citizenship or birth in a foreign 
country, and there is no evidence of foreign preference; 
 
(c) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce the foreign citizenship 
that is in conflict with U.S. national security interests; 
 
6 
 
(d) the exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen; 
 
(e) the exercise of the entitlements or benefits of foreign citizenship do not 
present a national security concern; 
 
(f) the foreign preference, if detected, involves a foreign country, entity, or 
association that poses a low national security risk; 
 
(g) civil employment or military service was authorized under U.S. law, or the 
employment or service was otherwise consented to as required by U.S. law; and 
 
(h) any potentially disqualifying activity took place after receiving the approval by 
the agency head or designee. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. AG ¶ 
7. a, b, e, and f are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
7 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest.  
 
  Applicant has three family members who are citizens of and resident in Romania, 
where she was born. Applicant is a U.S. citizen who left home at the age of 17 years. 
She has lived in the United States, or at military stations in other countries with her two 
husbands, until she returned to Romania in 2013 after her second divorce. In 2015, she 
returned to the United States to live and work. Her familial connections create a 
heightened risk of Romanian exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
duress because of her father’s military associations. Applicant had a bank account in 
Romania for two years. The amounts in the account were not specified. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant’s family members are Romanian citizens living in that country. Her 
parents are retired. Her younger brother works for a private company. Applicant’s father 
served in the SHAPE headquarters in the 1990s and trained with the U.S. Army. Even 
with her frequent telephone contact with her parents, their retired status and Applicant’s 
positive attitude toward the United States it is unlikely she will be placed in a situation 
8 
 
where she will have to choose between her family’s interests and Romania’s interests, 
and those of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) is established.  
 
There is no conflict of interest between Applicant’s dedication and affection for 
the United States and her family connections. She has demonstrated her loyalty and 
obligation to the United States by her U.S. Army service and her U.S. citizenship that 
she values over any connections to Romania and her family. AG ¶ 8(b) is established.  
 
The value of Applicant’s former bank account in Romania is so minimal that it is 
not a consideration in her foreign preference evaluation. She closed the account and 
prefers the United States for residence and the raising of her son. There is no conflict 
because of any financial association Applicant may have or had had and it cannot be 
used to manipulate, influence, or pressure the individual. AG ¶ 8(f) is established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines C and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant’s 
testimony about her history and family situation makes it clear she is dedicated to the 
United States and prefers it over her country of birth, Romania. She left Romania when 
she was 17 and now is 35 years old. Her son is a U.S. citizen. She is dedicated to 
working for the United States and living in it. There is no issue of any preference for 
Romania or the possibility of any adverse foreign influence on Applicant, based on her 
life’s work and performance to date. Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States due to her longstanding ties here, particularly with 
her son.  
9 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated Foreign Preference and the Foreign Influence security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Philip S. Howe 
Administrative Judge 
