 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00830 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Cathryn E. Young, Esq. 
 
 
June 28, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence concerns raised by his fiancée, father, and 
mother, who are citizens and residents in Ukraine. He also mitigated the foreign 
preference concerns raised by his exercise of Ukrainian citizenship by traveling on his 
Ukrainian passport. His request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 21, 2015, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 11, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines B and C.1 
The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
AG, effective June 8, 2017. Both attorneys were notified by email dated June 12, 2017, that the new AG 
would be applied to this case. They were given the opportunity to reopen the record to submit additional 
documentation. Neither party chose to exercise that option. The email correspondence is marked HE II. 
 
2 
 
government, DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 16, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on January 17, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on January 17, 2017, scheduling the hearing for February 6, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
admitted without objection, and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I for Administrative Notice. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf. Applicant presented nine documents, which I marked as 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through I. Department Counsel had no objections to AE A 
through AE I, and they were admitted. The record was left open until May 8, 2017, for 
receipt of additional documentation. On May 8, 2017, Applicant submitted one exhibit, 
marked AE J. Department Counsel had no objection to AE J, and it was admitted. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 14, 2017. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Ukraine. Department Counsel provided a five-page summary of the facts, 
supported by three Government documents pertaining to Ukraine, identified as HE I. The 
documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take administrative notice 
of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters of 
general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of 
Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 2.a. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings 
of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed in his current position as an electronic engineer since 2016. He seeks a security 
clearance for the first time, in connection with a job offer from another employer. He is 
divorced from his first wife, a natural-born U.S. citizen, and has no children. (Tr. 25). 
  
 Applicant was born in Ukraine. He first visited the United States in 2006, when he 
studied here for six months on a student exchange program. He returned to the United 
States in May 2007 to attend college. He studied first at a community college, and then a 
university. He graduated in 2011 with a Master’s of Science in Electrical Engineering. (AE 
G.) During his schooling, he decided that he loved the opportunities available in the United 
States and he applied to become a naturalized citizen. He became a U.S. citizen on 
January 9, 2013. He does not plan to return to Ukraine to live, as there are no job 
opportunities and “no future” for him there. (Tr. 17-22, 43.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant owns two properties in the United States. He owns a duplex in which he 
resides, and he leases the other unit in that building to tenants. He is also rehabilitating a 
second property and plans to lease it out when that work is completed. He has a 401K 
savings plan, invests in U.S. stocks, and has bank accounts in the United States. He 
estimated his net worth is between $200,000 and $300,000, but should increase to 
approximately $700,000 once the rental unit is completed. He has no assets outside of 
the United States. He is in good standing on all of his financial accounts listed in the 
record credit report. (GE 3; AE D; AE E; AE F; Tr. 23-24, 64-65.) 
 
 Applicant acquired a U.S. passport, which was issued on January 23, 2014. He 
continued to possess a valid Ukrainian passport, issued in July 2012 (prior to his 
naturalization as a U.S. citizen), until it was destroyed in May 2017. (AE J.) Applicant used 
that passport once in April 2015 when entering Brazil, because visas were not required 
to travel to Brazil for travelers using Ukrainian passports, but were required for U.S. 
travelers. This travel occurred prior to his application for a security clearance. Applicant 
travels internationally frequently, and he has used his U.S. passport for all other travel. 
Further, in February 2016, Applicant started a lengthy application process to formally 
renounce his Ukrainian citizenship. He intends to complete that process when the formal 
procedural steps permit it. (AE A; AE B; AE C; Tr. 44-55, 66.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother and father are citizens and residents of Ukraine. They are both 
65 years old and retired. They worked the majority of their careers for a privately-owned 
beer manufacturer. After they both were laid off from that job, his father opened a private 
transportation business, and his mother worked in Italy as a housekeeper.2 However, they 
are not currently working. They support themselves by small pensions from the Ukrainian 
government. Applicant testified they both have been granted visas to permit them to travel 
to the United States. Applicant speaks to his mother by phone on a weekly basis, and his 
father annually. His parents visit him in the United States. Neither of his parents are 
affiliated with the Ukrainian government, and they “literally hate Russia.” (Tr. 26-35, 60-
63, 70-71.) 
 
 Applicant is engaged to marry a Ukrainian citizen, who resides in Ukraine. He met 
her three years ago, while visiting his parents in Ukraine. She runs an on-line clothing 
store. They communicate by text approximately every other day, and speak by phone 
once per week. They see each other approximately every three months, at different 
destinations around the world including Italy, Spain, and Georgia. His fiancée’s parents 
are deceased, although she has ties to her grandmother and aunt, who are also citizens 
and residents of Ukraine. In July 2016, Applicant applied for a fiancée visa for her to join 
him in the United States. They intend to marry shortly after her visa is granted. She hopes 
to apply to become a naturalized U.S. citizen as soon as she is able. (AE I; Tr. 36-43, 47, 
62.) 
 
 Applicant presented five letters of recommendation from colleagues and friends. 
He is known as an exceptional team member that always exceeds expectations. He is 
known as a person of “exceptional character, superior problem solving skills and 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s father also completed compulsory military service in the early 1980s by joining the local police 
force for a brief period of time. (Tr. 28-29.) 
 
4 
 
creativity, and a high degree of professionalism.” One letter highlighted Applicant’s 
philanthropic and community spirit in helping to raise funds for autism awareness. His 
former roommate wrote Applicant “was always interested in American culture, loved 
American Holidays and tried his best to assimilate and become a productive part of this 
country.” (AE H.) 
  
 Ukraine is a republic with a semi-presidential political system. The eastern part of 
the country is controlled by Russian-backed separatists. Russia occupies Crimea. The 
United States strongly condemns the Russian military occupation of Crimea and Russia’s 
ongoing efforts to destabilize eastern Ukraine. Significant human rights violations have 
resulted due to the ongoing conflict. Individuals, including U.S. citizens, have been 
threatened, detained, or kidnapped for hours or days after being stopped at separatist 
checkpoints in eastern Ukraine. (HE I.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
 
5 
 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of 
the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG 
¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology. 
 
  Applicant’s mother, father, and fiancée are citizens and residents of Ukraine. His 
ties to his family and fiancée are strong. It is possible that his connections to them could 
create a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive 
 
6 
 
information and his desire to help his loved ones in Ukraine. AG ¶¶ 7(a) requires 
substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required to raise one of 
these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a 
risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign 
government. I am satisfied that the activities of insurgent groups and Russian forces, 
including the risks of kidnapping and the human rights violations in the Ukraine, are 
sufficient to establish the “heightened risk” in AG ¶ 7(a) and the potential conflict of 
interest in AG ¶ 7(b). The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, including: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
Applicant has lived in the United States for ten years, which equates to one-third 
of his life. He has adopted American customs, holidays, and an entrepreneurial spirit. He 
engages in philanthropic endeavors in his local community. He owns property in his local 
community and is developing a real estate business there. He has investments in U.S. 
stocks. He sees no future for himself in Ukraine. He has no assets in Ukraine. His parents 
and fiancée are the only ties he has to Ukraine. He hopes that his fiancée will join him in 
the U.S. soon. In this case, there is no concern about a potential conflict of interest, 
because the Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United 
States show that he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United 
States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the fact 
that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not disqualifying 
without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at concealment. 
The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or privilege of 
foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain recognition of a 
foreign citizenship. 
 
 
7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10: 
 
(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country; 
 
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by any 
country other than the United States; 
 
(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; 
 
(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, 
position, or political office in a foreign government or military 
organization; and 
 
(2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in any way that conflicts with U.S. 
national security interests; 
 
(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country in violation of U.S. law; and 
 
(f) an act of expatriation from the United States such as declaration of intent 
to renounce U.S. citizenship, whether through words or actions. 
 
  Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and Ukraine. He exercised his 
Ukrainian citizenship when he used his Ukrainian passport to enter Brazil. However, 
possession and use of a foreign passport does not, in and of itself, raise a security 
concern under these guidelines. Further, it should be noted that Applicant has destroyed 
his Ukrainian passport and has formally started the process to renounce his Ukrainian 
citizenship. The evidence is insufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
8 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a distinguished employment history and is respected by those that 
submitted letters on his behalf. He performs well at his job. While he was born in Ukraine, 
he is an American by choice. He has been residing in the United States for the past 10 
years. He has developed strong bonds to his community here. All of his assets are in the 
United States. He can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United 
States due to his longstanding ties here.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a(1):   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.a(2):   For Applicant 
 
  
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
