 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00862 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Chester H. Morgan, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline G, 
alcohol consumption, and Guideline J, criminal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 27, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines G, and J.  
DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 27, 2016. He requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 7, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 17, 
2017, with a hearing date of February 22, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. I marked Department Counsel’s exhibit list as hearing 
exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through C which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Post-hearing, Applicant submitted AE D, which 
was admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 1, 
2017. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to conform to the 
expected evidence. The specific amendment consisted of substituting the number 
“2014” for the number “2013” in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant had no objection to this 
amendment and the motion was granted.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of all the evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He is married and has two children, ages two and 
eight. Since June 2011, he has worked for various defense contractors. He has worked 
for his current employer since August 2016. He is working towards his bachelor’s 
degree. He served in the Marine Corps for eight years from 2003 to 2011, including two 
combat deployments to Iraq. He was honorably discharged in the paygrade of E-5. His 
wife was also a combat medic. In his first civilian contractor job, he deployed to 
Afghanistan for over two years (2011-2013). He held a security clearance while in the 
Marine Corps.2   
  
 Applicant’s SOR alleges: (1) in October 2007, being arrested, charged, and 
convicted of driving under the influence (DUI); (2) in October 2009, being arrested, 
charged, and convicted of DUI; (3) in January 2014, being arrested, charged, and 
convicted of DUI, and being on probation until October 2016. The above stated conduct 
also amounting to criminal conduct concerns. 
  
 Applicant fully admits the three DUI incidents. He did however, produce evidence 
that he was not the driver at the time of the 2009 arrest, but rather accepted 
responsibility to keep a friend out of trouble. Applicant’s first two DUIs occurred after he 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 8. 
 
2 Tr. at 21, 24, 33, 36, 59-60; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
returned from his deployments to Iraq. His first deployment was to Ramadi and his 
second was to Fallujah, both those locations experienced significant combat action 
during his time there. Upon his return, he did not handle his personal circumstances 
well and drank to intoxication and then drove his vehicle. He was later diagnosed by the 
VA with having post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). He was given a 50% disability 
rating because of the disorder. He had not been diagnosed with PTSD at the time of his 
first two DUIs. He fulfilled all the court-ordered counseling and course work.3  
 
 Applicant’s third DUI occurred after he returned from a civilian deployment in late 
2013. He was called home suddenly when his wife, herself a combat veteran, 
expressed suicidal thoughts. Once he returned and got his wife’s situation under 
control, he once again did not properly handle his personal issues and wound up 
arrested for drinking and driving a third time. Among the consequences he faced from 
this conviction were two months in jail (although he was permitted to leave jail during 
the work day to continue his job), having an interlock placed on his car for two years 
(since removed), being placed on probation for two years (since successfully 
completed), and incurring approximately $11,000 worth of fines and fees.4   
 
 Applicant credibly testified that he knew he had to make changes in his life after 
the third DUI. He completed over 146 hours of alcohol education and therapy. He 
enrolled in a VA inpatient program and successfully completed it. He was exposed to 
random urinalysis testing and successfully passed each test. He completed his terms of 
probation as acknowledged by his probation officer. He has remained abstinent from 
alcohol for over three years. He accepts that he cannot drink alcohol in the future. He 
continues to receive professional counseling for his PTSD and he voluntarily attends 
alcohol counseling sessions, which include random urine testing. He has not had 
another alcohol-related incident since the January 2014 DUI. He has a current valid 
driver’s license. His wife is supportive of his abstinence.5 
 
 Applicant’s past job performance, as reflected by a 2015-2016 appraisal, was 
ranked at the highest level, which was “exceeds expectations.” Additionally, three 
former coworkers described him as professional, trustworthy, and someone who 
demonstrated outstanding leadership.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 21, 23, 37-40, 44-45; AE C-D; Answer. 
 
4 Tr. at 25-27, 49-50; Answer. 
 
5 Tr. at 27-33, 35, 23, 37-40, 44-45, 59; AE C; Answer. 
 
6 AE A-B; Answer. 
 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Four are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 Applicant’s drinking history, which includes three DUI arrests, meets the 
conditions set forth in AG ¶¶ 22(a) and (c).  
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for alcohol consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and especially considered the following: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Even though he has not been diagnosed as either an alcohol abuser or as 
alcohol dependent, Applicant realized after his third DUI in 2014 that he needed to get 
help. He entered inpatient treatment and followed that up with outpatient counseling. He 
is also being treated by the VA for PTSD resulting from his combat experiences. He 
 
6 
 
 
satisfied all of his probation conditions and has a valid driver’s license. He has been 
alcohol abstinent for three years and has not had any further alcohol-related incidents. 
He changed the circumstances of his life and has seen the benefit of those changes. 
His VA counselor deems it unlikely that he would return to using alcohol to manage his 
stress. His character references and his employment appraisal support that he is 
professional, trustworthy, and an outstanding leader. I find that sufficient time has 
passed since his last alcohol-related incident and the incidents no longer cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment in view of his changed lifestyle. 
I find both AG ¶¶ 23(a) and (d) apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) individual is still on probation. 
 
Applicant was charged and convicted of three DUI offenses. He is no longer on 
probation. I find that only AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
7 
 
 
 The same rationale that supported application of mitigating factors under the 
alcohol consumption guideline also applies here. Both AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered Applicant’s age, 
honorable combat military service, his commitment to alcohol abstinence, his treatment 
for PTSD, work appraisal, and his character references. I am convinced that Applicant 
learned his lesson from his past DUIs and is committed to abstinence in the future, 
which will also avoid future criminal conduct.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption, and Guideline J, criminal conduct. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
