                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  16-01878           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:  Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding her financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of Case
On September 15, 2016, Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 26, 2016, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on December 21, 2016, and was scheduled for hearing on
March 8, 2017. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-
5). Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and three exhibits (AE A-C). The transcript
(Tr.) was received on March 20, 2017.  
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit her the opportunity to supplement the record with documentation of her payments
under the installment agreement she made with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in
2015. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted 21 days to supplement the record,
Department Counsel was afforded two days to respond. Within the time permitted by the
extension, Applicant did not supplement the record. In response to my inquiries, she
provided updated summaries and transcripts of her IRS installment payments and
account balances covering tax years 2007-2009, 2011, and 2013. Applicant’s
submissions were received on May 12, 2017, and admitted without objection as AE D.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly is indebted to the IRS for (a) delinquent
taxes of $18,336 for tax years 2007-2009, 2011, and 2013, and (b) for a tax lien entered
in February 2011 for $7,832. Allegedly, Applicant’s delinquent federal taxes remain
unpaid.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the obligations with
explanations. She claimed to have a payment plan in place with the IRS and is making 
all of her monthly tax payments on time.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 61-year-old electronics technician for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in September 1973 and divorced in January 1976. (GE 1) She
remarried in February 1981, separated initially in 2004, reconciled for a month before
separating again the same year. (GE 1; Tr. 26-27, 32-33) Applicant and her husband
reconciled again in 2008, a short time before her husband suffered a heart attack that
placed him on permanent disability. (Tr. 24, 32-33) She has one adult child and one
stepchild from her first marriage. (GE 1) 
Applicant attended college classes between January 2004 and May 2006; she
earned no degree or diploma. (GE 1) She reported no military service.
2
Applicant has worked for her current employer as an electronics technician since
July 2011. (GEs 1-2) Contemporaneously with her full-time employment with her current
employer, she has worked on a part-time basis with a non-DOD employer in an
engineering support position. (GEs 1-2)  Between January 2005 and January 2013, she
was self-employed as a home inspector representative. (GE 1) 
Applicant’s finances
Following her separation from her current husband, Applicant ceased filing her
federal tax returns on a timely basis. (Tr. 27-28) For tax years 2004, 2007-2009, 2011,
and 2013 she obtained  automatic extensions but failed to file her returns within the times
required by law. At some undetermined date, she filed all of her back federal returns
together without a valid extension. (Tr. 27-28) 
IRS transcripts covering tax years 2004, 2007-2009, 2011, and 2013 reveal no late
filings of her federal tax returns or penalties assessed for late filing of tax returns for the
years in question. (AE D) Each of the transcripts for the covered years recited tax
“information from the return or as adjusted,” without any taxpayer filing confirmations or
dates of filing. (AE D) Applicant’s acknowledged late filings for certain of the tax years in
issue cannot be verified from the documented evidence in the record. 
Because Applicant did not list or disclose her multiple failures to timely file her
federal tax returns for the years in issue in the Electronic Questionnaires for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) she completed in February 2015, or in the interview
she later submitted to with an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) in June 2015, filing dates could not be readily checked and verified by the
Government. (GEs 1-2) Not until she was asked about her filing of her federal tax returns
for the years in issue (i.e., 2007-2009, 2011, and 2013) at hearing did Applicant disclose
her multiple failures to timely file them. Without more information about when and how
she filed her federal tax returns for the covered years, filing confirmations and filing dates
cannot be verified.
Between 2004 and 2013, Applicant accumulated delinquent federal tax debts with
the IRS for tax years 2004, 2007-2009, 2011, and 2013. (GEs 1-5 and AEs B-D)) These
reported delinquent taxes totaled $18,336 according to recent credit reports. Besides
these reported delinquent federal taxes, Applicant incurred an IRS tax lien in February
2011 in the amount of $7,832 (years covered not specified).
In June 2015, Applicant entered into an installment agreement that covered tax
years 2004, 2007-2009, 2011, and 2013. (AEs C-D) Under the terms of her agreement
she was required to make monthly payments of $80, beginning in September 2015. (AE
C; Tr. 30-31) Beginning in August 2017, her monthly tax payments are scheduled to
increase to $347 a month. (Tr. 22) Applicant’s payment records document her regular
payments (varying between $50 and $80 a month) made between September 2015 and
February 2017, and totaling $1,780 to date. (AE C-D) Whether she can handle the
3
increased monthly payments with her income resources from her employment and her
husband’s disability income is unclear. 
IRS transcripts confirm that Applicant currently owes no more back taxes for the
2004 tax year. (AEs C-D) Still, the transcripts reflect that the aggregate balance of taxes
owed for the remaining tax years covered by Applicant’s installment agreement for tax
years 2007-2009, 2011, and 2013 has increased to a reported $20,939. More federal
taxes could be owed for previous years covered by the federal tax lien entered against
Applicant in 2011. 
Pressed to identify the tax years covered by the federal tax lien filed in February
2011 for $7,832, Applicant could not identify the covered years. (GE 2; Tr. 34-37) With
her increased monthly payments beginning in August 2017 under her installment
agreement, Applicant could begin to see reductions in the running balance on her taxes
owed for tax years 2007-2009, 2011, and 2013, but only if she is able to sustain her
monthly payments currently and under the upwardly revised payment table scheduled to
begin in August 2017. Amounts owing on other tax years covered by the federal tax lien
entered against Applicant in February 2011 remain unidentified, but are likely covered by
her installment agreement.  Because Applicant did not provide any budget or evidence of
financial counseling, her ability to sustain her IRS payments that are scheduled to
increase substantially to $347 a month in August 2017 cannot be determined with any
reasonable degree of accuracy.  
Endorsements 
Applicant is well regarded by her company president and facility security officer
(FSO). He credited her with being an exemplary employee who consistently performs
above and beyond the call of duty. (AE A) He characterized her as a team player with a
strong work ethic. With his business experience, her manager considered himself a good
judge of character. (AE A) He found Applicant to exhibit qualities of virtue, honesty, and
respect.
    P   o  l i c  i e  s     
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” 
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
4
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
5
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of incurring delinquent
federal taxes for tax years 2007-2009, 2011, and 2013 and other federal taxes covered
by a 2011 federal tax lien. To date, Applicant has produced documented payments of
$1,780 towards the satisfaction of a current balance owing of $20,939 for the tax years
covered by her installment agreement and nothing verifiable for the other years covered
by the federal tax lien entered against Applicant in 2011.  
While the taxes covered by the 2011 federal tax lien are likely covered by her
installment agreement, this is by no means certain. Applicant’s incurred delinquent
federal tax debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of
the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent federal tax debts, merit only partial 
application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
6
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances.” While Applicant’s credible testimony of her
husband’s heart attack and ensuing disability warrants some application of MC ¶ 20(b),
she provided no probative evidence of financial hardships that would justify her failing to
address her acknowledged federal tax liabilities in whole or in part before initiating the
application process for a security clearance in February 2015.
To date, Applicant has made some inroads on meeting her federal tax payment
obligations under the installment agreement she has with the IRS. But her payment
track record is still very recent and modest in payments credited to the $20,939 balance
that continues to accrue interest. And she still has not provided any verifiable
explanations of tax liabilities owed or resolved for the tax years covered by the 2011
federal tax lien entered against her. 
Because she has not developed a sufficient track record for repaying her federal
taxes owed under her IRS installment agreement, or provided verifiable explanations of
whether or not the taxes covered by the federal tax lien entered against her in 2011 are
incorporated in her installment agreement, application of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” is
very limited as well. Prospects for her sustaining her scheduled payments under her
installment agreement (both currently and under the revised repayment schedule
beginning in August 2017) without a supporting budget and evidence of financial
counseling are uncertain and difficult to gauge.
Applicant’s modest track record of repayment actions taken with her taxes owed
for past years and covered by her 2015 installment agreement and 2011 tax lien (if not
previously incorporated in her installment agreement) with the known resources
available to her prevent her from meeting the Appeal Board’s requirements for
demonstrating financial stability. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21 2008); see
ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1,
1999).   
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant’s limited attention devoted to
addressing her federal tax returns and payment obligations before completing her e-QIP 
reflect poorly on her judgment and willingness to follow IRS rules and regulations. While
her failure to timely file her federal tax returns until at least 2014 is not alleged in the
SOR, her delinquent filings may be considered under the whole-person concept when
evaluating her motives and overall whole-person judgment, trustworthiness, and
reliability. See ISCR Case No. 12-04554 at 2, Note 1 (App. Bd. July 25 2004)  
Timing of filing federal and state tax returns in DOHA proceedings is critical to an
assessment of an applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in following
rules and guidelines necessary for those seeking access to classified information. See
7
ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5
(App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015) 
The favorable impressions Applicant has forged with her manager are notable
and worthy of considerable praise and encouragement. They are not enough at this
time, however, to overcome security concerns associated with her history of failing to
file her federal tax returns for the years in issue (i.e., 2007-2009, 2011, and 2013) or
establish a stronger track record of paying her federal taxes as required by law. More
time is needed for Applicant to demonstrate her reliability and trustworthiness in
meeting IRS laws and regulations governing tax filings and payments of taxes owed. 
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s tax filing and
payment delinquencies, her actions to date in addressing her finances are insufficient to
meet mitigation requirements imposed by the guideline governing his finances.
Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b of Guideline F.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.b:                       Against Applicant
Conclusio  n  s                            
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
9
