 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02000 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jacob Ranish, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign preference security concerns, but she did not 
mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence) and Guideline C (foreign preference). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 8, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 7, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 24, 
 
2 
 
2017, scheduling the hearing for May 19, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 31, 2017.  
  
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
New AG  
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG under the Directive.1 
Accordingly, I have applied the June 2017 AG.2 However, because the September 2006 
AG were in effect on the date of the hearing, I have also considered the September 
2006 AG. Having considered both versions of the AG, I conclude that my decision 
would have been the same had I applied the September 2006 AG. 
 
Motion to Withdraw SOR ¶ 2.a 
 
 Applicant’s counsel moved to dismiss SOR ¶ 2.a on the basis that it would be 
moot under the June 2017 AG. Department Counsel objected, arguing that the 
September 2006 AG were still in effect, SOR ¶ 2.a presented foreign preference 
concerns under both the September 2007 and June 2017 AG, and Applicant could 
present evidence of mitigation. I denied the motion.3  
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted in evidence without objection. The 
Government’s exhibit list was appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through L, which were 
admitted in evidence without objection. After the hearing, the record was reopened at 
Applicant’s request and without objection for additional documentation. Applicant 
submitted documentation that was marked as AE M and admitted without objection.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Russia. The request was not admitted in evidence but was appended to the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The facts administratively noticed are summarized in 
the Findings of Fact, below.  
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security AG, 
which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for initial or continued access to 
classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability). 
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Tr. at 7-8. 
 
 
3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a - 1.h and 2.b, and denied SOR 
allegation ¶ 2.a.4  
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old training manager employed by a defense contractor 
since September 2000. She has never held a DOD security clearance. She obtained a 
high-school diploma in the United States in 1995, a bachelor’s and master’s degree 
from U.S. universities in 2000 and 2005, and a master certificate in July 2008. She is 
married to a native-born U.S. citizen, and has an adult stepchild and two children who 
are also native-born U.S. citizens. She owns three properties in the United States, 
consisting of her residential home that she has owned since 2012, and two investment 
properties.5 
 
 Applicant was born in Russia. She graduated from high-school in Russia, then 
immigrated to the United States in 1994 as an exchange student. After completing one 
year at a U.S. high-school, she obtained a U.S. high-school diploma. She obtained a 
work visa in 2000, became a permanent U.S. resident in 2007, and was naturalized as a 
U.S. citizen and obtained a U.S. passport in 2011.6  
 
 Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Russia. She is a 69-year-old 
retired teacher. She receives a pension and social security benefits in Russia of $200 
monthly. After Applicant’s first stepfather died, Applicant provided $50,000 in financial 
support to her mother and half-brother between 2001 and 2015. Since 2015, Applicant 
has sent her mother around $2,000 as gifts. Applicant stated that her mother and 
stepfather support themselves through farming. Applicant speaks with her mother 
weekly to biweekly. Applicant’s mother also visits Applicant in the United States once 
every two years, at Applicant’s expense, and last visited in 2016. Applicant last traveled 
to Russia in 2010, with her husband, mother-in-law, and eldest daughter, during which 
time they stayed with Applicant’s mother and father. Applicant stated that her mother is 
unaware she is seeking a DOD security clearance.7  
 
 Through Applicant’s sponsorship, Applicant’s mother has held a U.S. green card 
since 2011. Applicant stated that her mother and half-brother plan on moving to the 
United States once her half-brother’s green card, whom Applicant also sponsored in 
2011, is approved. Applicant indicated that her mother recently moved into her half-
brother’s apartment, as she and Applicant’s stepfather are heading towards divorce. 
Applicant purchased her mother a one-way ticket to the United States, and her mother 
plans on using it after her mother sells her half-brother’s apartment.8  
                                                          
4 Applicant’s response to the SOR.  
 
5 Tr. at 17-76; GE 1; AEs A, B, E-G, J. 
 
6 Tr. at 17-76; GE 1; AEs A, L. 
 
7 Tr. at 17-76; GE 1. 
 
8 Tr. at 17-76; GE 1; AE M. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s stepfather is a citizen and resident of Russia. He is Applicant’s 
second stepfather, and her mother’s third husband. Applicant’s mother met him in 2003, 
when she was ill, and married him in 2013. He is 70 years old and retired from the KGB. 
Applicant stated that she is unaware of his duties when he was in the KGB, and whether 
he receives any retirement benefits from the KGB. As previously noted, Applicant stated 
that her stepfather and mother support themselves through farming. Applicant met him 
twice, in 2000 and 2008; Applicant did not see her stepfather when she last visited 
Russia in 2010. She speaks to him around three times yearly to annually, during the 
holidays. Applicant stated that she is not close to her stepfather. As previously noted, 
Applicant indicated that her mother and stepfather are heading towards divorce.9   
 
 Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of Russia. Applicant’s mother and 
father divorced when Applicant was a toddler. He is a 69-year-old retired contractor. 
Applicant believes he receives a pension, though she is unaware of the details. 
Applicant stated that her father owns land in Russia, and he and her stepmother support 
themselves through farming. Applicant speaks with him monthly, and she last saw him 
in 2014 when he visited her in the United States at her expense. Applicant and her 
family also stayed with her father during Applicant’s 2010 trip to Russia. Applicant 
stated that her father is unaware she is seeking a DOD security clearance.10  
 
 Applicant’s stepmother is a citizen and resident of Russia. She is a 70-year-old 
homemaker. She has been married to Applicant’s father since Applicant was a toddler. 
Applicant stated that she does not have a relationship with her stepmother. Applicant 
speaks to her monthly to bi-annually, during the holidays, and Applicant last saw her 
stepmother during Applicant’s 2010 trip to Russia. She is unaware Applicant is seeking 
a DOD security clearance.11 
 
 Applicant’s half-brother is a citizen and resident of Russia. He is the son of 
Applicant’s mother and deceased stepfather. He is 28 years old and owns a company in 
Russia. Applicant is unsure whether he needs a business license from the Russian 
government to operate his company. He has never served in the Russian military. He is 
not married and does not have any children. Applicant speaks to him weekly to bi-
monthly, and she last saw him during her 2010 trip to Russia. Applicant stated that she 
has a good relationship with her half-brother. As previously noted, Applicant provided 
about $50,000 in financial support to her mother and half-brother between 2001 and 
2015. Since 2015, Applicant has not sent her half-brother any money. Applicant applied 
for a U.S. green card for her half-brother in 2011, and the application is currently 
pending review. Applicant indicated that he intends on moving to the United States once 
his green card is approved. He is unaware Applicant is seeking a DOD security 
clearance.12   
                                                          
9 Tr. at 17-76; GE 1; AE M. 
 
10 Tr. at 17-76; GE 1. 
 
11 Tr. at 17-76; GE 1. 
 
12 Tr. at 17-76; GE 1. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s stepsister is a citizen and resident of Russia. She is the daughter of 
Applicant’s father and stepmother. She is a 32-year-old cashier. She was previously 
married from 2003 to 2008, has two or three children, and previously lived with 
Applicant’s father and stepmother. Applicant stated that she does not have a 
relationship with her stepsister. Applicant last saw her stepsister during her 2010 trip to 
Russia, and talks to her primarily by text monthly or during holidays. She is unaware 
Applicant is seeking a DOD security clearance.13  
 
 Applicant’s two stepbrothers, ages 46 and 43, are citizens and residents of 
Russia. They are her stepfather’s children from a previous relationship. Applicant stated 
that she has never met or spoken to them. She believes one stepbrother works in 
construction, and is unaware of the other stepbrother’s employment. She is unaware if 
they are married or if they have any children.14 
 
 Applicant surrendered her Russian passport, issued to her on June 2014 with an 
expiration date of June 2024, to her security officer in December 2014. She did so 
because she understood from her employer that she was required to in order to apply 
for a DOD security clearance. Upon doing so, Applicant no longer considered herself a 
Russian citizen. Applicant still had in her possession a Russian identification card 
issued to her, as required, by the Russian government when she was 20 years old. She 
held on to the card because she did not understand it had any security implications. She 
never used it after immigrating to the United States in 1994. She destroyed the card in 
January 2016, and has no intentions of reapplying for another one.15   
 
 Applicant applied for and obtained Russian citizenship and a Russian passport 
for her second daughter in December 2014. Applicant previously applied for and 
obtained Russian citizenship and a Russian passport for her elder daughter in 2012. 
Applicant explained that she did so for travel convenience. She stated that neither of her 
daughters have traveled to Russia on their Russian passports. She indicated that she 
was unaware her actions would have any security implications, and is willing to have the 
Russian passports destroyed.16 
     
 Applicant stated that she is loyal to the United States. She lived in Russia for 17 
years, but has lived in the United States for 23 years. Her entire life is in the United 
States. She received her formal education in the United States and has worked for the 
same company for many years. Her family is in the United States, and she would not do 
anything to place them in jeopardy. She is a registered U.S. voter, and has never voted 
in Russia. All of her financial interests are in the United States, and she has none in 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 17-76; GE 1. 
  
14 Tr. at 17- 76; GE 1. 
 
15 Tr. at 17-76; GE 1; AEs A, I, K, L. 
 
16 Tr. at 17-76; GE 1. 
 
 
6 
 
Russia. She is extensively involved in her community in the United States. She does not 
plan to live in Russia in the future.17 
 
Russia 
 
 In 2016, Russia continues to be one of the leading state intelligence threats to 
U.S. interests. Russian intelligence services continue to target U.S. and allied personnel 
with access to sensitive computer network information. Russia remains one of the top 
two most aggressive and capable collectors of sensitive U.S. economic information and 
technologies, particularly in cyberspace. Non-cyberspace collection methods include 
targeting of U.S. visitors overseas, especially if the visitors are assessed as having 
access to sensitive information. One of the two trends that may increase Russia’s threat 
over the next several years is that many Russian immigrants with advanced technical 
skills, who work for leading U.S. companies, may be increasingly targeted for 
recruitment by Russian intelligence services.  
 
 Russia’s extensive and sophisticated intelligence operations are motivated by 
Russia’s high dependence on natural resources, the need to diversity its economy, and 
the belief that the global economic system is titled toward the United States at Russia’s 
expense. As a result, Russia’s highly capable intelligence services are using HUMINT, 
cyber, and other operations to collect economic information and technology to support 
Russia’s economic development and security. In June 2010, the U.S. Department of 
Justice announced the arrests of ten alleged secret agents for carrying out long-term, 
“deep-cover” assignments on behalf of Russia. Within weeks, all ten defendants pled 
guilty in federal court, and were immediately expelled from the United States.  
 
 Russia continues to take information warfare to a new level, working to fan anti-
U.S. and anti-Western sentiment both within Russia and globally. Moscow will continue 
to publish false and misleading information in an effort to discredit the West, construe or 
distort events that threaten Russia’s image, undercut consensus on Russia, and defend 
Russia’s role as a responsible and indispensable global power. 
 
 The most significant human rights problems of 2015 in Russia involved the 
following: restrictions on the ability to choose one’s government and freedoms of 
expression, assembly, association, and the media, as well as internet freedoms; political 
prosecutions and administration of justice; and government discrimination against racial, 
ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities. Other problems include allegations of torture 
and excessive force by law enforcement officials that sometimes led to deaths, 
executive branch pressure on the judiciary, electoral irregularities, and extensive official 
corruption. The government failed to take adequate steps to prosecute or punish most 
officials who committed abuses, resulting in a climate of impunity. 
 
 Although Russian law prohibits officials from entering a private residence, except 
in cases prescribed by federal law or when authorized by a judicial decision, 
government officials entered residences and premises without warrants. In addition, 
                                                          
17 Tr. at 17- 76; AEs A-J. 
 
7 
 
while Russian law prohibits government monitoring of correspondence, telephone 
conversations, and other means of communication without a warrant, government 
officials engaged in electronic surveillance without appropriate authorization. 
 
 Russia is considered to be at a high risk of local, regional, and international 
terrorism threats and concerns. In September 2015, Russia initiated military operations 
in Syria. In response, the Islamic Group of Iraq and the Levant and affiliated terrorist 
organizations have issued threats vowing retaliatory terrorist attacks in Russia. The 
Russian Federal Security Service reported no terrorist attacks in the Russian Federation 
in 2015, however in October 2015, a Russian charter plane exploded in mid-air over 
Egypt due to an improvised explosive device on board. All 224 people on board, 
including 219 Russian nationals, were killed. Russian authorities, in addition to the 
United States and the United Kingdom, determined the incident was an act of terrorism. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
 
8 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, financial, 
and property interests, are a national security concern if they result in divided 
allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent with 
U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and interests should consider 
the country in which the foreign contact or interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, considerations such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to 
obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a 
potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect 
classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to help 
a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information or technology. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, 
and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR 
 
9 
 
Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where 
family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
Applicant does not have a relationship with her two stepbrothers in Russia. She 
has never met or spoken to them. Given these facts, none of the disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 7 apply, and I find SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Applicant has a relationship with her mother, stepfather, father, stepmother, half-
brother, and stepsister in Russia. Russia is one of the leading state intelligence threats 
to U.S. interests. Russia remains one of the top two most aggressive and capable 
collectors of sensitive U.S. economic information and technologies, particularly in 
cyberspace. Non-cyberspace collection methods include targeting of U.S. visitors 
overseas, especially if the visitors are assessed as having access to sensitive 
information. Russia continues to take information warfare to a new level, working to fan 
anti-U.S. and anti-Western sentiment both within Russia and globally. Russian 
government officials enter private residences and premises without warrants, and 
engage in electronic surveillance without appropriate authorization. Applicant’s foreign 
contacts in Russia create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) 
and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided  
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which  
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty  
or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, government, or  
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that  
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or  
exploitation. 
 
 
 
10 
 
Applicant’s mother, stepfather, father, stepmother, half-brother, and stepsister 
are Russian citizens residing in Russia. Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(a) is not established for 
the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). Applicant 
indicated that she does not have a relationship with her stepfather, stepmother, or 
stepsister in Russia. However, Applicant’s mother remains married to Applicant’s 
stepfather despite their recent separation. Applicant has a relationship with her 
stepmother through her father, and Applicant speaks to her stepmother monthly to bi-
annually during the holidays. Finally, Applicant communicates with her stepsister 
monthly and during the holidays. AG ¶ 8(c) is not established.  
 
Applicant has lived in the United States since 1994. She received her formal 
education in the United States, and has worked for the same company for many years. 
She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2011. Her husband and children are native-
born U.S. citizens residing in the United States. She has substantial financial interests 
in the United States and none in Russia. She is a registered U.S. voter, and has never 
voted in Russia. She is extensively involved in her community in the United States. 
These are factors that weigh in Applicant’s favor. However, Applicant’s ties to her 
family in Russia are equally as strong. Applicant failed to meet her burden to 
demonstrate that she would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
AG ¶ 8(b) is not established. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9:     
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign 
country over the United States, then he or she may provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States. Foreign 
involvement raises concerns about an individual's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. national interests or when the 
individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen 
of another country is not disqualifying without an objective showing of such 
conflict or attempt at concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise 
of any right or privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country. 
 
Applicant’s Russian identification card was issued to her by the Russian 
government when she was 20 years old. While she held on to the card until January 
2016, she had never used it after immigrating to the United States in 1994, and 
destroyed it upon realizing its security clearance implications. She has no intentions of 
reapplying for another one. Given these facts, none of the disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 10 apply, and I find SOR ¶ 2.a in Applicant’s favor. 
 
11 
 
Applicant applied for and obtained Russian citizenship and a Russian passport 
for her second daughter in December 2014. She did so around the same time she 
surrendered her Russian passport to her security officer, after being told it was required 
in order to apply for a DOD security clearance. While Applicant no longer considered 
herself a Russian citizen, Applicant nonetheless obtained Russian citizenship and a 
Russian passport for her minor daughter through her own Russian citizenship. AG ¶ 
10(a) has been raised by the evidence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are provided  
under AG ¶ 11. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce the foreign citizenship 
that is in conflict with U.S. national security interests. 
 
 Applicant stated that she obtained Russian citizenship and a Russian passport 
for her second daughter for travel convenience. She stated that neither of her daughters 
have traveled to Russia on their Russian passports. She indicated that she was 
unaware her actions would have any security implications, and is willing to have the 
Russian passports destroyed. AG ¶ 11(c) is applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person 
analysis. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has no t  mitigated the security concerns raised by her mother, stepfather, 
father, stepmother, half-brother, and stepsister in Russia. Accordingly, I conclude she 
has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
12 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.g - 1.h:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
