 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 16-00759 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about her financial problems. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to me on January 25, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, scheduling the hearing for 
March 9, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1-4 were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified and presented 18 documents, which were 
 
2 
 
admitted into evidence as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A-R, without objection. The record 
closed on May 26, 2017. I received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 27, 2017. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges six medical accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.d.-1.h.), five consumer 
accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.c., 1.i., 1.j., and 1.m.), a delinquent student-loan account (SOR 
¶ 1.k.), and a delinquent mortgage-loan account (SOR ¶¶ 1.l.). Applicant admitted all 13 
debts, claiming that she had paid four of them. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. From 1989 to 1993, she served on active duty in the U.S. 
military. From 1993 to 2011, she served in the reserves, and she received an honorable 
discharge. Since August 2009, she has been employed by a DOD contractor. She was 
married in 1991, divorced in 2011, and has two adult children.1 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and her August 2015 and June 2016 credit reports 
establish all 13 alleged debts, which became delinquent between 2011 and 2014. 
Applicant’s settled her six medical collections (SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.d-1.h.) in February 2017.2   
 
 On the five alleged consumer accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.c., 1.i., 1.j., and 1.m.), 
Applicant paid or settled SOR ¶¶ 1.a. ($254), 1.c. ($659), 1.i. ($4,294), and 1.j. ($1283) 
in February 2017.3 She testified that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m. was a marital debt that she 
took over at her divorce in 2011, and she made one $250 payment in May 2017.4 
 
 In September 2007, Applicant co-signed on her daughter’s student-loan account 
(SOR ¶ 1.k.), which became delinquent in December 2013. Applicant claimed that her 
daughter has made payment arrangements and is making payments on the delinquent 
student loans; however, there is no documentary evidence to support her claim.5  
 
 Following their divorce in 2011, Applicant’s ex-husband resided in and agreed to 
pay the mortgage for their marital home. Applicant’s name remained on the mortgage-
loan account. Applicant’s ex-husband subsequently became unemployed and abandoned 
the residence. Applicant re-occupied the home and purportedly made mortgage-loan 
payments for a year. The loan became delinquent in about 2013 and later the bank 
foreclosed. In July 2016, the lender issued a 1099-C cancelling the $57,415 debt and 
potentially imputing taxable income to Applicant for tax year 2016. Applicant has not 
provided any documentation showing her debt-resolution efforts and payments on her 
mortgage-loan account, including her purported attempts to sell the house and to modify 
                                                          
1 GE 1; Tr. 35-36 (Applicant was recalled to active duty from 2001-02, 2005-06, and 2008-09). 
 
2 AE O; Tr. 38-41. 
 
3 AE A; AE C.; AE E; AE F; AE G; AE H; AE O; Tr. 18-20, 22, 23, 44-45, 74. 
 
4 AE R. 
 
5 AE O; Tr. 49-51. 
 
3 
 
the mortgage loan. Furthermore, she has not amended her 2016 federal income tax 
returns to reflect the imputed income.6  
 
 Applicant was aware that her finances could impact her clearance eligibility. During 
her November 2015, she acknowledged her delinquent debts and indicated that she 
would begin payments as soon as possible. Applicant attributed her financial problems to 
her divorce in 2011 and a poor personal relationship from 2012 to 2015, wherein she 
financially supported her partner. In February 2017, Applicant borrowed $20,000 from her 
401k account to resolve her delinquent debts. She has used approximately $10,300 to 
pay her delinquent debts, and approximately $9,700 remains. She has not received any 
credit or financial counseling.7 
 
 Applicant is well-regarded by her current and former supervisors for her leadership, 
work performance, and character.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 29-30, 56-59. 
 
7 GE 2; Tr. 30-32, 38, 47, 78. 
 
8 AE P; AE Q. 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s 13 alleged debts total approximately $92,144. These debts became 
delinquent between 2011 and 2014. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).9 Conditions that could mitigate 
the financial considerations security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
                                                          
9 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts were incurred between 2011 and 2014. Although she 
remained gainfully employed throughout, there is no documentary evidence of any debt-
resolution efforts until after the issuance of the SOR in July 2016. Notwithstanding 
Applicant’s debt payments in February 2017, the three largest debts remain unresolved 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.k., 1.l., and 1.m.). She has not adequately accounted for her delay in 
addressing her delinquent debts or shown that her financial situation has stabilized such 
that these circumstances are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both that (1) Applicant’s financial 
indebtedness resulted from circumstances beyond his control, and (2) Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant’s divorce and her ex-husband’s 
unemployment contributed to her financial problems. These events may constitute 
circumstances beyond his control in the context of AG ¶ 20(b). 
  
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Following the issuance of the SOR, Applicant paid or settled the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.j. She only recently took steps to resolve the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.k., 1.l., and 1.m., including one payment on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m. She has not acted 
responsibly in addressing these three debts. AG ¶ 20(b) applies only to SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.j. 
 
Applicant has not received any financial counseling. There is no evidence of 
Applicant’s monthly income and expenses to permit me to conclude that her financial 
situation is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”10 As 
discussed above, Applicant has resolved 10 of the alleged debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.- 1.j.) and 
made one payment on SOR ¶ 1.m. AG ¶ 20(d) applies as to SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.j. 
  
Applicant’s divorce and her ex-husband’s unemployment triggered her financial 
problems. Nonetheless, there is no documentary evidence of any debt-resolution efforts 
until after the issuance of the SOR, despite her longtime gainful employment. Moreover, 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
 
6 
 
Applicant’s three largest delinquent debts remain unresolved. I find that Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F and the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant honorably served in the military for 22 years. She is very well-regarded 
by her current and former supervisors. Notwithstanding the financial problems triggered 
by Applicant’s divorce (2011) and her ex-husband’s unemployment (2012), Applicant did 
not make any debt-resolution efforts for over four years. Her three largest debts remain 
unresolved, and she has not established a track record of payments to address them. I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.j.:   For Applicant 
  
  Subparagraphs 1.k.-1.m.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
