 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 16-01054 
  )  
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the personal conduct trustworthiness concerns, but failed to 
mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 1, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines E, personal conduct, and F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for 
decisions issued after that date.1 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AGs. 
 
 
2 
On August 29, 2016, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 22, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on May 4, 2017, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on June 8, 2017. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant and one witness testified. She also submitted Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which 
was admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on June 16, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.k and denied ¶ 2.a. 
Her admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. She completed the 11th grade. She married in 1982 
and divorced in 1992. She has three adult children from the marriage. She remarried in 
2006. Her husband is unable to work and receives Department of Veteran Affairs 
disability payments and Social Security income. Applicant became unemployed in 2010 
until she was hired by her current employer, a federal contractor, in 2015.2  
 
 Applicant attributed her financial difficulties to her unemployment in 2010, moving 
to a new state in 2012, and then moving back in 2014, and helping her sick mother who 
passed away in January 2017. She received unemployment benefits when she was not 
working. In her answer to the SOR, she indicated that she had started to set up 
payment plans with each creditor and was going to make minimal payments of $20 on 
each debt monthly. She testified that she was unable to make these payments because 
she did not have the money. She stated that she contacted some creditors, but they 
wanted her to pay more than she was able. She testified she is now able to pay her 
debts and wants to pay them. She admitted that she has a new delinquent debt that is 
not alleged on the SOR. Applicant testified that she contacted a credit restoration 
company a few weeks before her hearing. She paid an initial consultation fee of $89, 
and intended to participate in its program that attempts to resolve derogatory items on 
her credit report and consolidate her debts.3 
 
 Applicant’s husband testified that many of his wife’s debts are for medical 
services. He stated he has his own unresolved debts. They are hoping to purchase a 
house. He has not reviewed his wife’s debts, but they are working through their financial 
issues. He stated they have talked about taking care of their past financial problems.4  
                                                          
2 Tr. 14-17. 
 
3 Tr. 19-27, 30, 33-34; AE A. The new debt is not alleged in the SOR and will not be considered for 
disqualifying purposes, but may be considered when accessing Applicant’s credibility, applying mitigating 
conditions, and when analyzing the whole person.  
 
4 Tr. 36-44. 
 
3 
 The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by Applicant’s admissions and credit 
reports from November 2015 and June 2017.5 
 
 Applicant denied she deliberately provided false answers on her security 
clearance application (SCA) when she failed to disclose her delinquent debts. She 
credibly testified that she did not understand the questions on the SCA.6 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
                                                          
5 GE 2, 3, 4. 
 
6 Tr. 27-29, 31-33. 
 
4 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.7  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that she has been unable or unwilling 
to pay or resolve for several years. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following four are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts have been ongoing for several years and remain 
unresolved. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributes her financial problems to unemployment, moving, and 
helping her mother. Her husband indicated she also had medical issues. These were 
conditions beyond Applicant’s control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant 
must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has been employed 
since 2015, and in her SOR answer she stated she would arrange payment plans with 
the creditors and make minimal payments. She did not. Shortly before her hearing, she 
contacted a credit repair company to help her remove derogatory information from her 
credit report and consolidate her debts. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that 
Applicant acted timely and responsibly under the circumstances. I find AG ¶ 20(b) 
partially applies.  
 
 Applicant recently hired a credit repair company, but there is insufficient evidence 
to conclude that there are clear indications that her financial problems are being 
resolved or under control. There is no evidence that she made a good-faith effort to pay 
any of the delinquent debts alleged. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the trustworthiness concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. I find the following one potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
6 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
I find that Applicant did not deliberately omit, conceal, or falsify her SCA when 
she failed to disclose her financial problems. Applicant was genuinely confused by the 
questions on the SCA. I find her testimony credible. She refuted the personal conduct 
security concerns. Hence, a discussion of mitigating conditions is unnecessary. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E into my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant’s long period of unemployment, moves, and her mother’s passing 
affected her finances. She recently hired a credit repair company, but no progress has 
been made in paying or resolving any delinquent debts. Although I believe Applicant 
wants to resolve her financial problems, she is not yet in a position to do so. At this 
juncture, she has not established a meaningful track record of financial stability or debt 
resolution. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns. Applicant refuted the personal conduct trustworthiness concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
7 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
