 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01243 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jacob T. Ranish, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 7, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and C (foreign preference). Applicant responded to the SOR on August 1, 
2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on September 28, 2016, 
and reassigned to me on December 20, 2016. After coordinating with the parties, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 17, 2017, scheduling the hearing for March 31, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 10, 2017.  
 
 
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Compel Discovery 
 
 Applicant’s motion to compel Department Counsel to obtain discovery from a 
government agency was denied. 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing ¶ 1.a. The motion 
was granted without objection. 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through I, and AA through 
DD, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to 
submit additional information. He submitted documents that I have marked AE EE 
through GG and admitted without objection.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel and Applicant both requested that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts about Pakistan. The requests were not admitted in evidence but 
were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II. Neither party objected, 
and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in HE I and II. The facts 
are summarized in the written requests and will not be repeated verbatim in this 
decision. Of particular note is that Pakistan is a safe haven for terrorists. The State 
Department warns U.S. citizens to defer all non-essential travel to Pakistan, as the 
presence of several foreign and indigenous terrorist groups poses a potential danger to 
U.S. citizens throughout Pakistan. Major human rights problems include extrajudicial 
killings, disappearances, torture, rape, honor crimes, lack of rule of law, and corruption 
within the government and police. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old scientist and chief executive officer (CEO) of a 
company doing business as a defense contractor. He has a bachelor’s degree, which 
was awarded in Pakistan. He also has a bachelor’s degree from a U.S. college. He 
attended graduate school in the United States, but he left before obtaining a post-
graduate degree in order to start his first company. He is married with three minor 
children.1 
  
 Applicant was born in Pakistan. He came to the United States in the 1990s to 
attend college. He remained as a permanent resident and became a U.S. citizen in 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 15, 19-20, 24-25, 62, 71; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE E. 
 
3 
 
2013, while retaining his Pakistani citizenship. His wife is a U.S.-Pakistan dual citizen. 
His children are U.S. citizens by birth. They also have Pakistani citizenship through their 
parents.2 
 
 Applicant’s father and father-in-law are deceased. His mother, mother-in-law, a 
sibling, and other extended family members are citizens and residents of Pakistan. 
Applicant has three siblings. His sibling who lives in Pakistan travels extensively to the 
United States for business. His two other siblings live in the United States; one is a U.S. 
citizen; the other is a U.S. permanent resident applying for U.S. citizenship. Applicant’s 
wife’s second cousin is a senior officer in the Pakistani military. Applicant’s wife has little 
contact with this second cousin, and Applicant even less. The same is true for most of 
Applicant’s extended family members.3   
 
 Applicant’s companies have sponsored employees from foreign countries, 
including Pakistan, for H-1B visas. Applicant is involved with several charitable 
organizations based in Pakistan. He also sits, without compensation or ownership, on 
an advisory board for his sibling’s company in Pakistan.4   
 
 Applicant does not intend to return to Pakistan to live. All of his financial assets 
are in the United States. He estimates his wealth at more than $100 million, with his 
wife’s assets adding another $10 million. He, his wife, and his children may receive 
large inheritances that are small in comparison to their U.S. assets. Applicant paid for 
two of his siblings and a friend of the family to be educated in the United States. He also 
gave various family members more than $100,000, which was a small percentage of the 
proceeds from the sale of his equity in a company.5   
 
 Applicant has a U.S. passport, which he uses to travel. He also has a Pakistani 
passport. He surrendered the passport to his facility security officer (FSO), who noted 
that the passport is stored in a safe that is inaccessible to Applicant. The FSO will report 
to the DOD if the passport is returned to Applicant.6   
 
 Applicant reported his foreign contacts on his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86), which he submitted in March 2015. He works with and knows current 
and former senior government officials. He credibly testified that he is completely loyal 
to the United States, and that if any person, government, or entity attempted to use his 
foreign connections against him, he would report the matter to those senior government 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 22-25, 68-70; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 30-41, 53-58, 84-86, 91-96; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE B, C. 
 
4 Tr. at 41-46, 73-81; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE D. 
 
5 Tr. at 25, 29-30, 50-56, 65-68, 84, 96-101; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE1 ; AE F, CC. 
 
6 Tr. at 30, 62-64, 67; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE DD. 
 
 
4 
 
officials who are best able to assist him. He reported actions of security significance to 
authorities in the past, and cooperated in the investigation of those actions.7   
 
Applicant is a top authority in his field. He submitted numerous documents and 
letters attesting to the importance of his work, as well as his allegiance to the United 
States, judgment, reliability, honesty, patriotism, and integrity.8 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 47-49, 58-61; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A. 
 
8 AE F-I, AA, BB, EE-GG. 
 
5 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology;  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
6 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant’s family, including in-laws, are citizens and residents of Pakistan. He, 
his wife, and their children may receive inheritances. He is involved with several 
charitable organizations based in Pakistan, and he sits, without compensation or 
ownership, on an advisory board for his sibling’s company. The potential for terrorist 
violence exists in Pakistan. Pakistan also continues to have serious human rights 
problems. Applicant’s foreign contacts and inheritance prospects create a potential 
conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both directly and through his wife. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 
7(b), 7(e), and 7(f) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
  Applicant’s companies have sponsored employees from foreign countries, 
including Pakistan, for H-1B visas. That does not create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. SOR ¶ 2.e is concluded 
for Applicant. 
 
  Applicant’s financial support for friends and family does not create a security 
concern independent of the concerns already addressed under other allegations. SOR ¶ 
2.h is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
7 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Pakistan. Guideline B is not limited 
to countries hostile to the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in 
protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, 
organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the United States.9  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made 
with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen. His wife, children, and two siblings live in the 
United States, but he still has family in Pakistan, including his mother, mother-in-law, 
and a sibling. He credibly testified that he would report to security officials any attempt 
to use his family members against him, which he believes would be the safest and most 
prudent course. Such testimony, standing alone, is of limited value. However, here 
Applicant acted in a somewhat similar manner when he reported certain actions of 
security significance to authorities. 
I find that Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable. Applicant has minimal contact with 
most of his extended family members. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) are applicable to those 
extended family members.  
Applicant, his wife, and his children may receive large inheritances, or they may 
not. Any inheritance, while large to most people, would be small in comparison to their 
U.S. assets, and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure 
Applicant. AG ¶ 8(f) is applicable. 
 
 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen with impeccable qualifications and endorsements. 
He credibly testified that he would report any attempt to use his foreign contacts to 
coerce him to reveal classified information. The complicated state of affairs in Pakistan 
places a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his foreign 
connections do not pose an unacceptable security risk. He has met that burden.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   Withdrawn 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Withdrawn 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.h:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
