 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01904 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s financial 
problems were caused by his divorce as well as an extensive period of unemployment 
and underemployment. He has made a good-faith effort to repay his creditors and has 
engaged a credit-repair service. Although many debts remain unresolved, Applicant has 
demonstrated a track record of repayment. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 29, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke his security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017. 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On March 13, 
2017, I issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission 
of discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses, and the parties 
complied.2  At the hearing, convened on April 6, 2017, I admitted Government’s Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through H, without objection. After the 
hearing, Applicant submitted AE I through L, which were also admitted without 
objection.3 I received the transcript (Tr.) on April 14, 2017. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Implementation of Revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Security Executive Agent Directive 4 
was issued establishing the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The 2017 AG superseded those 
implemented in September 2006, and they are effective for any adjudication made on 
after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have decided this case under the 2017 AG. 
 
Discovery 
 
 As required by the Directive, Department Counsel sent discovery to Applicant in 
October 2016 to Applicant’s address of record, which he confirmed at hearing. Although 
he received all other communications from DOHA related to his adjudication, Applicant 
claimed not to have received the Government’s discovery letter and proposed exhibits. 
Before the hearing, Department Counsel provided Applicant another copy of the 
documents to review. After doing so, Applicant indicated that he was prepared to 
continue with the hearing as scheduled. I left the record open to give Applicant time to 
submit additional documentation.4   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant has worked as a special police officer for a federal contractor since 
January 2015. He completed a security clearance application, his first, in August 2015. 
The investigation revealed a recent bankruptcy and the subsequent accumulation of 
delinquent accounts. The resulting SOR alleged that Applicant owed $46,000 on 24 
delinquent accounts and that he received bankruptcy protection in September 2009 
from a June 2009 petition.5  
 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order and the discovery letter are appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) I and II.  
 
3 Correspondence regarding Applicant’s post-hearing submission is appended to the record as HE III. 
 
4 Tr. 10-12. 
 
5 Tr. 28, GE 1-2, 4.  
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began during the dissolution of his marriage, which 
ended in divorce in August 2009. Applicant left the marriage with all the debt in his 
name. However, he could not repay it on his income alone. Applicant filed for 
bankruptcy protection in June 2009 and the court discharged Applicant’s debts in 
September 2009. In May 2011, the court ordered Applicant to pay $1,100 monthly in 
child support for his four children. At the time, the obligation amounted to almost half of 
Applicant’s take home pay. In March 2012, Applicant was laid off from his job of 12 
years. He was unemployed from March to September 2012.  From September 2012 to 
November 2014, Applicant was only able to find part-time employment earning 
minimum wage as a grocery store cashier. Applicant found full-time employment in 
November 2014 as a receptionist at a nursing home, where he worked for two months 
before starting his current job. In the wake of his financial hardship, his ex-wife 
petitioned the court to terminate Applicant’s child support obligation and forgive any 
arrearage. The court issued an order to that effect in October 2012.6 
 
 Applicant incurred the majority of the delinquent debt alleged in the SOR 
between December 2010 and December 2014. Since returning to full employment in 
January 2015, Applicant has taken steps to resolve his delinquent accounts. In June 
2016, Applicant settled SOR ¶ 1.h ($1,005). In September 2016, Applicant engaged a 
credit repair service. The service, for which Applicant pays approximately $100 monthly, 
is contractually obligated to examine Applicant’s credit reports from the three major 
reporting agencies, to verify the reported information is correct and in compliance with 
federal reporting laws, and to remove inaccurate or erroneous information. Applicant 
remains responsible for contacting verified creditors to resolve the accounts. To date, 
the credit repair service has had 39 entries removed from Applicant’s credit reports. 
Each month, the credit repair service provides Applicant a report listing disputed and 
verified accounts.7 Between September 2016 and March 2017, Applicant resolved SOR 
¶¶ 1.b ($4,568), 1.j ($499), and 1.v ($83).8  
 
 Currently, Applicant earns approximately $46,000 annually. He lives within his 
means and does not use credit cards. After taxes, he brings home $2,800 per month. 
Applicant spends $1,100 per month, or 39% of his income, on medication necessary to 
treat a serious, chronic medical condition, leaving $1,700 each month to pay for his 
other recurring living expenses, any financial assistance he provides to his children, and 
to resolve his delinquent accounts. Applicant plans to continue resolving his delinquent 
accounts as the credit repair service verifies his outstanding debts.9  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 27-34, 41, 54-62; GE 1; AE E-H. 
 
7 After examining the report, AE L, there is not enough information about the deleted account to match 
them to the accounts alleged in the SOR. 
 
8 Tr. 40, 43, 62, 66-68, 70-74; Ans; GE 3-4; AE B-D, I, L. 
 
9 Tr. 48-53, 63-65.  
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”10 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant declared bankruptcy in June 2009 and 
accumulated $46,000 in debt on 24 delinquent accounts between December 2010 and 
December 2014. The record supports a prima facie case that Applicant has a history of 
not paying his bills and, that for several years, he had an inability to do so.11 However, 
Applicant’s financial problems were not caused by behavior that suggests reckless or 
irresponsible behavior, but by events beyond his control: a 2009 divorce and 7 months 
of unemployment between March and September 2012, followed by almost 2.5 years of 
underemployment. Applicant’s decision to file for bankruptcy protection in 2009 was 
reasonable given his circumstances. Upon returning to full employment, Applicant acted 
responsibly by addressing his delinquent debt and engaging a credit repair service to 
help him do so.12 Acting in good-faith, Applicant has resolved four SOR accounts 
totaling $6,100. Applicant does not have any open credit cards and he has not incurred 
any new debt.  
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). While many of the SOR debts remain unpaid, this 
does not ultimately resolve the question of Applicant’s security worthiness. Applicant 
has not exhibited behaviors that are indicative of an inability to properly handle or 
safeguard classified information.  Given the length of Applicant’s underemployment, his 
financial recovery will require a significant amount of time. Taking this into account, 
Applicant’s resolution of 13% of the SOR debts since his return to full employment is 
sufficient evidence that Applicant is committed to resolving his delinquent accounts and 
I am confident he will continue to do so as he is able.   
                                                          
10  AG ¶ 18. 
 
11 AG ¶¶ 19 (a) and (c). 
 
12 AG ¶¶ 20 (b)-(d). 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.y:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
