                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 16-00203
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: 
Tara R. Karoian Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On May 18, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September
2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, implemented new National Security
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. The decision in this case is based on
the new AGs. I have also considered this case based on the Ags implemented on
September 1, 2006. The outcome of my decision would have remained the same if
adjudicated under the former AGs.
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision based on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated July 11, 2016.  Applicant received the FORM on September1
The Government submitted six items in support of its case.      1
1
17, 2016. She submitted additional information for the record. I received the case
assignment on June 2, 2017. Based on a review of the case file, I find Applicant has not
mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised. Eligibility for a position of trust is denied.
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the majority of the SOR allegations
under Guideline F, with explanations. She admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e. 
(Item 2) 
Applicant is 43 years old. She is employed with a federal contractor. She
graduated from high school in 1993 and she attended college but did not obtain her
degree. Applicant received a Certificate of training from a technical college in 2013,
which made her a Certified Coding Specialist. She married in 1998 and is the mother of
five children. (Item 3) She has been employed with her current employer since 2014,
but she has been employed since 1999, with the exception of unemployment in 2006 to
January 2008. This is her first application for a position of trust, which she completed on
November 15, 2014. (Item 3) 
 The SOR alleges 16  delinquent debts totaling approximately $23,085.  These
debts include medical accounts, judgments, and collection accounts. (Item 1) Credit
reports in evidence confirm the debts. (Items 4 and 5) 
Applicant explained in her Answer that she denied SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a,
1.b,1.d,1.f,1.g,1.h,1.i, 1.j,1.k,1.l,1.m,1.n,1.o, and 1.p because “they have been removed
from her credit report.” (Item 2) She provided no documentation of any disputes or
evidence of any efforts to pay or resolve any of the accounts. 
As to the remaining SOR allegations, Applicant admitted the debt in ¶ 1.c for
$864, but stated that the account was in her husband’s name, the amount owed was
not correct, and it has been removed from the credit report. As to ¶ 1.e, Applicant
admitted it and stated that the phone account for $622 has been “re-established and
resolved.”  (Item 2)
Applicant also stated in her answer that she was a victim of identity theft. She
claimed that she experienced a series of issues that negatively impacted her credit
report.  Applicant referred to police reports concerning identity theft that were on file in
her county of residence. She retained Lexington Law to assist her and to effectively 
address each credit account. Applicant disclosed on her SF-86 that she sought a
financial counselor for guidance about the identity theft. She completed a financial
counseling course and received a certificate of completion in March 2016. (Report in
File) Applicant downsized her vehicle and rental home in 2013 to save money. (Item 3)
During her investigative interview in 2015, Applicant explained that she did not
recognize many of the accounts. She also believed that the medical accounts were
being paid. Applicant stated that she would investigate the delinquent accounts. She
noted that her finances were improving and she can now save money. (Item 6)
2
In Applicant’s response to the FORM, she disagreed with the Government’s use
of a January 2016 credit report because it was more than 120 days old. She attached a
current credit report, dated September 2016. Applicant insisted that she has resolved
each derogatory account, but there are still some SOR delinquent accounts listed on
her most recent credit bureau report. It also showed new accounts that are current. She
emphasized that complications with a pregnancy and her husband’s unemployment,
combined with her two year unemployment, took a toll on her credit. Applicant stated
that since 2014, she has cleared up her credit and established financial security.
Applicant also referred to a March 2016 chapter 7 bankruptcy filing, which was
dismissed (not discharged). She added that she has not pursued the bankruptcy but
successfully addressed each delinquent account by payment or claiming it was
inaccurate. She believes that her current debt is about $2,600. (Response to FORM)
The record does not indicate Applicant’s current salary. Applicant did not provide
any information concerning a budget or expenses. She did not provide any
recommendations from her employer or any character references. 
Policies   
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3. 1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the
interests of national security.” Regulation C6.1.1.1 Department of Defense contractor
personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final
unfavorable access determination may be made. Regulation ¶¶8.2.1
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national interest.” 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
3
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect sensitive information. 
 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The trustworthiness concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor sel-control, lack of judgement, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other
issues of personnel security concerns such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern insofar as it may result from criminal
activity, including espionage.
The Government produced credible evidence to establish Applicant’s delinquent
debts and her credit reports confirm the debts. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a): (inability to satisfy debts), FC DC AG ¶
19(b): (unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so) and (FCDC) AG
¶ 19(c): (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply.  With such conditions
raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against her and mitigate
trustworthiness concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” An unpaid debt is a
continuous course of conduct for the purposes of  adjudications. See, ISCR Case No.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
4
10-11083 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2012). Applicant has not provided any
documentation that any debt is paid. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)
does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization
by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances) partially applies. Applicant listed information concerning her
unemployment, her husband’s unemployment, medical issues, and identity theft.
However, she did not produce documentary evidence when she answered the SOR, or
with the Response to the FORM showing that any debts had been paid. She relied on
the fact that the delinquent accounts had been removed, or resulted from the identity
theft. From this record, it is unclear which debts were acknowledged to be the direct
result of events beyond her control. She has not shown that she acted responsibly.
This mitigating condition does not fully apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d): (the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Applicant
provided one document that shows the phone account is current. There was no
evidence of earlier payment.  She has not provided any documentation for any other
delinquent bills. She referred to a bankruptcy filing that was dismissed. There was no
indication that the debts were discharged. She does not intend to continue with the
bankruptcy, which is a legitimate way to resolve debts. She presented a certificate of
financial counseling, dated 2016. AG ¶ 20(c): (the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem from a credible source, such as a non-profit credit
counseling service) applies. However, the additional requirement that there are clear
indications that her financial problems are being resolved or is under control, does not
apply.  Consequently, I do not find that there are clear indications that her financial
problems are being resolved or disputed. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider
the nine adjudicative factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
5
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position
of trust  must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate burden
of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a public trust position. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person
factors. Applicant is 43 years old. She has worked for her current employer since 2014. 
She has been unemployed, but she has not presented any evidence that she has
acted responsibly. Applicant is required to show that she has a credible, reasonable
plan to resolve her financial problems, and that she has taken significant actions to
resolve her delinquent debts. She has not produced any documentation or evidence in
this case to meet her burden of proof. Overall, the record leaves me with questions
and doubts pertaining to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and her
eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For all these reasons, Applicant’s
eligibility for a trustworthiness position is denied.
 Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.f-1.p: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a position of public trust.
Eligibility for  a position of public trust is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
6
