 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02473 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 8, 2015. 
On November 16, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F.1 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was 
issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to 
all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. My decision is based on the guidelines in SEAD 
4, referred to in this decision as “AG.” The changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my 
decision in this case. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 20, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with 
supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted 
by Department Counsel on January 25, 2017. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on February 1, 2017. He submitted 
material in response to the FORM. The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM 
(Items 1 to 8), and the Applicant’s exhibits (AE) collectively marked as AE A, are admitted 
into evidence. The case was assigned to me on June 19, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old structural mechanic employed by a defense contractor 
since February 2013. He received an associate’s degree in 1986 and a bachelor’s degree 
in 1987. He was married in 1990 and divorced in 1992. He has not served in the military 
but last held a security clearance in the 1970’s while employed by a defense contractor. 
 
The SOR alleges debts to the federal and state governments for delinquent taxes 
and unpaid child support, totaling about $61,895, failure to file federal and state income 
tax returns for tax years 2009, 2011-2013, and a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharged in 
2016. He reported financial delinquencies in his SCA. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted the allegations with explanations and supporting documents. 
 
 Applicant owned an insurance company from 2006 to 2012, but due to economic 
conditions, he had to close the business. He stated in his answer to the SOR that he was 
more concerned about keeping the business open rather than filing income tax returns. 
He also used funds to recapitalize the business instead of paying his income taxes, or 
simply did not have the money to pay taxes. 
 
He contended in his Answer that he assumed the federal tax returns for 2009 and 
2011 were filed; that he filed the 2012 return in October 2016; and that he filed the 2013 
return in April 2015. The IRS transcripts he provided with his answer show he filed his 
2009 and 2010 returns in October 2011; the 2011 return was filed in 2013; no tax return 
was filed for 2012; the 2013 and 2014 returns were filed in May 2015; and the 2015 return 
was filed in March 2016. Copies of signed tax returns were not provided. Applicant 
acknowledged in his answer to the SOR, that he continues to owe for delinquent federal 
and state taxes. He claimed that he has an extra $10 per week deducted from his pay for 
federal taxes, and $5 per week for state taxes. In response to the FORM, Applicant 
provided a letter from the IRS agreeing to establish a $100 monthly installment plan, with 
the first payment to begin February 28, 2017. He also attached a partially completed but 
unsigned payroll deduction form, requesting a deduction of $25 per week from his pay, 
beginning on February 28, 2017. There was no evidence provided to show the initial 
payment of the first installment and fees were paid, or that subsequent monthly 
installments were completed.  
 
3 
 
 Applicant owes the state for delinquent child support. The SOR alleged Applicant 
owes $53,750 based on a 2016 credit bureau report (CBR). Applicant acknowledged that 
he received two notices from the state in December 2016, but disputes that amount owed. 
He stated in his answer that he believes he owes about $10,000. He consulted an attorney 
to review his child support dispute, but he cannot afford to advance the case. In December 
2015, he filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant discharged approximately $105,756 in 
liabilities in March 2016, although he claimed in an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) personal subject interview (PSI) that he discharged about $43,000. 
 
 Since Applicant elected to have this case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing, I was unable to further inquire into these allegations, or evaluate his demeanor 
or credibility in response to questions about his business or the status of his debt 
payments and current finances. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
4 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence are sufficient to establish 
the disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
5 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, and there is insufficient 
evidence to determine that they were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely 
to recur. He asserts his tax delinquencies were due to an economic downturn that 
impacted his business, but he failed to provide evidence to support the assertion. He 
acknowledged that he disregarded his taxes or returned profits back to the business 
rather than pay taxes. His willful disregard of his federal and state tax obligations, and his 
child support responsibilities, raise serious questions about his judgment and willingness 
to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has commented:2 
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with such rules and systems is essential for protecting classified 
                                                     
2 ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). See ISCR Case No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Mar. 25, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002)). ISCR Case No. 14-01894 
at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). 
 
6 
 
information.3 As we have noted in the past, a clearance adjudication is not 
directed at collecting debts. By the same token, neither is it directed toward 
inducing an applicant to file tax returns. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at 
evaluating an applicant’s judgment and reliability. A person who fails 
repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not demonstrate the high 
degree of good judgment and reliability required of those granted access to 
classified information.4 
 
The Appeal Board clarified that even in instances where an “[a]pplicant has 
purportedly corrected [the applicant’s] federal tax problem, and the fact that [applicant] is 
now motivated to prevent such problems in the future, does not preclude careful 
consideration of [a]pplicant’s security worthiness in light of [applicant’s] longstanding prior 
behavior evidencing irresponsibility” including a failure to timely file federal income tax 
returns.5 
 
In this case, the negative financial and judgment information is significant. 
Applicant did not take appropriate, responsible and timely action to resolve his tax and 
child support obligations. Although he received an installment agreement to begin 
addressing his federal tax debt, he did not show he has made any payments on the debt. 
Despite consulting an attorney to review his child support debt, it remains unresolved 
because he cannot afford to advance the case. He presented no evidence showing his 
current financial condition or that he sought financial counseling. His financial situation is 
not under control. 
 
Although a successful bankruptcy may be evidence of mitigation under the right 
conditions, Applicant has not shown that his bankruptcy has resolved or improved his 
overall financial condition, and there was no evidence presented to absolve his failure to 
file and pay taxes or child support obligations when due. Overall, no mitigating conditions 
fully apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
                                                     
3 ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002). 
 
4 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-
01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union Local 473 v. 
McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 
 
5 See ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 3 and note 3 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016) (characterizing “no harm, no foul” 
approach to an Applicant’s course of conduct and employed an “all’s well that ends well” analysis as 
inadequate to support approval of access to classified information with focus on timing of filing of tax returns 
after receipt of the SOR).   
 
 
7 
 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s tax and 
child support delinquencies remain an ongoing concern, and he has not shown that his 
financial situation is under control. His bankruptcy discharged other debts, but he has not 
shown that he is now financially stable and able or willing to adequately address his 
remaining financial delinquencies. 
 
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant him eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
