                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
 )     ISCR Case No.16-01172
)
` )
Applicant for Security Clearance                  )     
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to
Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The SOR was dated July 1, 2016. The action was taken under
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented  June 8, 2017. 1
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision based on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
In this case, the SOR was issued under Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department      1
on September 1, 2006. Revised Adjudicative Guidelines were issued on December 10, 2016, and became
effective on June 8, 2017. My decision and Formal Findings under the new Adjudicative Guidelines would not
be different from the 2006 Adjudicative Guidelines.
1
Material (FORM), dated August 15, 2016.  Applicant received the FORM on September2
8, 2016, Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on June
1, 2017. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to classified information
is granted. 
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted three allegations (SOR 1.a-1.c),
and disputed the medical account allegations (SOR 1.d-1-p.) She  provided
explanations for the allegations under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  (Item 1)
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She graduated from
high school in 1978. Her first marriage ended in divorce in 1985. She remarried in
September 1985 and her second husband died in June 2009. She has one daughter.
Applicant has worked for her current employer since 2015. She completed a security
clearance application in  2015, and she reported that she obtained a security clearance
in 1992. (Item 2)
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges 16 delinquent debts that total approximately $42,000. The
items are three consumer accounts and the remainder are medical accounts.  (Item 5)
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she does not deny the financial
issues, which were due to the nature of her now deceased husband’s illness. He had
stage IV colon cancer. He lost his job and his insurance. During the illness she was the
sole care giver and that resulted in the loss of income for the family. Applicant
acknowledged that she lived on credit cards, with the hope that the credit cards would
be paid when her husband became well.  The credit cards reached the maximum limit
in 2008, and she had no way of repaying them. Applicant also had medical bills. She
lost her home  and her good credit after her husband’s death in June 2009. (Item 1)3
Applicant was self-employed from 2003 until 2012. She worked freelance but
during the end stage of his illness, she cared for him 24/7. She was emphatic when she
reported that the charges were for life necessities (food, clothing, and medicine). She
explained that she did this out of survival, necessity and love for her fragile family.
Applicant spent the last 40 days of her husband’s life when he was in ICU, living in her
car parked at the hospital. 
Applicant acknowledged that it was wrong to incur unpayable debt, but it was
unavoidable. There was no frivolous spending. She does not understand how this could
be mistaken for poor judgement and lack of trustworthiness. She lost everything she
The Government submitted five items for the record.      2
Applicant had PMI and the house was sold.  She paid the income tax on the difference in the amount of      3
$8,000 in June 2015.
2
had worked for her entire life. She stated that she would never compromise the security
of the United States. This personal crisis does not mean that she lived beyond her
means. Applicant submitted a credit report from 2016, which reflects many accounts
that are current. (Item 6 )
During her 2015 investigative interview, Applicant stated that she used two credit
cards from the same company (SOR 1.a and 1.c) and worked with the bank to satisfy
the account. She was told by the bank representative that the account would be written
off in 2016. She understood this to mean that they would not accept payments from
her. (Item 3) She owned this account with her deceased husband jointly. Her plan was
to contact the bank and make monthly payments. She acknowledged that she did not
seek financial counseling.  As to her mortgage payment, she was told to keep paying,
but eventually she could not maintain the payments. As described above, the house
was sold in 2013, and she does not have any further financial obligation.  As to the
majority of medical accounts, she had no knowledge of them at the time. She assumed
that insurance would pay the bills. She learned that the medical accounts were not paid
in 2015, and she is disputing them. This is reflected on the 2016 credit report that was
submitted by the Government in Item 5. All of the medical bills relate to her husband’s
illness. (Item 3) One or two of them do not appear on her current credit report.
As to SOR allegations 1.a-1.c, Applicant admits that they are not resolved. She
has paid smaller accounts that are reflected in the credit reports. (Items 4 and 5)
Allegation SOR 1.a was charged off in the amount of $26,621. SOR allegation 1.b was
a collection account in the amount of $9,333. A note referring to this account states that 
“Consumer disputes after resolution.” Allegation SOR 1.c was charged off in the
amount of $6,063. There are numerous accounts that have zero balance due, including
a paid car loan. (Item 5)
As to SOR allegations 1.d through 1.p, Applicant disputed the medical accounts
as reflected in the 2016 credit report. She checks her credit reports weekly and finds
new medical accounts. (Item 2) She stated that she will pay the accounts if they are her
responsibility.
Applicant’s credit report, obtained in 2015, reflects that the majority of her
accounts are noted “pays as agreed.” However, the SOR accounts 1.a through 1.c still
appear as closed or charged-off accounts. 
There is nothing in the record that shows Applicant’s current financial earnings or 
any attempts to obtain financial counseling, She did not respond to the FORM to
supplement the record.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
3
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance4
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  5 6
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance7
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt8
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      4
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      5
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      7
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      8
4
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a9
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other
issues of personnel security concern such as compulsive gambling, mental
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An
individual who is financially over-extended is at grater risk of having to
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including
espionage.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability to  satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
The Government produced credible evidence to establish that Applicant has
delinquent debts. The credit reports confirm the debts. Consequently, the evidence is
sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
 Id.      9
5
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation clear
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved
or is under control;
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant acknowledged her delinquent debts. She had extraordinary
circumstances due to her husband’s loss of income and terminal illness. She worked
when she was able and she disputed all the medical bills as reflected in her credit report.
She attempted to negotiate with one of the creditors. She paid other non-SOR debts to
provide for her family. Before the illness of her husband, she had good credit. She acted
responsibly. She lived within her means. She is rebuilding her credit. Applicant receives 
credit under AG 20(a), 20(b) and 20(e). She receives partial credit  under 20(d).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
6
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors. I
have noted Applicant’s years of experience and time holding a security clearance. She
had a credit rating that showed she paid her bills before her husband became terminally
ill.  She disputed medical debts to the credit reporters. She believed the insurance paid
those bills.  Applicant took care of her husband and at the end could not work. When he
became sick, she lost his income. When he died, Applicant began to address delinquent
debt. She continues with the process. She has met her burden of proof in this case. 
Clearance is granted.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.p: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Clearance is
granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
7
