1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In re:  ) 
 ) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 16-00364 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the personal conduct, criminal conduct, and drug involvement 
security concerns, but failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 27, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guidelines F, financial considerations, E, personal conduct, H, drug 
involvement, and J, criminal conduct. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On June 8, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations, admitting all of the 
allegations except subparagraphs 1.b and 1.d, and requested a hearing. The case was 
 
2 
 
assigned to me on December 6, 2016. On February 13, 2017, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing scheduling Applicant’s case for April 3, 
2017. The hearing was held as scheduled. I received five Government exhibits (GE 1 – GE 
5), and considered the testimony of Applicant and three character witnesses. The transcript 
(Tr.) was received on April 10, 2017. 
 
While my decision was pending, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was issued 
establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligiblty to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG. Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR 
would not change my decision in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 31-year-old single man. He has a high school education and he has 
earned some college credits. For the past two years, he has worked for a defense 
contractor as an electronics mechanic assembler. (Tr. 14)  He is highly respected on the 
job. According to his program manager, he has a strong work ethic and is “dedicated to 
getting the job done.” (Tr. 33) According to his immediate supervisor, he is “a very hard 
worker” who is trustworthy and responsible.” (Tr. 29) 
 
 Since 2007, Applicant has incurred approximately $17,000 of delinquent debt, as 
alleged in the SOR. All of these bills except the bill alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.b, as 
duplicated in SOR subparagraph 1.d, totaling $1,347, constitute medical expenses 
stemming from a 2007 motor cycle accident, a kidney stone removal in 2009, and an 
emergency appendectomy received between 2012 and 2014. Applicant had no health 
insurance when he suffered these medical problems. (Tr. 16) Thus far, he has made a 
partial payment towards the satisfaction of the debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.l, 
totaling $95. (Tr. 23) The remainder of the debts are outstanding. Applicant contends that 
many of the debts are unpaid because he has been unable to discern their identity, as they 
are unidentified in the SOR (subparagraphs 1.e, 1.f, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.m – 1.o).  
 
 Applicant has approximately $2,000 of monthly discretionary income. (Tr. 25) He 
deposits about $200 per month into a savings account. He has never attended credit 
counseling. (GE 2 at 6) 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.b, totaling $1,347, constitutes court-
ordered restitution stemming from an arrest after Applicant’s employer caught him stealing 
merchandise (see also, SOR subparagraph 2.a and SOR subparagraph 4.a).  The court 
ordered him to pay restitution through a two-year payment plan. (Tr. 23) The charge was 
initially a misdemeanor, but was later converted to a felony, per state law, after Applicant 
missed one of the restitution payments. (Tr. 23-24) Applicant contends that he satisfied the 
restitution payments in full by March 2015. (Tr. 24) He provided no supporting evidence. 
3 
 
Applicant stole the merchandise because at the time, he had been going through “some 
tough times just trying to pay bills and feed [him]self.” (Tr. 20)  
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana recreationally from 2002 through 2012. His use ranged 
from weekly to monthly. He has not used marijuana since 2012 and no longer associates 
with his marijuana-using friends. (AE 2 at 5) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Applicant’s ongoing financial problems trigger the application of disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The majority of Applicant’s debts relate to medical expenses he incurred after 
a succession of health problems or injuries that occurred when he had no health 
insurance. The first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) applies. Conversely, Applicant has only 
made one payment towards the satisfaction of any of the debts, despite having 
$2,000 of monthly discretionary income. Applicant’s testimony that his debt payment 
efforts have been stymied by his inability to identify some of the creditors has merit, 
as multiple creditors alleged in the SOR are unidentified. However, this argument is 
undercut by the fact that the debts owed to identified creditors, totaling $6,500, are 
unpaid. Under these circumstances, neither the second prong of AG ¶ 20(b), nor the 
remaining mitigating conditions, listed above, apply. Applicant has not mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns. 
 
5 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness.” Applicant’s arrest for stealing merchandise from his 
employer in August 2011 triggers the application of AG ¶ 31(b), ”evidence (including, but 
not limited to, a credible allegation, an admission, and matters of official record) of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or 
convicted.”  
 
Applicant’s criminal conduct was isolated and occurred nearly six years ago. He has 
been working for his current employer for the past two years and he is highly regarded on 
the job. Under these circumstances, the following mitigating conditions under AG § 32 
apply: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment, and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited to, 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement, 
apply.  
 
Applicant has mitigated the criminal conduct security concern. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.” (AG ¶ 
15) Applicant’s 2011 arrest triggers the application of AG ¶ 16(d)(1), “untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, release of proprietary 
information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government protected 
information.”  Applicant’s conduct was isolated. Moreover, “so much time has passed . . . 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” (AG ¶ 17(c)) He has mitigated the personal conduct 
security concern. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
Under this guideline, “the illegal use of a controlled substance . . . can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical and psychological impairment, and because it raises questions about 
a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws and regulations.”  (AG ¶ 25) Applicant’s 
6 
 
use of marijuana from 2006 to 2012 triggers the application of AG ¶ 26(a) “any substance 
misuse.” 
  
Applicant’s marijuana use occurred during his early to mid-twenties. He has not 
used marijuana in approximately five years. Currently, he is a well-respected employee 
who performs well on the job. Considering these circumstances, I conclude that AG ¶ 
26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” applies, and that Applicant has mitigated the 
drug involvement security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).1  In evaluating the financial considerations security concern, I 
paid particular attention to the longstanding nature of Applicant’s financial problems and its 
nature and seriousness, as his financial problems once prompted him to steal from his 
employer. Considering this case in light of the whole-person concept, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concern. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagaph 2.a:     For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 3, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 Paragraph 4: Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
