 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01033 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for drug 
involvement and substance misuse, but not those raised under the guideline for criminal 
conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On August 22, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On July 18, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, and Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective on September 1, 2006. This 
decision applies the new Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) that came into effect on June 8, 
2017.1  
  
                                            
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 4, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On September 28, 2016, the 
Department filed an Amendment to the Statement of Reasons, adding SOR ¶ 1.g under 
Guideline J. Applicant answered that Amendment on October 14, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on October 7, 2016. It 
issued a Notice of Hearing on December 21, 2016, scheduling the hearing for January 
17, 2017. The hearing convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
January 25, 2017. The record remained open until February 3, 2017, to give Applicant 
an opportunity to provide exhibits. No documents were submitted.  
 
Motion to Amend the SOR 
 
At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to strike the 
words “manufacture of dangerous drug” from SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant had no objection and 
those words were stricken. (Tr. 8.) Department Counsel then moved to strike reference 
to SOR ¶ 1.c from SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant had no objection and the reference was 
stricken. (Tr. 9.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶1.b and 1.d. He denied the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g, and provided explanations. He denied 
the allegation in SOR   ¶ 2.a. His admissions are incorporated into these findings.  
 
Applicant is 27 years old and unmarried. He completed a bachelor’s degree in 
2012. He subsequently played semi-professional basketball and was on a music tour 
until the end of 2014. He works as a physical fitness trainer at local gym. He is not yet 
employed by the defense contractor that sponsored him for a clearance. (Tr. 17-19.) 
When he completed his September 2015 security clearance application (SCA), 
Applicant disclosed his criminal arrests and charges under the section inquiring about 
his police record. (GE 1.) 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) On December 3, 2009, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
theft of property greater than or equal to $500 and less than $1,500, a misdemeanor. 
He spent one night in jail and paid $200 for bail.  The charge was dismissed on August 
20, 2010, after he completed court requirements. Applicant was 20 years old. (Tr. 22; 
GE 2.)  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.b) On December 25, 2009, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
felony possession of a controlled substance, penalty group 2, less than one gram, a 
felony. The police found an Adderall pill in his possession, for which Applicant stated he 
had a prescription. He was convicted of unlawful possession of a dangerous drug, a 
misdemeanor, on August 26, 2011, following a deferred disposition from August 2010, 
and placed on probation for one year. (Tr. 23-24.) He said the prescription he presented 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
for the drug was out of date. (Tr. 49-50; GE 2.) He denied that he ever misused any 
illegal drugs or prescription medications. (Tr. 41.) 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c) Prior to completing probation for the above charge, Applicant was 
arrested on July 22, 2011, and charged with assault causing bodily injury, a 
misdemeanor. This case involved an altercation between Applicant and a female friend, 
while at a party. She attempted to stab him and he said he grabbed her arms in order to 
restrain her. He then left the party. He subsequently was arrested on an outstanding 
warrant for assault when he appeared at his probation officer’s office. He was placed in 
jail for two days and released on bond. He subsequently pleaded guilty to the assault 
charge and was given credit for time served (30 days) on an arrest warrant that had 
previously issued for failing to appear in court on the controlled substance charge. (Tr. 
24-28; GE 3.) 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d) On August 17, 2012, Applicant was charged and arrested for 
criminal trespassing, a misdemeanor, after he became embroiled in an altercation with a 
bartender. He served one night in jail and was released on bond. He pleaded no contest 
to the charge, and was placed on a deferred prosecution on September 21, 2012. The 
charge was subsequently dismissed. (Tr. 30-32; GE 2.) 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.e) On April 20, 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
possession of marijuana, less than five pounds, greater that four ounces, a felony. He 
pleaded guilty on April 14, 2014, and received a deferred prosecution for two years and 
was required to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). He was 24 years old. (Tr. 32-33; 
GE 2, GE 5.) 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.f) Prior to the above arrest, on March 30, 2013, Applicant was arrested 
when the police found him asleep in his car. He spent the night in jail. He was not 
charged with a crime or other violation. (Tr. 34; GE 2, GE 5.) 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.g) On March 20, 2016, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving 
while intoxicated (DWI), a misdemeanor. He said the police found him sleeping in his 
car with an open beer bottle. He pleaded guilty and was placed on probation for one 
year, until July 2017. He was ordered to abstain from alcohol, perform community 
service, and install a breathalyzer in his car. (Tr. 43-45.) He remains on probation. 
  
Applicant has never been evaluated for drug or alcohol dependence. He has 
never received any counseling for drug or alcohol abuse. He said he does not have an 
alcohol problem, and only drinks occasionally. He stopped using marijuana after 
graduating from college. He would not use it now because of his physical training 
schedule. He regrets his past criminal behaviors. (Tr. 45-48.) He acknowledged that he 
was on criminal probation from July 2010 to July 2011 and from April 2013 to April 
2014. He was again placed on probation in July 2016, and anticipates completing it in 
July 2017. (Tr. 52-57.) He admitted that these criminal incidents are the result of being 
young and immature. (Tr. 58.) He said his employer is aware of this hearing and the 
underlying criminal conduct. (Tr. 59.) 
 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s father testified. He retired from the Air Force after serving 20 years. 
He works for the company that is sponsoring his son for a security clearance. He 
understands the serious allegations against Applicant. He did not make excuses for his 
son’s behaviors, and acknowledged that Applicant was responsible for his conduct. He 
also recognizes his son’s talents and intelligence. (Tr. 65-70.)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security 
eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets forth the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; 
and 
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation.  
 
The evidence established the above disqualifying conditions. Since 2009, 
Applicant has been arrested seven times: twice in 2009, once in 2011; once in 2012; 
twice in 2013; and once in 2016. Two of those arrests involved felony charges. He is 
currently on probation for the 2016 DWI.   
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate the above security concerns: 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
From 2009 to 2016, Applicant was involved in criminal conduct seven times, the 
most recent having occurred in March 2016. Insufficient time has passed without 
recurrence of criminal activity. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 
32(a). Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence of successful rehabilitation. He did 
not submit documentation of compliance with his current probation or a successful 
employment record. He did exhibit some remorse over the totality of his criminal 
offenses. The evidence establishes minimal mitigation under AG ¶ 32(d). 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
 The security concerns under the guideline for drug involvement and substance 
misuse are set out in AG ¶ 24: 
  
 The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia. 
 
Applicant was arrested and charged with the illegal possession of marijuana in 
2013. In 2009, he was arrested and charged with illegally possessing a controlled 
substance, Adderall. The evidence raises the above two disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG & 26 provides a condition that could mitigate the security concerns raised in 
this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant disclosed to the Government in his 2015 SCA, his unlawful possession 
of a prescription drug charge in 2009, and possession of marijuana charge in 2013. 
Three years have passed since he was arrested and charged with possessing 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
marijuana. He testified that he has stopped using marijuana. There is no evidence to 
contradict that assertion, and based on his truthful disclosures, his testimony is credible. 
AG & 26(a) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 27-year-old 
man, who has been involved in the criminal justice system from 2009 into 2016. Three 
of the crimes involved the illegal possession or use of substances. While he appears to 
be maturing and recognizing the effect of his past criminal record on his future, he has 
not demonstrated that he successfully completed probation for the 2016 DWI charge. 
Nor has he established a sufficient record of non-involvement in criminal conduct. The 
evidence does not support his eligibility for a security clearance at this time. 
  
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns pertaining to drug involvement and substance misuse, but not criminal 
conduct. Overall, the record evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:     Against Applicant 
 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:                 For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility. 
National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
