 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02268 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has 
demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debts. He has resolved all but 
one of the accounts alleged in the SOR. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines.1 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke his security 
clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On March 13, 
2017, I issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply to this case.  
 
2 
 
of discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses and the parties 
complied.2  At the hearing, convened on April 12, 2017, I admitted Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, without objection. After 
the hearing, Applicant submitted AE C through D, which were also admitted without 
objection.3 DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 20, 2017. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Security Executive Agent Directive 4 
was issued establishing the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG 
implemented in September 2006, and they are effective for any adjudication made on 
after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 29, has worked for a federal contractor since 2011 and was granted 
access to classified information that same year. He completed a security clearance 
application in May 2016, but did not disclose any derogatory information. The resulting 
investigation revealed several delinquent accounts. The SOR alleges Applicant owes  
five delinquent accounts, totaling $24,000, and that he failed to disclose those accounts 
on his security clearance application.4  
 Applicant admits that he did not disclose his delinquent debts on his May 2016 
security clearance application. Due to time constraints, he completed the form quickly 
with the intention of disclosing the debt during his background interview. Eight days 
before Applicant’s signed and certified the security clearance application at issue, he 
had an interview with an investigator. According to the interview summary, AE B, 
Applicant volunteered information about SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d and discussed the 
debts Applicant disclosed on another security clearance application. That application is 
not identified by date and is not part of the record.5  
Applicant’s financial problems started during his marriage. When Applicant 
married in August 2008, he was 21 and his wife was 19 years old. For the duration of 
their marriage, Applicant was the sole source of income for his family of three. To 
maintain the lifestyle his wife desired, they lived beyond their means. When their 
finances became strained, Applicant prioritized the family’s necessities and allowed 
some of his financial obligations to become delinquent. The couple separated in 
September 2015. They do not have a formal separation agreement, but share custody 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order  and the discovery letter are appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I and II, respectively.  
 
3 Correspondence regarding Applicant’s post-hearing submission is appended to the record as HE III. 
 
4 GE 1-3. 
 
5 Tr. 32-34, 52-56;  AE B.  
 
3 
 
of their eight-year-old daughter. Applicant continues to pay off debt incurred during the 
marriage. He also pays his ex-wife’s car note, car insurance, and cell phone bills 
because he believes doing so benefits his daughter.6 
In the almost two years since separating from his wife, Applicant has been 
working to resolve marital debt. He eliminated housing expenses by moving into his 
parent’s home in September 2015. He eliminated childcare expense by arranging his 
work schedule to accommodate his custody schedule. Applicant works 20 hours during 
his custodial weeks and makes up the remaining 60 hours during his non-custodial 
weeks. Applicant also has two part-time jobs. Since August 2014, he has worked for 
second federal contractor.  This job also requires a security clearance. He is guaranteed 
four hours a week, but often picks up additional hours when others are unavailable. He 
has also worked as a waiter since February 2012. He works Friday through Sunday 
nights on his non-custodial weekends. Applicant also works during his custodial 
weekends when his mother is available to watch his daughter.7    
Before the issuance of the SOR, Applicant resolved more than $5,000 in non-
SOR marital debt. The five debts alleged in the SOR are all accounts accumulated 
during the marriage. Before the hearing, he resolved SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1,d, and 1.e, totaling 
approximately $3,000. The remaining debts, SOR ¶¶ 1.a  and 1.b, are the largest 
accounts. Applicant contacted each creditor, but each wanted more than Applicant 
could afford to settle the accounts. Since the hearing, he has been able to negotiate an 
affordable settlement with the creditor in SOR ¶1.b ($4, 570), with payments to begin in 
May 2017. He also retained a credit-repair service, which advised him that the debt in 
SOR 1.a was uncollectible and that the derogatory account could no longer be reported 
to credit reporting agencies after June 2017.8  
 Applicant’s father-in-law testified as a character witness. He spoke of the 
problems created in the marriage by his daughter’s desire for a particular lifestyle. He 
considers Applicant to be of good character, trustworthy, and reliable. Now that 
Applicant and his daughter are separated, Applicant’s father in-law believes that 
Applicant lives within his means and is making a concerted effort to repay his debts.9  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 17-18, 22-23, 35, 48. 
 
7 Tr. 17, 24-25, 38, 46, 50.  
 
8 Tr. 19-21, 26; AE C-D.  
 
9 Tr. 57-65.  
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”10 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
                                                          
10  AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
The Government established its prima facie case that Applicant has a history of 
not paying his debts and that he had an inability to do so.11 However, Applicant has 
provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial considerations concerns. Applicant 
is making a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debt.12 He has enacted a series of 
austerity measures to ensure that as much of his income as possible is directed his 
debt. His resolution of non-SOR debt, three of the SOR debts ¶¶ 1.c. – 1.e, and his 
establishment of a payment plan for SOR ¶ 1.b show a commitment to financial 
rehabilitation as well as provides a positive track record of repayment. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his delinquent debt 
on his May 2016 security clearance application. Conduct involving a lack of candor or 
dishonesty,  particularly, a failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the 
security process, raises questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information.13 However, the conflicting information in the 
record does not support the allegation. Applicant volunteered information about the 
debts alleged in the SOR during a background interview that occurred days before he 
signed the security application at issue. It defies commonsense that Applicant later 
attempted to omit the same information from the May 2016 security clearance 
application with the intent to mislead of the Government.  
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s financial situation is far from perfect, but 
his efforts to correct it speaks volumes about his good character, trustworthiness, and 
reliability and outweigh the concerns raised by his past record of financial 
irresponsibility. 
                                                          
11 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
12 AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
13 AG ¶ 15. 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
