 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02724 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 24, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 29, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
on the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on 
January 13, 2017. On April 4, 2017, Applicant responded to the FORM and provided 
additional documents. His response to the FORM and attached documents are admitted 
as Item 9. Department Counsel indicated no objection to Applicant’s Response to 
FORM on April 20, 2017. (Item 10) On April 20, 2017, the FORM was forwarded to the 
Hearing Office and assigned to me on June 2, 2017. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
 
2 
 
 
      Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant denies the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 
1.i, 1.n, and 1.o. He is researching the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1,h, 1.j and 1.l. He 
admits the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.k, and 1.m. (Item 4)    
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain his security 
clearance. He has worked for his current employer since April 2010. He is a high school 
graduate and has some college credit. He is divorced and has three children, ages 18, 
14 and 9. (Item 5)   
 
On July 2, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 26 – Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts, Applicant did not indicate that he had any delinquent accounts. (Item 
5 section 26) A subsequent background investigation revealed that Applicant had 15 
delinquent accounts, an approximate total of $76,412. The accounts include a $50,542 
home equity loan that was charged off in January 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 7 at 4; Item 8 
at 1); a $6,561 account that was charged off in May 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 7 at 4; Item 
8 at 2); a $2,972 account that was charged off in May 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 8 at 2): a 
$2,751 cell phone account placed for collection in September 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 8 
at 2); an $850 medical account placed for collection in May 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item  8 at 
2); and a $699 account placed for collection in April 2015. (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 8 at 2).  
 
Additional delinquent accounts include: a $501 debt owed to an apartment 
complex placed for collection in May 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 8 at 2); a $492 medical 
account placed for collection in September 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 8 at 2); a $292 cell 
phone account placed for collection in December 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 8 at 2): a $599 
medical judgment entered against Applicant in May 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.j: Item 7 at 4); a 
$3,208 judgment entered against Applicant in August 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.k: Item  7 at 4); a 
$3,432 account placed for collection in May 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.l: Item 7 at 10); a $3,313 
credit card account placed for collection in May 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.m: Item 7 at 10); a $100 
debt owed to a local government placed for collection in March 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.n: Item 7 
at 10): and a $100 debt owed to a local government placed for collection in March 2011 
(SOR ¶ 1.o: Item 7 at 10). 
 
The current status of the delinquent debts are: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a:  $50,542 charged-off home equity loan:  Applicant indicates this debt 
was a home equity loan taken out by his ex-wife for a business that failed. He indicates 
the loan was charged off. Applicant has not taken additional action to resolve this 
account.  (Item 4) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b:  $6,561 charged-off account: Applicant states this was a debt 
consolidation loan. He stopped making payments on the account when he encountered 
financial difficulties. As of his answer to the SOR, he intended to pay this debt off within 
 
3 
 
 
90 days.  At the close of the record, he provided no receipts verifying that he paid or 
was paying this debt. (Item 4; Item 9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c:  $2,972 charged-off account: Applicant was not aware of this debt. 
He believes the debt belonged to his ex-wife. He was researching the debt when he 
responded to the SOR. He provided no updates in his response to the FORM. (Item 4; 
Item 9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d:  $2,751 cell phone account placed for collection:  Applicant claimed 
his 14-year-old son went beyond the plan’s data limits. In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant claimed he was working on a settlement and the matter will be closed in 90 
days.  In response to the FORM, Applicant provided proof that an account owed to 
Verizon was successfully disputed with the credit reporting agencies. (Item 4; Item 9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: $850 medical collection account: Applicant said this debt was created 
after he spent a couple days in the hospital. He said he contacted the hospital and the 
debt will be resolved in 90 days. In his response to the FORM, he provided no 
documentation on the progress towards resolving this debt. (Item 4; Item 9)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f: $699 collection account: Applicant did not recognize this debt. He was 
attempting to determine what the debt was at the time he answered to SOR. He did not 
provide an update on the status of the debt in his response to the FORM. (Item 4; Item 
9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: $501 collection account owed to an apartment: Applicant disputes 
this debt. He states he paid his rent in full and the apartment kept his security deposit 
because of a stain on the carpet. He expected a court disposition in the matter, which 
he intended to provide. In his response to the FORM, Applicant did not provide any 
information on the status of this debt. (Item 4; Item 9)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.h: $492 medical collection account: Applicant was attempting to identify 
this account. Once identified, he intends to resolve the matter within 60 days. He did not 
provide an update on the status of this account in his response to the FORM. (Item 4; 
Item 9 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i: $292 cell phone collection account: Applicant claimed the debt has 
been cleared and the bill is current. In his response to the FORM, Applicant provided 
proof that this account was successfully disputed. (Item 4; Item 9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j:  $599 medical judgment: In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated 
he is researching this account. If he is liable for the bill, he will pay it in a timely manner. 
Applicant did not provide an update of the account in his response to the FORM. (Item 
4; Item 9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k:  $3,208 judgment: Applicant claimed that this debt was incurred by 
his ex-wife. He stated in his answer to the SOR that he was negotiating a settlement 
 
4 
 
 
with the creditor. He did not provide an update on the status of the debt in his response 
to the FORM. (Item 4; Item 9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l:  $3,432 collection account:  Applicant mentioned he was still 
investigating this debt in his answer to the SOR. He did not provide an update on the 
status of the debt in his response to the FORM.  (Item 4; Item 9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m: $3,313 credit card collection account:  In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant mentioned that he was negotiating a settlement on this account. He did not 
provide an update on the status of the debt in his response to the FORM. (Item 4; Item 
9) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.n and 1.o: two $100 debts owed to a local government placed for 
collection: Applicant claimed that these two debts were settled in full. He indicated a 
receipt would be provided. He did not provide a receipt in his response to the FORM. 
(Item 4; Item 9)  
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant mentions that he hired a credit repair law 
firm. He provided a weekly report from the firm indicating the number of accounts that 
were removed from Applicant’s credit report, apparently as a result of a formal dispute. 
The report indicates six accounts were removed from his credit reports.  Only one debt 
can be identified as a creditor in his SOR – the cell phone account alleged at SOR ¶¶ 
1.d and 1.i.  The other five accounts may be related to debts alleged in the SOR that 
were purchased by another collection agency. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
information to connect the debts removed from his credit report to any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. No account numbers, debt balances, or the original creditor’s name 
were listed in the weekly report. (Item 9) 
 
Applicant hopes that the efforts he took to hire the credit repair law firm is 
sufficient to give him a security clearance. He hopes to be able to continue in his job 
and to serve with loyalty and professionalism. (Item 9)  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
 
5 
 
 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
encountered financial problems for several years now.  The SOR alleges a $50,542 
charged-off home equity loan and approximately $25,870 in delinquent medical and 
consumer debts. The total amount of the debt is $76,412. Many of these debts became 
delinquent several years ago and remain unresolved. Both AG &19(a) and AG &19(c) 
apply.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control);  
  
 
7 
 
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue).  
 
AG & 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. He has 
encountered financial problems over the past five years. Applicant recently hired a 
credit repair law firm to dispute the debts alleged on his credit report. He provided no 
information on the steps he has taken to resolve the debts that he owes. There is 
insufficient information to conclude Applicant is resolving his debts.    
  
AG & 20(b) partially applies in that Applicant’s financial problems were caused, in 
part, by his separation and divorce from his wife.  This is a condition that was beyond 
his control. However, I cannot conclude that he acted responsibly towards his debts. 
Applicant indicated that he intended to resolve his accounts. He recently hired a credit 
repair law firm to resolve his delinquent accounts. However, he did not provide proof of 
any steps that he was taking towards resolving his delinquent accounts.  
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply. Applicant provide no proof of financial counseling. It 
is too soon to conclude that his financial situation is under control.  
 
AG & 20(d) does not apply. Applicant provided no proof that he entered into 
repayment agreements with any of the creditors whose debts he admits are valid. He 
has not made a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies with respect to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.i. His 
credit repair law firm successfully disputed the debt with this creditor. He did not provide 
sufficient evidence to conclude other debts that he denied were successfully disputed. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances and 
facts that would mitigate financial considerations security concerns. While Applicant 
provided evidence that he hired a credit repair law firm, most of his delinquent debts 
remain unresolved. Applicant did not mitigate the concerns arising from financial 
considerations. 
 
 The determination of an individual’s eligibility for a security clearance is not a 
once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying 
and mitigating to the evidence presented. Under Applicant’s current circumstances, the 
granting of a security clearance is not warranted. In the future, if Applicant establishes a 
a track record of resolving his delinquent debts and financial responsibility, he may 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness.  
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 
employment record. I considered his divorce. I considered that he recently retained a 
credit repair law firm. It is too soon to conclude that he will successfully resolve all of his 
delinquent accounts and maintain financial responsibility. In the future, he may be able 
to demonstrate a track record of resolving his financial obligations. It is too soon to 
make this conclusion at this point. The security concerns raised under financial 
considerations are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c, 1.e -1.h, 1j.-1.o: Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.i:   For Applicant  
  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
