 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-02089 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
 For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esquire 
                For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On September 3, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
or after June 8, 2017. 
 
In an undated response, Applicant admitted the allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on December 2, 2016. The matter was 
scheduled on March 6, 2017, for an April 5, 2017, hearing. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered three documents, which were accepted without 
objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-3. Applicant gave testimony, introduced one witness, and 
 
 
 
 
2 
offered four documents, which were accepted into the record without objection as Exs. 
A-D. The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 13, 2017, and the record was closed. 
After review of the record as a whole, I find that Applicant mitigated financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 63-year-old engineer who has worked for her present employer, a 
defense contractor, since 2015. Prior to this position, she worked within the defense 
contracting community for over 30 years. Applicant served as an active reservist in the 
Army National Guard from 1975 until receiving an honorable discharge in 1979. She 
has earned an associate’s degree and a bachelor’s degree. A former superior testified 
on her behalf in positive terms. 
 
Applicant is presently single. She has been financially stable and has had no 
problems meeting her financial obligations to date. (Tr. 37) Applicant has not received 
financial counseling. She has maintained a security clearance since 1990 without issue. 
 
 From 2012 to 2015, Applicant worked for a former employer. As a qualification 
engineer, her work there required extensive travel to various sites, domestically and 
internationally. Each month, she would be away from home for up to three weeks. As 
soon as she would return home, usually on a Friday, she would unload all of her 
equipment on Saturday, leaving little time to conduct her personal affairs and prepare 
for her next trip. (Tr. 20-21) During the months leading up to the deadline for filing her 
tax year 2013 federal income tax returns, she was rarely home. Due to her schedule 
and distraction, she failed to apply for a filing extension. She also failed to file her 
federal income tax return for that year, and then again for tax year 2014.1 Applicant 
ascribes her belated filings to oversight or procrastination. In her 60s, with a career 
stretching back over 40 years, she has never before neglected to timely file her tax 
returns. (Tr. 25) 
 
 In September 2015, Applicant met with investigators, noting that she had 
forgotten to file the tax returns at issue. Ultimately, the returns were filed by October 
2016. (Tr. 26) In November 2016, she received tax refunds varying from $1,750 to 
$2,000 for tax years 2013 and 2014, respectively, and a refund of about $1,700 for tax 
year 2015. (Tr. 26-27; Exs. B-C) She was not penalized by the IRS for her late filings. 
 
 Hence forward, Applicant intends to be timely with her tax filing and all related 
obligations. Her most recent job does not require extensive work travel, leaving her 
sufficient time to see to her personal affairs. As of the April 5, 2017, hearing, she noted 
that she was currently accumulating all of her documentation and planning on e-filing 
her tax year 2016 federal income tax returns this year. Because she is presently not 
generating a paycheck, she is economizing and not utilizing the services of a 
                                                          
1 Starting in the mid-2000s, Applicant began to file her own federal taxes, itemizing in her forms so she 
could references expenses such as mortgage interest and student loans. She does not use software to 
aid her in her tax preparation. 
 
 
 
 
3 
professional tax preparer or service. (Tr. 28) She is, however, amenable to using such 
services when needed. Applicant stated that although she has maintained a security 
clearance for many years, she was not previously aware failure to file taxes posed a 
security concern, only a concern with regard to Internal Revenue Service rules. (Tr. 30)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 
10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence indicating that Applicant 
failed to timely file federal income tax returns for tax years 2013 and 2014. Applicant 
admits she failed to file taxes for those years. This is sufficient to invoke financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required 
  
Seven conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
 
 
 
5 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue;   
 
AG ¶ 20(f): the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
Under these facts, application of AG ¶ 20(a) initially appears limited because the 
multiple income tax returns at issue were for recent years. However, Applicant’s present 
work and seniority make her constant work travel less likely, and make her less 
vulnerable to being professionally overwhelmed. Now apprised of the importance of 
filing tax returns, even when a refund is expected, Applicant is aware of her obligations 
in that regard. She has promised to be timely going forward, and to seek professional 
guidance when needed in the future. Consequently, I find AG ¶ 20(a) applies.  
 
Moreover Applicant is genuinely contrite over her laxity and oversight. She has 
taken the appropriate ameliorative action. Evidence of her Federal tax return filings was 
introduced, and it was shown that payment of her refunds have settled those issues with 
the IRS. In the future, she will be mindful of her obligation to file her tax returns timely. 
The situation is now under control and AG ¶ 20(g) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the her  
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Here, I have considered those 
factors. I am also mindful that, under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to 
grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
Applicant is a 63-year-old engineer who has worked for her present employer 
since 2015. She has supported the defense contracting industry since at least 1985 and 
maintained a security clearance without adverse incident since 1990. Applicant served 
as an active reservist in the Army National Guard from 1975 until honorably discharged 
in 1979. She has earned an associate’s degree and a bachelor’s degree.  
 
During the years at issue in the early 2010s, Applicant held a position that 
entailed extensive travel. Her work trips left her with little personal time. Although she 
was a seasoned professional who had been within the workforce for many years, the 
overwhelming demands of her job took its toll on her personal life. Included in this toll 
was her failure to timely submit federal tax returns for tax years 2013 and 2014 in 2014 
and 2015, respectively. At no time was her delay caused by deficient funds, only 
insufficient time and organization. 
 
 
 
 
6 
In 2016, Applicant filed tax returns for the years at issue, received owed refunds, 
and is now in full compliance with IRS rules. Through this process, Applicant has 
become thoroughly aware of the importance of timely filing all tax returns, an issue that 
never before arose during her professional career or her 27 years maintaining a security 
clearance. Free of a position that is so time-consuming she is overwhelmed, I have no 
reservations feeling that all future tax returns will be timely filed or appropriate 
extensions requested. Consequently, I find Applicant has mitigated financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
