1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )    ISCR Case No. 16-00295 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On June 9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations and explaining why it was unable to find it 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance eligibility for him. The 
DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access 
to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On June 19, 2016, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except 
subparagraphs 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h, and requested a hearing, On December 16, 2016, 
 
2 
 
the case was assigned to me.  On February 1, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals issued a notice of hearing, scheduling Applicant’s case for March 1, 2017. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, I received three Government exhibits (GE 1 
– GE 3), and Applicant exhibit (AE) A. In addition, I marked and received the discovery 
letter, dated August 16, 2016, mailed from Department Counsel to Applicant. (Hearing 
Exhibit I) The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 9, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 49-year-old single man. He has a bachelor’s degree in accounting 
and a master’s degree in management. (GE 1 at 10) Since June 2012, he has worked for a 
defense contractor as a senior financial analyst. (Tr. 13) 
 
 Since 2008, Applicant has incurred approximately $255,000 of delinquent debt, 
including $31,000 in student loans (subparagraphs 1.a  - 1.c); $3,000 of miscellaneous 
debt (subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f); and $222,955 of delinquent mortgage debt 
(subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g). Applicant incurred the student loan debts, alleged in 
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c, in 2011 to finance the completion of his master’s degree. 
(Tr. 14; GE 3 at 2) These student loan debts have been delinquent since January 2014. 
(GE 3 at 2) He has been attempting to develop a payment plan since June 2016. They 
remain outstanding. 
 
 The debt alleged in subparagraph 1.d, totaling $4,766, is included in two credit 
reports from 2015 and 2016. (GE 2 and GE 3) Both credit reports indicate that this debt is 
in dispute status. Applicant reiterated his dispute of this debt at the hearing. (Tr. 31)  
 
 The debt alleged in subparagraph 1.e, totaling $1,634, has been outstanding since 
March 2010. (GE 3 at 2) Applicant disputes this debt, but provided no evidence 
substantiating the basis of his dispute. 
  
 Subparagraph 1.f, totaling $1,280, is a delinquent debt owed to a bank. The creditor 
obtained a judgement against Applicant in November 2013. (GE 2 at 3; GE 3 at 3; Tr. 34) It 
remains outstanding. 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.g and 1.h are the primary and secondary mortgages on a property 
that Applicant cosigned with his father in April 2007. (Tr. 39) Applicant’s father asked 
Applicant to cosign the mortgage loans because he had bad credit and was unable to be 
approved for these loans without a cosigner. (Tr. 41) Applicant’s father stopped making 
mortgage payments in November 2008, approximately 18 months after purchasing the 
home. (GE 2 at 3)  At or about the time Applicant’s father stopped making mortgage 
payments, Applicant was laid off from his job. (GE 1 at 13) He was subsequently 
unemployed for the next eight months. Consequently, he was unable to make any of these 
mortgage payments. 
 
  In July 2009, Applicant obtained a full-time job, but it paid approximately $25,000 
less than his previous job. (Tr. 53) In 2012, Applicant’s father became seriously ill. 
3 
 
Applicant spent the next three years, through his father’s death, preoccupied with his care, 
helping pay for medical treatments and general elder care. He never attempted to resume 
the mortgage payments. Since December 2014, the home has been in foreclosure status. 
(GE 2 at 3) 
 
 In 2006, approximately a year before Applicant cosigned the home mortgages with 
his father, he purchased a home for himself. (GE 3 at 1) He financed the purchase with a 
mortgage, and later opened a home equity line of credit secured by the home. Applicant 
fell behind on this mortgage after he lost his job in 2008. He attempted to resume 
payments after regaining employment in2009, but could not afford the monthly payments, 
as  they exceeded his after-tax income. (Tr. 54) Although he obtained a loan modification, 
it only reduced the payment by $50. Unable to afford mortgage payments, Applicant lived 
in the home for the next five years, through 2014 before moving after the bank filed a 
notice of foreclosure. The home has since been foreclosed. (Answer at 2) Applicant’s 
difficulty paying his home mortgage coincided with the period when his student loans, as 
discussed above, became delinquent. (Tr. 55) 
 
 Applicant has never sought credit counseling. (Tr. 61) He does not maintain a 
budget, but estimates that he has approximately $500 of monthly discretionary income. (Tr. 
62) 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
4 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).1  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 Applicant denies subparagraph 1.d and the only evidence supporting the 
Government’s contention that Applicant owes this debt are two credit reports that list 
it, but indicate that it is in dispute status. I conclude that the Government did not 
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
5 
 
meet its burden of production with respect to subparagraph 1.d, and I resolve it in 
Applicant’s favor.  
 
 The remaining delinquencies alleged in the SOR are established by the 
evidence and trigger the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.”  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;”  
 
AG ¶ 20(c), the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d), the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems initially occurred after an eight-month period of 
unemployment, beginning in November 2008, and were compounded when his 
father became seriously ill, requiring costly treatment that Applicant helped pay. 
Conversely, Applicant has been working full-time for more than six years, and has 
made no payments towards the satisfaction of any of his debts. In addition, he 
decided to attend graduate school, financing it with student loans, since regaining 
employment, during a period of time when he was living in his home and not making 
mortgage payments. Under these circumstances, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 In addition to not initiating debt repayments, Applicant has not sought 
counseling. Neither AG ¶¶ 20(c) nor 20(d) apply. Applicant provided no 
documentary evidence supporting the basis of his dispute of subparagraphs 1.e and 
1.f. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Applicant’s decision to help his father reflects admirably upon his character. 
Conversely, Applicant provided this help without first considering his financial limitations, 
6 
 
and consequently compounded his financial problems, which he has yet to address. Under 
these circumstances, he has failed to mitigate the security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.h:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
