 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00558 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement considerations but did not mitigate the 
criminal conduct considerations and alcohol consumption security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines J (criminal 
conduct), G (alcohol consumption), and H (drug involvement). The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 6, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on September 9, 2016, and received by Applicant on September 12, 2016. 
The Government exhibits identified as Items 1 through 6 included in the FORM are 
 
2 
 
admitted into evidence, absent objection. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. On October 
11, 2016, Applicant responded with a ten-page facsimile transmission, including a cover 
sheet, a one-page letter from Applicant, and 9 pages of documentation. These are 
collectively marked as Applicant’s Exhibit A (AE A) and admitted into evidence.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since May 2013. He obtained a GED in 2009 and has several 
additional technical certifications. He reports no military service and he has never been 
married or had a security clearance.2  
 
Applicant disclosed several convictions and traffic offenses in section 22 (Police 
Record) in his Security Clearance Application (SCA) that he signed in April 2015. 
Applicant was arrested in December 2007 for grand theft when he was with a friend who 
stole a purse and other contents, from an automobile parked at a mall. In January 2008, 
he pled no contest to the charge and was sentenced to time served, which was three 
weeks in confinement. Applicant was also convicted of driving under the influence in 
August 2012, and again in January 2014. He is on probation until February 24, 2019 for 
the latter offense. He was also ordered by the court to attend an 18-month-alcohol 
abuse prevention course, attend AA meetings, and install an ignition-interlock device. 
Next, he pled no contest to a charge of driving on a suspended license in December 
2014, while he was still on probation for his second DUI, and after having completed 
drinking-driver-treatment courses.3 Applicant attended traffic school and paid fines for 
his moving offenses committed between May 2008 and December 2013.  
 
 Applicant also disclosed in his April 2015 SCA that he used marijuana with 
varying frequency from August 2009 to March 2012 while he had a medical marijuana 
card. No evidence was submitted to corroborate that he had a medical marijuana card, 
or why it was prescribed. He did not have a security clearance at the time and he no 
longer associates with the same friends with whom he smoked marijuana.4 He does not 
frequent locations where illegal drugs are used, and he realized the adverse impact of 
marijuana use. He no longer desires to use marijuana and he intends to never use it 
again. Thus, the concern with his drug involvement, alleged at SOR ¶ 2.a, has been 
mitigated.  
 
 
                                                          
1 Nine pages of documents attached including: a one page certificate of completion of a drinking driver 
treatment program; two reference letters; and a five page performance evaluation.  
 
2 Item 4.  
 
3 Item 4, pp. 36-38. 
 
4 Item 6, p. 7. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant admitted all of these offenses and convictions in his answer to the SOR  
in July 2016, with explanations. They are also reflected in his FBI criminal history 
report.5 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
                                                          
5 Item 5. 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment or abstinence.  
 
 Applicant has two alcohol-related incidents, the DUI arrest in August 2012 and 
the DUI arrest in January 2014. Applicant disclosed these transgressions in his SCA 
and he has admitted them in his Answer to the SOR. AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(g) are 
applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and, 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
 
5 
 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol-related incident was in January 2014. He has completed 
treatment, attends AA meetings, and had his license restricted and an ignition-interlock 
device installed on his vehicle.6 He seemed to be on the road to recovery. However, late 
in 2014, Applicant was again arrested for driving on a suspended license, which was 
ordered suspended following his second DUI. He was still on probation at the time. 
Insufficient time has passed to conclude that Applicant is maintaining his sobriety, 
confronting his condition, and coping with his affliction. Applicant has not met his burden 
in establishing that sufficient time has elapsed since his last alcohol-related event, and 
he has taken responsible measures to insure that it never happens again. The above-
mentioned mitigating conditions do not apply.   
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
   
   The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30.  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶  
31. The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
 (a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;   
 
 (c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the  
           person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;  
  
 (d) individual is currently on parole or probation; and  
 
 (e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated  
           rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant has admitted to two arrests for DUI within the last five years, and the 
grand theft when he was 18 years old. Although Applicant has matured and has taken 
steps toward recovery, he re-offended as recently as December 2014 when he was 
arrested for driving on a suspended license while he was on probation. Such a flagrant 
violation of terms of probation shows an inability to comply with rules and regulations 
and follow the law. This flies in the face of the trustworthiness and reliability required to 
have access to classified information. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
                                                          
6 Items 4 and 6.  
 
6 
 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and, 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
           Applicant has not been involved in any criminal activities since his 2014 arrest. 
Before that, his interaction with the criminal justice system spanned a decade. His 
employment with a defense contractor is a sign of rehabilitation. He is credited with 
divulging his actions on the SF 86 and during his background interview. However, 
insufficient evidence has been introduced to show adequate passage of time since his 
last offense to conclude that he is committed to following the law. At some point in the 
future, if Applicant sustains his demonstrated commitment to sobriety and lawfulness, 
he may successfully attenuate the taint of his criminal behavior. He has not met this 
burden yet. This leaves me with serious doubts that Applicant is ready to be entrusted 
with access to classified information. I find that Applicant’s criminal conduct security 
concerns have not been mitigated and that AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) do not apply. 
 
Guideline H, - Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes two drug-involvement-disqualifying conditions that could raise 
a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug 
abuse;”7 and “(c) illegal drug possession.” AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply because 
Applicant used marijuana from August 2009 to March 2012, with varying frequency.8 
                                                          
7AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
8AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances.  
 
 
7 
 
Although Applicant claimed to have a medical marijuana card, he provided no evidence 
of this or the medical condition that necessitated it. Consideration of mitigating 
conditions is required.  
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug-involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substance. See Sch. I(c)(9). See also Gonzales v. 
Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
8 
 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). See ISCR Case No. 14-05095 at 3 n. 1 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2016) (affirming lack 
of bright-line test for recency of illegal drug use) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-01847 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2015)). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 
98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant’s last use of marijuana occurring 
approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent; however, the marijuana 
use in that case was not while holding a security clearance. If the evidence shows “a 
significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an 
administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”9 
Applicant disclosed his previous marijuana use in his SCA. He has not used it in 
over five years and he did not have a security clearance at the time when he used it. 
Applicant has disassociated from his friends with whom he previously smoked 
marijuana, and he does not frequent locations where illegal drugs are used. He has 
matured and his life circumstances have changed. He now appreciates the adverse 
impact that illegal drug use could have on his career. Applicant has expressed his 
intention not to use marijuana in the future. I am persuaded that he has mitigated any 
drug-involvement security concerns. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and (b) apply. 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
9 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines G, H and J in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the drug involvement security concerns, but he did not mitigate the alcohol-
consumption and criminal-conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   FOR Applicant 
 
             Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline J:                        AGAINST Applicant 
 
   Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.d:                       Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
_______________________ 
Robert J. Kilmartin 
Administrative Judge 
