 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 17-00314 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 28, 2015. 
On March 7, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 22, 2017, admitting all of the SOR 
allegations, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed on April 13, 2017. The case was assigned to me on May 
2, 2017. On May 22, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for June 20, 2017. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A 
which was admitted without objection. At Applicant’s request, I left the record open until 
June 30, 2017. Applicant timely provided additional documents consisting of bank 
statements, which were collectively marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) B and admitted 
into evidence without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 28, 2017. 
 
  Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant is 55 years old. He obtained a bachelor’s degree in 1984. Applicant has 
been employed by a federal contractor with an interim-security clearance since January 
2016. He had previous security clearances under various employers, dating back to the 
mid -1980’s. He was married in 1986 and divorced in 1988. Applicant has two children, 
ages 29, and 31. He reports no military service.  
 
In 2000, Applicant had 85,000 shares in a start-up technology company. When it 
was acquired by another company, Applicant cashed in his shares and received $2.8 
million dollars, after taxes. Thus, from 2000 through 2007, Applicant was semi-retired 
living off the capital gains from the sale of his shares. Then, in 2008, he obtained 
employment for six months at a research laboratory. His employer lost that contract 
when the economy weakened, and Applicant was constrained to obtain unemployment 
benefits. Applicant did not explain how he went through the $2.8 million.  
 
 The SOR alleged in ¶ 1.a that Applicant is indebted to the Federal Government 
for delinquent taxes in the approximate amount of $7,791. Applicant admitted this 
allegation in his Answer to the SOR. At the hearing, he produced evidence in AE A that 
he was making payments to the IRS in the amount of $125 a month initially. Recently, 
he increased these payments to $150 a month. Additional evidence in the form of bank 
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s August 8, 2015 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) and the summary of his security clearance interview on November 
4, 2016.  
 
 
3 
 
 
statements, admitted as AE B, corroborated Applicant’s testimony that he has been 
consistently making these payments to the IRS for over one year, and well before the 
SOR was issued.  
 
 The SOR alleges in ¶ 1.b that Applicant is indebted to a state for delinquent 
taxes in the amount of $6,818. Applicant admitted this allegation in his Answer to the 
SOR. At the hearing, he produced evidence in AE A that he was making payments of 
$256 each month toward settling this debt. Additional evidence in the form of bank 
statements admitted as AE B, corroborated Applicant’s testimony that he has been 
consistently making these payments to date.  
 
 Applicant became delinquent on taxes owed for tax years 2008, 2009 and 2010 
because he misunderstood his tax liability during his period of unemployment. Once 
employed in 2008, he overstated the number of his dependents on his IRS W-4 form, 
resulting in insufficient withholdings.3 Applicant hired an accountant shortly after he 
completed his SCA to review his taxes from 2008 to 2015 and to ascertain the amount 
of his tax arrearages, both state and federal, for the tax years in question. He has also 
reduced the number of deductions (dependents) on his IRS Form W-4, thereby 
increasing tax withholdings.4  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c is a delinquent utility bill in the amount of $729. Applicant’s September 
2015 credit report indicates that this account was opened in February 2008 and charged 
off in July 2009.5 Applicant admitted this debt in his Answer to the SOR. In his clearance 
interview of November 2016, Applicant told the investigator that he fell behind on his 
utility bills for the residence where he lived due to little or no income.6 Applicant testified 
that he thought this debt might be a duplicate with the delinquent debt alleged at SOR ¶ 
1.e, another utility bill in the amount of $155 that he paid in full September 25, 2015.7 It 
is not a duplicate. Applicant testified that it was possible he had already paid this bill 
off.8 It was accrued during a time when he lost his job at the laboratory due to loss of 
the contract, and a general recession. Whether or not Applicant paid this off previously, 
it is less than $1,000 and he clearly has the means to do so now.   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d is a delinquent debt for back rent that Applicant owed for a residence 
where he  lived in 2008. Applicant was unemployed after his six month contract with the 
laboratory ended in 2008. He was unable to pay the rent. He owed a total amount of 
                                                          
3 Tr. 46. 
 
4 Tr. 51. 
 
5 GE 5.  
 
6 GE 3 at p. 2. 
 
7 GE 3 at p. 2. 
 
8 Tr. At 39. 
 
 
4 
 
 
$4,325 but has since made four separate payments of $500 each to the collections 
agent for his former landlord to settle this debt.9 It has been resolved.  
 
 Applicant needs a security clearance for his systems engineer job. Applicant’s 
monthly take-home pay is presently $4,900 after taxes.10 His monthly expenses are 
considerably less than that. He expects to have all of his delinquent tax debts resolved 
within the next 18 to 36 months. He testified that he had next to nothing in his checking 
and savings accounts and his net worth at the time of the hearing was zero.11 
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
                                                          
9 GE 3 at p. 2, AE A, and Tr. at 33. 
 
10 Tr. at 58. 
 
11 Tr. at 61.  
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds…  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;    
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
 
6 
 
 
 (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state or local income tax  
               returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state or local income tax as required. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, clearance interview and answer to the SOR. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c) 
and 19(f), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.12 Applicant has met that burden. Most of the delinquent 
debts have been resolved.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant was semi-retired from 2000 to 2007 until his windfall from cashing-in 
85,000 shares in a start-up company ran out. Then, he was employed briefly for six 
months at a laboratory, but had a long period of unemployment from 2008 to August 
2015 during the downturn in the economy. Arguably, these conditions were beyond his 
                                                          
12 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 
 
 
control. He has now produced relevant and responsive documentation, demonstrating 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has met his burden to 
provide sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and 
that his debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. He has 
either paid off, or has made consistent payments pursuant to a plan, most of his 
delinquent debts. He produced a matrix and bank statements to confirm that four out of 
the five delinquencies alleged in his SOR have been resolved. The mitigating conditions 
enumerated above apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines. Most important, Applicant has 
addressed the specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative measures to 
resolve them. He has met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances no longer remain a security concern. There is sufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He is 
gainfully employed and managing his financial affairs. The record evidence leaves me 
with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:             FOR Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
