 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-08412 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s brother-in-law and sister-in-law (siblings-in-law) are citizens and 
residents of Iran. Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate his and his 
spouse’s relationships with Applicant’s Iranian siblings-in-law. Foreign influence security 
concerns are not mitigated. All other security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 1, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Item 2) On November 7, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 
20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.    
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign influence) and C 
(foreign preference). (Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On December 10, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived 
his right to a hearing. (Item 1) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated June 1, 2015, was provided to him on July 1, 2015.1 On July 9, 2015, Applicant 
responded to the FORM. Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s submission. 
The case was assigned to me on July 30, 2015. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of materials concerning the 
Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran). (Item 6) Department Counsel listed 16 U.S. Government 
publications as reliable sources to show context and support for the discussion of Iran 
and its relationship to the United States. (Item 6 with Appendices I-XVI) There were no 
objections, and I have included Department Counsel’s statement about Iran in the 
section labeled “Iran” of this decision based on my discretion to take administrative 
notice of generally accepted facts from reputable U.S. Government sources. The Iran 
section of this decision is taken from Department Counsel’s administrative notice 
request with some punctuation, spelling corrections, and internal footnotes omitted. In 
addition to the information Department Counsel provided, I take administrative notice 
that the United States and Iran have recently discussed agreements to lift economic 
sanctions against Iran and for Iran to permit inspections to ensure Iran is not developing 
nuclear weapons. Iran and the United States oppose the activities of Isis in Iraq. See 
Paul D. Shinkman, U.S. News and World Report, “Is Iran Helping the U.S. Dislodge ISIS 
from Iraq?” (Mar. 3, 2015), http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2015/03/03/is-iran-
helping-the-us-dislodge-isis-from-iraq. 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, 2.a(1) 
through 2.a(3), and he provided mitigating information. (Item 1) His admissions are 
                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated June 19, 2015, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated July 1, 2015. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 
30 days after his receipt to submit information.  
 
2To protect Applicant and his family’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, and names of other groups or locations. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 72-year-old manufacturing engineer who is seeking employment in 
post-design systems. (FORM response) He has worked for the same large DOD 
contractor for more than 10 years. (Item 2) Applicant was born in Iran, served in the 
Iranian Army for 18 months (1964-1965), earned a bachelor’s degree in Lebanon in 
1972, and immigrated to the United States in 1973. (Items 1, 2; FORM response) He 
earned a master’s degree in business administration from a U.S. university. (FORM 
response) He began working for a DOD contractor in 1980. He became a U.S. citizen in 
1984, and a U.S. passport was issued to him in 2004. (SOR response) He has a life-
time teaching credential from a college. (FORM response) His U.S. net worth is about 
$1,605,000. (Item 3) Applicant and his spouse’s parents are deceased. (Item 2) 
 
In 1972, Applicant married his spouse in Iran. (Item 2) Applicant’s spouse is a 
dual citizen of the United States and Iran. (SOR ¶ 1.a response) She resides with 
Applicant in the United States. Applicant’s brother-in-law and sister-in-law are in their 
early 70s, and they are citizens and residents of Iran. (SOR ¶ 1.b response; Item 3) 
Applicant’s brother-in-law is a retired Iran Government employee. (SOR ¶ 1.b response) 
Applicant said he communicates with his siblings-in-law about four times a year. (April 
26, 2012 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI), Item 
3) 
 
Applicant obtained an Iranian passport in 2004. (SOR ¶ 2.a(1) response) He 
used it to travel to Iran in 2004. (SOR ¶ 2.a(2) response) In 2004, Applicant and his 
spouse went to Iran to visit his mother, who was very ill. (FORM response) Applicant 
explained he used his Iranian passport because: 
 
[The Iranian authorities] would have captured me right upon arrival at the 
airport check out as an American spy & we would not have been able to 
have this conversation together. Plus in that case, my family would have 
lost their bread winner, their house, their belongings & God knows what 
would have happened to them. (FORM response)     
  
Applicant’s mother passed away in 2010, and his sister used Applicant’s Iranian 
passport to claim the $3,000 in benefits of an insurance policy in 2011. (SOR ¶ 2.a(3) 
response; FORM response) In 2012, Applicant surrendered his Iranian passport to his 
security officer. (SOR response) His Iranian passport expired in 2014. (SOR ¶ 2.a(1) 
response) 
  
Applicant’s three daughters were born in 1973, 1978, 1982, in the United States. 
(Item 2) His three daughters live in the United States. (FORM response) One daughter 
has a biology degree, is married to a physician, and has three sons. The other two 
daughters are medical professions with degrees from a well-known university. (FORM 
response) Applicant’s grandchildren are U.S. citizens.    
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant said, “I love Iran & I always will love Iran because it is my birth place – 
for no other reason.” (FORM response) He also loves the United States and appreciates 
everything the United States has done for him and his family. (FORM response) He 
denies that he has a preference for Iran over the United States. (FORM response) 
Applicant does not have any financial interests in Iran. (Item 3) Applicant offered to 
renounce his Iranian citizenship. (April 26, 2012 OPM PSI, Item 3) 
 
Iran 
 
• In January 2012, the Director of National Intelligence assessed that the most 
menacing foreign intelligence threats in the next two to three years will involve 
espionage by China, Russia, and Iran, and that the foreign intelligence services 
of these three countries will remain the top threats to the United States in the 
coming years. He also assessed that Iran's intelligence operations against the 
United States, including cyber capabilities, have dramatically increased in recent 
years in depth and complexity.  
 
• In February 2014, the Director of National Intelligence assessed that Iran and 
North Korea are unpredictable actors in the international arena. Their 
development of cyber espionage or attack capabilities might be used in an 
attempt to either provoke or destabilize the United States or its partners. 
 
• The U.S. Government does not have diplomatic relations with Iran. The United 
States has long-standing concerns over Iran's nuclear program, sponsorship of 
terrorism, and human rights record. The United States and the international 
community have imposed comprehensive sanctions against Iran to compel Iran 
to engage seriously in discussions with the international community and address 
concerns over its nuclear program and human rights abuses. The current Iranian 
government still has not recognized Israel’s right to exist, has hindered the 
Middle East peace process by arming militants, including Hamas, Hezbollah, and 
Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and continues to play a disruptive role in sustaining 
violence in the region, particularly Syria.  
 
• The U.S. Government prohibits nearly all trade and investment with Iran by U.S. 
persons. Sanctions have been imposed on Iran because of its sponsorship of 
terrorism, its refusal to comply with international obligations on its nuclear 
program, and its human rights violations.  
 
• Iran has made technical progress in a number of areas-including uranium 
enrichment, nuclear reactors, and ballistic missiles-from which it could draw if it 
decided to build missile-deliverable nuclear weapons. These technical 
advancements strengthen the assessment that Iran has the scientific, technical, 
and industrial capacity to eventually produce nuclear weapons. 
 
• Iran will continue to act assertively abroad in ways that run counter to U.S. 
interests and worsen regional conflicts. Iranian officials almost certainly believe 
that their support has been instrumental in sustaining Assad’s regime in Syria 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and will probably continue support during 2014 to bolster the regime. In the 
broader Middle East, Iran will continue to provide arms and other aid to 
Palestinian groups, Houthi rebels in Yemen, and Shia militants in Bahrain to 
expand Iranian influence and to counter perceived foreign threats. 
 
• Iran sees rising sectarianism as a dangerous regional development, but its 
perceived responsibility to protect and empower Shia communities will 
increasingly trump its desire to avoid sectarian violence. Hence, Iran's actions will 
likely do more to fuel rather than dampen increasing sectarianism.  
 
• In 2013, the U.S. Department of State reaffirmed its 1984 designation of lran as a 
State Sponsor of Terrorism, denoting the U.S. Government's determination that 
Iran has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism.  
 
• In 2013, Iran continued its terrorist-related activity, including support for 
Palestinian terrorist groups in Gaza, and for Hizballah. It has also increased its 
presence in Africa and attempted to smuggle arms to Houthi separatists in 
Yemen and Shia oppositionists in Bahrain. Iran used the Islamic Revolutionary 
Guard Corps-Quds Force (IRGC-QF) and its regional proxy groups to implement 
foreign policy goals, provide cover for intelligence operations, and create 
instability in the Middle East. The IRGC-QF is the regime's primary mechanism 
for cultivating and supporting terrorists abroad.  
 
• In 2013, Iran continued to provide arms, financing, training, and the facilitation of 
lraqi Shia fighters to the Asad regime's brutal crackdown, a crackdown that has 
resulted in the death of more than 100,000 civilians in Syria. 
 
• In 2013, despite its pledge to support Iraq’s stabilization, Iran trained, funded, 
and provided guidance to Iraqi Shia militant groups. Iran remained unwilling to 
bring to justice senior al-Qa’ida (AQ) members it continued to detain, and refused 
to publicly identify those senior members in its custody.  
 
• In 2013, Iran allowed AQ facilitators Muhsin al-Fadhli and Adel Radi Saqr al-
Wahabi al-Harbi to operate a core facilitation pipeline through Iran, enabling AQ 
to move funds and fighters to South Asia and also to Syria. 
 
• In 2013, the most egregious human rights problems in Iran were the 
government’s manipulation of the electoral process, which severely limited 
citizens' right to change their government peacefully through free and fair 
elections; restrictions on civil liberties, including the freedoms of assembly, 
speech, and press; and disregard for the physical integrity of persons whom it 
arbitrarily and unlawfully detained, tortured, or killed. The government took few 
steps to prosecute, punish, or otherwise hold accountable officials who 
committed abuses. Members of the security forces detained in connection with 
abuses were frequently released soon after their arrest, and judicial officials did 
not prosecute offenders. Impunity remained pervasive throughout all levels of the 
government and security forces.  
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
• In 2013, other reported human rights problems included, for example: 
disappearances; cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment, including 
judicially sanctioned amputation and flogging; politically motivated violence and 
repression, such as beatings and rape; harsh and life-threatening conditions in 
detention and prison facilities, with instances of deaths in custody; arbitrary arrest 
and lengthy pretrial detention, sometimes incommunicado; continued impunity of 
security forces; denial of fair public trials, sometimes resulting in executions 
without due process; the lack of an independent judiciary; political prisoners and 
detainees; ineffective implementation of civil judicial procedures and remedies; 
arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, and correspondence; severe 
restrictions on freedoms of speech (including via the internet) and press; and 
harassment of journalists.  
 
• In 2013, Iranian security forces monitored the social activities of citizens, entered 
homes and offices, monitored telephone conversations and Internet 
communications, and opened mail without court authorization. The Iranian 
Government often charged persons with crimes against national security and 
insulting the regime based on letters, e-mails, and other public and private 
communications. 
 
• The Iranian government does not recognize dual nationality and will treat U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals solely as Iranian citizens subject to Iranian laws. Thus, 
U.S. citizens who were born in Iran, who became naturalized citizens of lran 
(e.g., through marriage to an Iranian citizen), and children of such persons-even 
those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian-are 
considered Iranian nationals by Iranian authorities. Therefore, despite the fact 
that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under Iranian law, they must enter 
and exit Iran on an Iranian passport unless the Iranian government has 
recognized a formal renunciation or loss of lranian citizenship. Dual nationals 
sometimes have their U.S. passports confiscated and may be denied permission 
to leave Iran, or encounter other problems with Iranian authorities. 
 
• Iranian authorities have prevented a number of U.S. citizen academics, 
scientists, journalists, and others who traveled to Iran for 
personal/cultural/business reasons from leaving the country and in some cases 
have detained, interrogated, and imprisoned them on unknown or various 
charges, including espionage and being a threat to the regime. U.S. citizens of 
lranian origin should consider the risk of being targeted by authorities before 
planning travel to Iran.  
 
• Iranian security personnel may at times place foreign visitors under surveillance. 
Hotel rooms, telephones, and fax machines may be monitored, and personal 
possessions in hotel rooms may be searched.  
 
• In February 2011, the Iranian Government put former presidential candidates and 
opposition leaders Mehdi Karroubi, Mir Hossein Mousavi, and his wife, women's 
rights advocate Zahra Rahnavard, under house arrest without formally charging 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
them with any crimes. In February 2014, the U.S. Department of State 
condemned their continued imprisonment and the harassment of their family 
members, and called for their immediate release, continued to urge the Iranian 
government to respect its international obligations to guarantee its citizens 
minimum fair trial guarantees and provide that no one shall be subject to arbitrary 
arrest or detention, and renewed its call for Iran to release all prisoners of 
conscience in its custody. 
 
• In March 2014, the U.S. Department of State renewed its commitment to the safe 
return of Robert Levinson, who disappeared seven years ago while on a 
business trip to Iran, and is one of the longest held American citizens in history. 
 
• In May 2013, Mansour Arbabsiar was sentenced to 25 years in prison for 
conspiring with Iranian-based co-conspirators, including senior officials in Iran's 
Quds Force, to assassinate the Saudi Arabian ambassador to the United States. 
 
• In October 2011, the Office of National Counterintelligence Executive reported 
that losses of sensitive economic information and technologies to foreign entities 
represent significant costs to U.S. national security. It also reported that the illicit 
transfer of technology with military applications to a hostile state such as Iran or 
North Korea could endanger the lives of U.S. and allied military personnel. 
Finally, it reported that Russia and Iran have aggressive programs for developing 
and collecting U.S. civilian and dual use technologies, specifically in one area of 
advanced materials and development: nanotechnology. The United States 
continues to charge and convict individuals involved with the illegal export, or 
attempted illegal export, of restricted and dual-use technology to Iran.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant was born in Iran, and he served in the Iran military for 18 months. His 
siblings-in-law are citizens and residents of Iran. In 2012, he told an OPM investigator 
that he had contacts with his siblings-in-law living in Iran about four times a year. He did 
not provide updated information on his contacts with his siblings-in-law or describe his 
spouse’s contacts with her brother and sister in Iran.  
 
Applicant lives with his spouse in the United States. His spouse is presumptively 
close enough to her siblings to raise a security concern because her siblings are 
residents and citizens of Iran. Applicant did not indicate how often his spouse 
communicates with her parents. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has 
ties of affection for, or obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally 
ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). “[A]s a 
matter of common sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that 
a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the 
person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 
7(d). See also ISCR Case No. 09-05812 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (finding “presence 
in India of close family members, viewed in light of that country’s troubles with terrorism 
and its human rights abuses, and his sharing living quarters with a person (his wife) 
having foreign family contacts, establish the ‘heightened risk’” in AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d)). 
Thus, an indirect, but important tie remains between Applicant and his in-laws living in 
Iran. Indirect influence from Applicant’s in-laws living in Iran, through Applicant’s spouse 
to Applicant, could result in a security concern.   
 
Applicant’s relationships with his siblings-in-law living in Iran create a concern 
about Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and his 
desire to help his spouse’s siblings, who are in Iran. For example, if terrorists or 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
government officials in Iran wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert 
pressure on his siblings-in-law in Iran. Applicant would then be subject to coercion 
through his spouse’s relatives and classified information could potentially be 
compromised. 
 
Possession of close family ties with family living in Iran is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant or his or her spouse has a 
close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of Iran with the United States places some, but not an 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his and his 
spouse’s relationships with family members living in Iran do not pose a security risk. 
Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist his spouse’s relatives in Iran.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Iran seek 
or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, his 
spouse, or her relatives living in Iran, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a 
possibility in the future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Iran has a problem 
with terrorism. Applicant’s and his spouse’s relationships with family members living in 
Iran create a potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently 
close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist relatives in Iran by providing 
sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence 
of Applicant’s and his spouse’s contacts with family living in Iran. Department Counsel 
has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation, and further 
inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has frequent contacts 
with his siblings-in-law and his spouse’s contracts with her siblings, who are citizens 
and residents of Iran is unknown. His loyalty and connections to family living in Iran is a 
positive character trait. However, for security clearance purposes, those same 
connections negate the possibility of mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), and Applicant failed to 
fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with his 
siblings-in-law who are Iran citizens living in Iran] could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States. He immigrated to the United States in 1973. He 
earned a master’s degree in business administration from a U.S. university. He began 
working for a DOD contractor in 1980. He became a U.S. citizen in 1984. His spouse, 
three daughters, and grandchildren are all U.S. citizens and live in the United States. 
When he took an oath and swore allegiance to the United States in 1984, as part of his 
naturalization as a U.S. citizen, and when he volunteered to assist the U.S. Government 
as a contractor, he manifested his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States 
over all other countries. His U.S. net worth is about $1,605,000.  
  
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his and his spouse’s relationships with family 
living in Iran. There is no evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Iranian 
Government, or those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant, 
his spouse, or their family to coerce Applicant for classified or sensitive information.3 As 
such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant or his family living in Iran would be 
specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or exploitation. Of course, the 
primary risk to his family living in Iran is from the lawless Iranian Government.  
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ recent efforts to reach an agreement with Iran to inspect 
for development for nuclear weapons and possible lifting of economic sanctions. In 
addition, the United States and Iran both seek to expel Isis from Iraq. Nevertheless, 
Applicant’s potential access to classified information could theoretically add some risk to 
Applicant’s siblings-in-law from the Iranian Government.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in Iran. Applicant is not required to 
report his contacts with citizens or residents of Iran. AG ¶ 8(f) does not apply because 
Applicant does not have any property in Iran.  
 
In sum, Applicant and his spouse’s connections to family living in Iran are 
significant. According to Applicant’s 2012 OPM PSI, Applicant frequently communicated 
                                            
3There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
with his siblings-in-law in Iran. The frequency of his spouse’s communications with her 
siblings in Iran is not described in the record. Applicant has the burden of establishing 
mitigation. He did not provide any information that his communications with his siblings-
in-law are less frequent now than they were in 2012. Security concerns are not 
analyzed in a piecemeal assessment. Instead, the overall situation must be considered. 
Foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B are not mitigated at this time.   
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference security concern stating, “when an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes one condition with seven subparts that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in Applicant’s case. AG ¶ 10(a) provides: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; . . . [and] (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, 
social welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country.  
 
The scope of AG ¶ 10 is not limited to the specifically enumerated disqualifying 
conditions and includes other conduct or statements that show preference for a foreign 
country. In 1984, Applicant became a U.S. citizen. In 2004, Applicant obtained an 
Iranian passport, and he and used it in 2004 to enter and leave Iran, and his sister used 
it in 2011, to obtain benefits from Iran. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) and 10(a)(3) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: “(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship; . . . 
[and] (e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated.”  
 
AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e) apply. Applicant turned in his Iranian passport, and it has 
expired. He offered to renounce his Iranian citizenship. Based on the entire record, 
foreign preference concerns are mitigated.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
The factors weighing towards approval of Applicant’s security clearance are 
noteworthy; however, they are less substantial than the factors weighing against its 
approval. There is no evidence that Applicant has engaged in recent criminal activity, 
abused alcohol or recently abused illegal drugs, or committed any security violations. 
When he and his spouse were naturalized as U.S. citizens, they swore allegiance to the 
United States. His spouse, three children, and grandchildren are U.S. citizens and 
reside in the United States. He volunteered to serve as a contractor supporting the 
DOD. Applicant has substantial property in the United States, including his U.S. salary, 
and these financial components are important economic connections to the United 
States. There is no evidence that Applicant has any economic connections to Iran. 
There is no evidence that terrorists or other foreign elements have specifically targeted 
Applicant or his family.  
  
A Guideline B decision concerning Iran must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.4 Iran is a dangerous place. Iran supports 
terrorists, who threaten the interests of the United States, and those who cooperate and 
assist the United States. The Iranian Government does not comply with the rule of law 
or protect civil liberties. Iran aggressively seeks intelligence information from the United 
States. The United States and Iran have recently discussed agreements to lift economic 
sanctions against Iran and for Iran to permit inspections for nuclear-weapon 
development. Iran and the United States oppose the activities of Isis in Iraq. Iran and 
the United States continue to have profound policy disputes.  
  
Unresolved significant foreign influence security concerns from Applicant’s 
siblings-in-law living in Iran, and his, his spouse’s connections to them warrant greater 
weight than his connections to the United States. Applicant and his spouse were born in 
Iran. Applicant acknowledged his love for Iran and the dangerous elements in Iran and 
the risks to his siblings-in-law. In 2012, Applicant frequently communicated with his 
siblings-in-law in Iran. The record is silent about his spouse’s communications with her 
siblings. Applicant and his spouse’s connections to family in Iran make Applicant, his 
spouse, and his siblings-in-law more vulnerable as a target of coercion of lawless 
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
elements in Iran, including the Iranian Government. Applicant’s family in Iran will be at a 
greater risk if his clearance is granted.    
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign preference 
concerns are mitigated; however, Applicant has not carried his burden and foreign 
influence concerns are not mitigated at this time. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a(1) through 2.a(3): For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
