1Item 4.
1
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-09057
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
August 18, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge:
Applicant resolved $31,509 of his alleged $33,494 debt. He remains indebted to
three creditors in the total amount of $1,940. He made great progress in decreasing his
total delinquent debt, and promised to continue addressing his remaining delinquencies.
The evidence is sufficient to mitigate resulting security concerns. Based upon a review
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 25, 2012.1 On
December 24, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
2Item 1.
3Item 3. 
4Department Counsel submitted seven iItems in support of the SOR allegations. 
5Item 4.
6Item 3.
7Items 5 and 7.
2
(DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2 The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines that came into effect in the Department of
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted a written response to the SOR on January 5, 2015, and
requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record
without a hearing.3 Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on
May 11, 2015. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM)4 was provided
to Applicant, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM
on May 19, 2015. He submitted 27 pages of additional material in response to the
FORM (Response). I received the case assignment on July 21, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 32 years old, and has worked for a defense contractor since April
2012. He reported unemployment from December 2009 to April 2011, after he was
terminated by his employer. He is unmarried and reported no children.5
The SOR alleged that Applicant is indebted to ten creditors in the total amount of
$33,494. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations
concerning his delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1, although he noted that ¶¶ 1.a and
1.h alleged the same debt.6 The credit reports dated May 7, 2012, and October 8, 2014,
identified all of Applicant’s delinquent debts.7
Applicant was indebted on an vehicle loan that was charged off in the
approximate amount of $19,785, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant was unable to
resolve this delinquency when he was laid off in 2009. He car was repossessed and
sold. Applicant  owed $8,577 after the sale of the car, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. This
3
debt was settled in full on March 6, 2015, as documented in a letter from the creditor
dated April 21, 2015. This debt is resolved. (Response.) 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent debt in the approximate amount of
$1,613, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He indicated this account became delinquent in 2008
because his “ex girlfriend was paying [his] bills because [he] worked all the time. [And]
she was not paying.” Applicant presented an account statement that shows he made a
$450 payment on this debt on April 17, 2015. The statement lists a past-due balance of
$0. This debt is resolved. (Response; Item 5.)
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent medical debt in the approximate amount of
$935, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. This debt has been delinquent since May 2012. This
debt is unresolved. (Response; Item 5.)
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent medical debt in the approximate amount
of $278, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant presented a letter dated April 22, 2015, that
shows this account was paid in full. It is resolved. (Response.)
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent medical debt in the approximate amount of
$189, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant averred in his Response that this debt is paid.
He provided a confirmation number, but failed to introduce documentation to support
this claim. This debt is unresolved. (Response.)
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent telecommunications debt in the
approximate amount of $861, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. Applicant cancelled his service
after moving and never received the final bill. This debt remains unresolved.
(Response.)
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent medical debt in the approximate amount
of $630, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. This debt first became delinquent in 2012. Applicant
presented a letter from this creditor, dated March 30, 2015, that shows this debt was
“paid in full.” It is resolved. (Response.)
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent debt in the approximate amount of $401,
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. This debt was for an overdrawn checking account. Applicant
presented a letter dated February 13, 2013, that shows this debt was “satisfied in full.” It
is resolved. (Response.)
Applicant purportedly was  indebted on a delinquent tax debt in the approximate
amount of $225, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. The only support for this allegation provided by
the Government was in Applicant’s disclosure in his e-QIP and during his personal
subject interview. (Items 4 and 6.) He explained in his Response that he “thought he
owed the IRS money so [he] put it down on his application because [he] did not know
for sure and [he] did not want you to find out that [he] did if [he] said no.” He later
contacted the IRS and was told he “did not owe them.” (Response.) Instead, his credit
report reflects he was delinquent on a bill to a tax preparer. That debt has been
4
resolved. There are no Federal or state tax debts identified on his credit reports. This
debt is resolved. (Response; Item 5; Item 7.)
Applicant stated that he is working on getting all of his debts resolved and
‘hope[s] to have all our debt paid by the end of 2015.” He attributed his debts to his
unemployment and lack of medical insurance. (Item 6; Item 3; Response.) There is no
evidence that Applicant obtained credit counseling, sought assistance with a debt
consolidation company, or contested any of his unsatisfied debts. He submitted no
evidence concerning the quality of his professional performance, or the level of
responsibility his duties entail. He provided no character references describing his
judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
5
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Department Counsel asserted, and the record evidence established, security
concerns under two Guideline F DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
Applicant incurred $33,494 in debt, identified on his credit report since 2008. Of
his ten alleged debts, he has resolved seven accounts $31,509. He remains indebted to
three creditors in the total amount of $1,940. His ongoing pattern and history of inability
or unwillingness to pay his debts raises security concerns under DCs 19(a) and (c), and
shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns. 
The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
6
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts. He
has worked through them systematically and resolved seven of ten accounts. He
intends to resolve the remaining three debts by the end of 2015. There are clear
indications that Applicant is resolving his delinquencies. His recent track record of
attending to his debts suggests Applicant has matured and that similar financial
difficulties are unlikely to occur in the future. The record is sufficient to establish
mitigation under the foregoing conditions. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant offered sufficient
evidence of financial rehabilitation, better judgment, and responsible conduct with
respect to his finances, which offset resulting security concerns. While he needs to
resolve the remaining three delinquent accounts, he has established a recent track
record of diligently addressing his delinquencies. Overall, the record evidence leaves
me without substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a
security clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from his
financial considerations.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j : For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
JENNIFER I. GOLDSTEIN
Administrative Judge
