 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 12-09395 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, dating back to 1998. In 2002 he 
filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy that he did not complete. He has 27 delinquent debts 
totaling about $24,000, which are not paid or resolved. Financial security concerns are 
not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 11, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 4, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On March 11, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing. On April 27, 2015, the Department of Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On June 5, 2015, DOHA issued a hearing 
notice, setting the case for June 30, 2015. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 into evidence. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 14 into evidence. All exhibits were admitted. The 
record remained open until July 20, 2015, to give Applicant time to submit additional 
information. Applicant timely submitted a revised AE 1, which was admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 9, 2015.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted eight of the allegations contained in the SOR, and denied the 
remaining 20 allegations. His admissions are accepted as factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and married since 1998. He and his wife have three 
children, ages 16, 13 and 11.  He has a bachelor’s degree in engineering.  He began his 
current position with a defense contractor in September 2011. Prior to that, he worked 
for a private company for 11 years. (Tr. 25-27.) He held a secret security clearance from 
about 1998 to 2002 while working for another defense contractor. (Tr. 9.) 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. In a June 1998 personal statement, 
Applicant acknowledged that for the past two years he was having difficulty managing 
his financial obligations, including large medical bills that accumulated after the birth of 
his two older children. (GE 6, GE 1.) In another statement made in February 2002 he 
admitted that he had financial problems related to overspending and medical expenses. 
(GE 5.) 
 
 In October 2002 Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. It was dismissed in 
March 2003 because he moved and did not make any payments. Most of the debts 
included in the bankruptcy were eventually charged off. (Tr. 32-33.) In 2009 Applicant 
again began experiencing financial difficulties when his wife was diagnosed with cancer 
and underwent costly medical treatments, some of which was not covered by his 
insurance company. (Tr. 34-35.) 
 
 In June 2012 Applicant discussed his financial history and numerous delinquent 
debts with a government investigator. He said that he and his wife were unable to pay 
some debts because his salary was garnished for delinquent medical bills. He did not 
recognize many debts mentioned by the investigator, but said he would review a credit 
report within the next month or so, and begin contacting creditors to start resolving the 
debts. (GE 2.)   
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR), dated May 2012 and October 2014, the 
SOR alleged Applicant’s 2002 bankruptcy and 27 delinquent debts totaling $23,747. 
None of the 27 debts are resolved. (AE 1.) Although Applicant stated he paid some of 
 
 
3 
 
 
them, he did not provide evidence to verify payments. For example, he said the $10,511 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a for an automobile repossession was resolved through gap 
insurance. However, he did not contact the insurance company or creditor to obtain 
proof of the resolution. (Tr. 37.) Applicant did not produce credible evidence to confirm 
that he disputed the $2,294 debt owed to an apartment complex, as alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.u. 
 
 Applicant submitted a monthly budget that he and his wife created a couple 
weeks ago. His annual salary is $102,000. His net monthly income is $5,500 and 
expenses are $5,500. Included in the budget is $495 for savings. He and his wife 
started following a financial strategy offered by the Dave Ramsey’s program. (Tr. 50-51; 
AE 8.) Between 2012 and 2013 he borrowed about $50,000 from his 401(k). He used 
the money to purchase a car; pay for his wife’s schooling; pay some bills; and take a 
vacation. (Tr. 54-54.) He has repaid about half of it. (Tr. 59.) He acknowledged that his 
June 2015 CBR includes delinquent debts not included on the SOR. (Tr. 55-58.) He has 
never sought financial counseling or other pertinent assistance. (Tr. 63.) He admitted 
that he has “not done a good job handling the credit issue.” (Tr. 67.) 
 
  Applicant submitted letters of recommendation. His first line manager is aware of 
this proceeding and the underlying security concerns related to finances. (Tr. 28.) He 
wrote that Applicant “holds himself accountable to high standards.” (AE 4.) A lead 
designer of Applicant’s team stated that he has not witnessed behavior by Applicant 
“that would cause any concern on my part.”  (AE 5.) His former employer wrote a letter 
noting that Applicant was always supportive of the company projects. (AE 6.) Another 
individual who has known Applicant for 20 years and worked with him in a previous 
position “found [Applicant] to be of good character.” (AE 7.) The authors of the letters 
recommended Applicant for a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant provided performance evaluations for the years 2011, 2012, 2013, and 
2014. All four evaluations note ratings in the met or exceeded expectation categories. 
(AE 9, 10, 11, and 12.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
 
 
4 
 
 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides: 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Since before 1998, Applicant has accumulated delinquent debts that he has been 
unable or unwilling to resolve. The evidence is sufficient to raise both disqualifications, 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s delinquent debts: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems have been ongoing since at least 1998 and 
continue into the present. Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not provide mitigation. Applicant’s 
wife encountered medical problems at the time two children were born prior to 1998. In 
2010 she also required expensive treatment for cancer. Both of those circumstances, 
which created large medical bills, were beyond Applicant’s control. However, he also 
admitted that some problems arose because of his poor financial management skills. 
He provided insufficient evidence that he acted responsibly while the debts were 
accumulating over the years. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) provides limited application. He did not 
offer any evidence that he has received credit or budgetary counseling, and there are 
 
 
6 
 
 
no indications that his finances are under control. Only recently, did he establish a 
budget. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Although he stated that he paid many SOR debts, 
he did not submit documentary evidence confirming a good-faith effort to pay or resolve 
debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Applicant did not document that he has a reasonable 
basis to dispute any of the debts. Thus, AG ¶ 20(e) does not provide any mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment, based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature 44-year-
old employee of a defense contractor since 2011. His supervisor strongly recommends 
him for a security clearance based on his observations of Applicant’s work ethic. Other 
colleagues also recommend him. His performance evaluations document four years of 
successful performance. While those are factors in favor of granting a security 
clearance, other factors outweigh them. Applicant has a long history of mismanaging his 
finances and debts. Until recently, he did not have a family budget nor is there evidence 
that he ever sought financial counseling or assistance over the years. In 2012 he spoke 
to an investigator about his delinquent debts and indicated that he would begin 
addressing them. For over three years, he has known that his financial situation created 
a security concern, but based on the record evidence, he has chosen not to address the 
problem. Until he establishes a track record of financial responsibility, the evidence 
leaves me with concerns as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. Applicant did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising 
from financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.bb:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                  
    
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
