 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-07595 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 6, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 28, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 25, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 2, 
2015, scheduling the hearing for July 21, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 29, 2015.  
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through H, which 
were admitted without objection.  
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.i by changing the date in the 
allegation from “July 9, 2013,” to “February 26, 2012.” The motion was granted without 
objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2011. He is applying for a security clearance for the first 
time. He has a General Educational Development (GED) high school equivalency 
certificate. He is married with four minor children.1 
 
 Applicant has a history of traffic infractions and criminal behavior. He smoked 
marijuana about once a week from 2003, or earlier, through 2007.2 He also purchased 
marijuana, which he stated was “only for personal use.”3 
 
 An FBI identification record indicated that Applicant was arrested in June 2003 
and charged with the federal felony offenses of possession of marijuana with intent to 
distribute (21 U.S.C. § 841) and conspiracy to possess marijuana with the intent to 
distribute (21 U.S.C. § 846). The identification record indicates the charges were 
dismissed the next day.4 
 
 Records from the U.S. District Court indicate that Applicant was arrested on June 
24, 2004, with three other individuals, two males and a female, and charged with the 
federal felony offenses of 21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1), 21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1)(B)(vii), 21 U.S.C. 
§ 846, and 21 U.S.C. § 861(a)(1) for: (1) conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute 
marijuana; (2) possession with intent to distribute marijuana - aiding and abetting; and 
(3-5) three counts of possession with intent to distribute marijuana – employment of 
persons under 18 years of age. Applicant and the other defendants appeared before a 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 10, 72-74, 84; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 The SOR only alleged that Applicant used marijuana before a June 2003 arrest; it did not allege 
marijuana use through 2007. Any conduct that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for 
disqualification purposes. It may be used when assessing Applicant’s credibility, in the application of 
mitigating conditions, and in the whole-person evaluation.  
 
3 Tr. at 54-55, 68-69, 83-84; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
4 GE 3. 
 
3 
 
U.S. Magistrate on June 25, 2004, and he appeared again with an attorney on June 29, 
2004. A detention hearing was reset for July 1, 2004. On that date, the Magistrate set 
bond for Applicant at $10,000, and he was placed in third-party custody of his parents. 
Applicant and the other defendants were indicted on July 21, 2004, and arraigned on 
July 29, 2004. The charges were dismissed on December 10, 2004.5 
 
 The FBI identification record does not report a June 2004 arrest, and the clerk of 
court certified that there were no records of a 2003 case. Applicant testified that the two 
above events represent separate events and charges.6  
 
 Applicant stated that he was at an event at a lake with his family in June 2003. 
Two unknown individuals were there talking to his sister-in-law (wife’s sister). Applicant 
was drinking beer and got in an argument with his wife. His wife left with the children, 
and Applicant decided to walk home. He was picked up by his sister-in-law who offered 
to drive him home. Her car was stopped at a checkpoint where the two unknown 
individuals were already stopped. Several hundred pounds of marijuana were 
discovered in his sister-in-law’s car (254 pounds by one estimate). Applicant denied 
knowing there was marijuana in the car. They were all arrested, and Applicant spent the 
night in a federal facility. He stated that he was released the next day, and any charges 
were dismissed. When questioned what happened to the case against his sister-in-law, 
Applicant stated he did not know if she ever went to trial, was convicted, or spent time in 
prison. He stated that his wife and her sister are not in contact.7 
 
 Applicant described a separate arrest in June 2004. He stated that two high 
school friends came to visit him. They lived in a different area than Applicant. They did 
not have a car. Applicant did not know how they got to his home, so he assumed they 
must have been dropped off. The three decided to go to a third location, and they drove 
in Applicant’s truck, with one of his friends driving. Applicant stated they were stopped 
and arrested. He stated that no drugs were found in his truck. Applicant identified the 
driver as one of the individuals named in the 2004 indictment. When he was asked 
about the other male identified in the indictment, he testified: “No, he wasn’t in the truck 
with me.” He testified that he did not know that individual or the female identified in the 
indictment. He stated the first name of his other high school friend in the truck is [S], but 
he did not know S’s last name. S is not the first name of the person in the indictment.8 
 
 Applicant initially stated that S had drugs on his person, but he later denied it. 
Applicant stated the truck was a 2003 model that belonged to his mother. The truck was 
seized and never returned to his mother.9  
                                                          
5 AE G, H. 
 
6 Tr. at 37-38; GE 3; AE G, H. 
 
7 Tr. at 38-42, 47-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
8 Tr. at 23-37. 
 
9 Tr. at 32-37, 41. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant was arrested in May 2005 and charged with simple assault. He stated 
a co-worker threw a punch at him, and Applicant reacted in self-defense. He stated he 
paid a small fine and had to attend 16 hours of anger-management education.10 
 
 Applicant was arrested in March 2007. In June 2008, he pleaded guilty to federal 
misdemeanor offenses of conspiracy to knowingly hire and continue to employ illegal 
aliens (8 U.S.C. § 1324a(a)(1)(A) and 8 U.S.C. § 1324a(a)(2)). He was sentenced to 
time served and 60 days of home confinement with electronic monitoring under the 
sanction of detention. He was also ordered to pay a $500 fine and a special assessment 
of $10. Applicant stated that he worked for a construction company that employed illegal 
aliens, and he was arrested when the company was raided by Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement (ICE). Applicant told a background investigator that he was in 
charge of a crew, but there were no illegal workers on his crew. He stated that he was 
charged because he knew the company employed illegal aliens, and he did not notify 
ICE.11  
 
 Applicant was charged with failure to appear in 2002, 2004, and 2010. He was 
cited for not being in possession of insurance or a driver’s license in 2009, and he was 
cited for driving with a suspended driver’s license in 2010. Applicant stated that he did 
not intentionally fail to appear at trial or traffic court. He also stated that he had 
insurance and a valid driver’s license, but he did not have them with him when he was 
cited. The disposition of the charges and citations are unclear, but Applicant admitted 
that he paid fines for other traffic citations.12 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant had three delinquent medical debts totaling 
$3,553 and a $440 charged-off department store account. Applicant admitted owing all 
the debts. He stated that he was unaware that the debts were charged off or sent to 
collections. He stated that he contacted the creditors and intends to pay the debts. The 
department store debt is the only debt listed on the September 2014 credit report, which 
is the only credit report in evidence.13 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
February 2012. Section 22 asked: 
 
 Section 22 Police Record  
 
For this item, report information regardless of whether the record in your 
case has been sealed, expunged, or otherwise stricken from the court 
record, or the charge was dismissed. You need not report convictions 
under the Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 55-56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
11 Tr. at 57-62; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE A, G. 
 
12 Tr. at 56-57, 62-71; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
13 Tr. at 18, 75-78; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 4; AE B-E. 
 
5 
 
expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 
3607. Be sure to include all incidents whether occurring in the U.S. or 
abroad. 
 
 Police Record 
 
Have any of the following happened? (If ‘Yes’ you will be asked to provide 
details for each offense that pertains to the actions that are identified 
below.) 
 
 In the past seven (7) years have you been issued a summons, 
citation, or ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding against 
you? (Do not check if all the citations involved traffic infractions 
where the fine was less than $300 and did not include alcohol or 
drugs) 
 
 In the past seven (7) years have you been arrested by any police 
officer, sheriff, marshal or any other type of law enforcement 
official? 
 
 In the past seven (7) years have you been charged, convicted, or 
sentenced of a crime in any court? (Include all qualifying charges, 
convictions or sentences in any Federal, state, local, military, or 
non-U.S. court, even if previously listed on this form). 
 
 
 * * * 
 
 Police Record (EVER) 
 
Other than those offenses already listed, have you EVER had the 
following happen to you? 
 
 
 * * * 
 
 Have you EVER been charged with any felony offense? (Include 
those under the Uniform Code of Military Justice and non-
military/civilian felony offenses) 
 
 * * * 
 Have you EVER been charged with an offense involving alcohol or 
drugs?14 (emphasis in original) 
 
                                                          
14 GE 1.  
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant answered “Yes” to the police record questions that were limited to the 
last seven years. He reported his 2005 arrest, his 2007 arrest and conviction, and six 
traffic citations. He answered “No” to the questions asking if he had ever been charged 
with a felony offense or an offense involving alcohol or drugs. Under other questions, he 
reported his marijuana use between 2004 and 2007 and a $2,831 delinquent medical 
debt. The questions asking about illegal drug involvement only required Applicant to 
report information from the previous seven years.15 
 
 Applicant denied intentionally providing false information on his SF 86. He stated 
that he did think that he had been charged in 2003 and 2004. In January 2014, he wrote 
in response to DOHA interrogatories asking why he did not disclose his 2003 arrest on 
his SF 86: 
 
The reason that [I] did not disclose the June 2003 incident, [t]o the best of 
my knowledge I never got charged with anything, yes I was placed under 
arrest but later released by the agents outside the court house without 
even stepping foot inside the court house. And was told by the agents that 
I was being released, at that point I assumed that since I was not 
summoned to court I was free of all charges, for that reason was that I 
failed to disclose this incident.16 
 
 Applicant’s explanation fails to address why he did not list his 2004 charges. He 
testified that he did not know that he was charged because he was not convicted. 
However, he admitted that his sister-in-law had been charged (“The driver of the car 
was charged, I was not.”) even though he stated that he did not know if she had ever 
been convicted. Additionally, Department Counsel asked him if he knew what an 
indictment was, to which he replied. “Sir, an indictment is when you get charged with 
something, don’t you?” He stated that he had “never been, not even verbally, told [he] 
was being charged.”17 Yet he also testified: 
 
 DC: All right. Well you know you were arraigned according to this? 
 
 Applicant: Yes. 
 
 DC: And what did they tell you you were charged with?  
 
 Applicant: For conspiracy. 
 
 DC: Conspiracy to do what? 
 
 Applicant: For marijuana.  
 
                                                          
15 GE 1. 
 
16 GE 2. 
 
17 Tr. at 43-47, 87-89; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
7 
 
 DC: Conspiracy to import marijuana? 
 
 Applicant: To have a role to play with marijuana. 
 
 DC: Trafficking? 
 
 Applicant: Yes.18 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in March 2012. He 
discussed his marijuana use from 2004 to 2007. He discussed the 2003 arrest involving 
his sister-in-law. He did not state that he was arrested again in 2004. He did not reveal 
the information about the 2004 arrest with his high school friends and subsequent 
charges until the hearing.19 
 
 I did not find Applicant to be a credible witness. There is little in his testimony that 
I find believable, including his description of the events in 2003 to 2004. I further find 
that he intentionally provided false information on his SF 86 when he failed to divulge 
his 2003/2004 arrests and charges. 
 
 Applicant submitted several letters attesting to his excellent job performance, 
dedication, patience, compassion, loyalty, moral character, leadership, honesty, honor, 
work ethic, trustworthiness, responsibility, dependability, professionalism, reliability, and 
integrity.20 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
18 Tr. at 35. 
 
19 Tr. at 38-40; GE 2. 
 
20 AE F. 
 
8 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
 
9 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant’s marijuana use, criminal conduct, and traffic-related offenses reflect 
questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. They 
also created vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d), 
and 16(e) are applicable. Applicant intentionally provided false information on his 2012 
SF 86 when he answered “No” to the question that asked if he had ever been charged 
with an offense involving alcohol or drugs. AG ¶ 16(a) is also applicable.  
 
There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant provided the 
false statement alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. AG ¶ 16(b) is not applicable. That allegation is 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
  SOR ¶ 1.j alleges that Applicant intentionally falsified his 2012 SF 86 by failing to 
list his 2003 drug involvement. However, the pertinent question only required him to go 
back seven years. He had no obligation to report his 2003 drug involvement under that 
question. SOR ¶ 1.j is concluded for Applicant.  
 
  The four delinquent debts, traffic infractions, and failure to arrear charges are 
mitigated. SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.f to 1.h, and 1.l are concluded for Applicant.  
 
 
10 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 There is no evidence of any citations, arrests, or convictions after 2010. The last 
significant criminal conduct that resulted in criminal proceedings occurred in 2007. 
Under most circumstances, the conduct would have been mitigated by the passage of 
time. However, I have serious concerns about Applicant’s versions of the events. 
Moreover, having determined that Applicant intentionally provided false information on 
his 2012 SF 86, I have also determined that he provided false information when he 
denied his omission was intentional. It would be inconsistent to find the conduct 
mitigated.21  
 
 
 
                                                          
21 See ISCR Case No. 03-22819 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2006), in which the Appeal Board reversed the 
Administrative Judge’s decision to grant the applicant’s security clearance: 
 
Once the Administrative Judge found that Applicant deliberately falsified a security 
clearance application in September 2002, the Judge could not render a favorable security 
clearance decision without articulating a rational basis for why it would be clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant 
despite the falsification. Here, the Judge gives reasons as to why he considers the 
falsification mitigated under a “whole person” analysis, namely that Applicant has 
matured, has held a position of responsibility, recognizes how important it is to be candid 
in relation to matters relating to her security clearance, and has changed her behavior so 
that there is little likelihood of recurrence. However, the Judge’s conclusion runs contrary 
to the Judge’s rejection of Applicant’s explanations for the security clearance application 
falsification. At the hearing (after earlier admitting the falsification in her March 2003 
written statement to a security investigator), Applicant testified that she had not 
intentionally falsified her application. Given the Judge's rejection of this explanation as 
not being credible, it follows that the Judge could not have concluded Applicant now 
recognizes the importance of candor and has changed her behavior. 
 
 
11 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. However, he has a 
troublesome criminal record, and he cannot be counted on to tell the truth.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.h:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.l:   For Applicant 
   
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
