KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: It is an applicant’s task to present evidence to rebut explain or mitigate adverse facts
proven by Department Counsel.  In this case, the Judge admitted all the evidence presented by
Applicant and made some findings based on Applicant’s testimony.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-02329.a1
DATE: 08/17/2015
DATE: August 17, 2015
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-02329
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 30, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On May 19, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings were based
on substantial record evidence; whether Applicant was denied due process; and whether the Judge’s
adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we
affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant graduated from high school, after which he obtained technical degrees.  Married
four times, he has adult children from prior marriages.  He last married in 2011 but is currently
separated.  Applicant has worked for his current employer since 1985, during which time he has held
a security clearance.
Applicant’s SOR lists numerous delinquent debts, for communication services, utilities,
credit  cards, etc.  Applicant disputes a number of these debts, although he did not provide evidence
corroborating the basis for the disputes.  He testified that he sent handwritten letters to the credit
bureaus claiming not to owe certain debts, but he never heard back from the bureaus and did not
keep copies of these letters.  Applicant claimed to have been a victim of identity theft.  He also
stated that his separation agreement from a previous wife, whom he divorced in 2008, set forth
responsibilities between the parties regarding the payment of debts.  However, he does not have a
copy of the settlement agreement.  He stated that he gave his divorce attorney $7,000 to pay his
share of the marital debts, but he does not know if this was done and the attorney has since died. 
Applicant acknowledged a debt for more than $15,000, stating that it was his responsibility after his
2008 divorce.  He claimed to have worked out a payment agreement but was unable to make
payments because of other responsibilities, such as child support and a debt to the IRS that was the
subject of a garnishment action.  Another creditor has acquired this debt, and Applicant states that
he is in negotiations to resolve it.  
In 2011, Applicant was interviewed pursuant to his clearance application.  When confronted
with his delinquent debts, he was concerned.  He stated that he would obtain a copy of his credit
report and maybe seek legal counsel.  He has stated a desire to resolve his debts, although he claims
that most of them are not legitimately his.  He stated that he had taken care of a number of debts that
were identified by the DoD during the processing of his clearance.  He stated that the SOR
allegations are all that remain of his financial problems.
2
Applicant submitted documents after the hearing.  These include an application for a
hardship loan from his retirement plan and a statement that he would use the funds to pay his debts
rather than resolve them by disputing them.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge resolved two SOR allegations, for medical expenses, in Applicant’s favor. 
However, she reached the opposite conclusion regarding the remainder.  She stated that Applicant
had been aware of his delinquent debts at least since his 2011 interview, yet they remain unresolved. 
She noted his claims to have been a victim of identity theft but also noted that Applicant had
provided nothing in corroboration of these claims.  Neither did he corroborate his testimony that he
sent dispute letters to the credit bureaus.  She stated that there is no evidence that Applicant has
initiated a good-faith effort to pay his debts.  Even the $15,000 one, which he agrees is legitimate,
has not been paid or made the subject of a payment agreement with the current creditor.  The Judge
acknowledged that Applicant had applied for a loan from his retirement plan.  However, she
concluded that it was too soon to conclude that his debts are no longer matters of security concern.
Discussion
Factual Sufficiency
Applicant claims that the Judge’s decision was “based on assumptions and opinions” rather
than facts established by the Government, “such as income to debt ratio.”  Appeal Brief at 1.  He
argues that the Judge failed to admit all of the evidence since the beginning of his case.  Had she
done so, it would have shown that he has addressed a large number of his debts.  
 It is an applicant’s task to present “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by the Department Counsel[.]”  Directive ¶
E3.1.15.  We have examined the entire record, paying particular attention to the transcript.  Nowhere
can we find an instance, either during or after the hearing, in which the Judge refused to admit
evidence provided by Applicant.  Indeed, all of the documents he offered were admitted into
evidence without objection.  If he believed that there was other evidence that should have been
considered, he could have offered it while the record was open.  In any event, the Judge made a
finding based on Applicant’s testimony that he had taken care of many of the debts that had been
drawn to his attention during the processing of his application for a clearance.  We find no reason
to conclude that the Judge failed to extend appropriate weight to this finding.  The Judge’s material
findings of security concern are based upon substantial record evidence or constitute reasonable
inferences that could be drawn from the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App.
Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).  We resolve this assignment of error adversely to Applicant.
Due Process
Applicant argues that neither the Judge nor Department Counsel gave him appropriate advice
on what steps he needed to take to resolve his debts to the satisfaction of the Government.  As a
3
consequence, he claims that he had no reason to know what he should have done to mitigate the
concerns in his case.  
A Judge is an impartial fact-finder.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00434 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan.
20, 2015).  As such, a Judge has no authority to advise an applicant on the quantum of evidence
sufficient to mitigate the concerns raised in an SOR.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04664 at 3 (App.
Bd. Jul. 24, 2015).  Neither is a Department Counsel authorized to advise an applicant on how to
present his or her case or otherwise to act as an advocate for an opposing party.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 12-00270 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 17, 2014).    For them to do otherwise would be inconsistent with
their respective duties to make findings and conclusions or to represent the interests of the U.S.  
As stated above, it is an applicant’s responsibility to provide evidence in mitigation of the
concerns raised in the SOR.  To that end, an applicant has a right to employ counsel or some other
person to provide assistance and representation at the hearing.  See Directive, Enclosure 1 ¶
SECTION 3 (5); ¶ E3.1.8.  The record shows that Applicant was advised of his rights, including the
right to present evidence and to be represented, if he so chose.  These  rights were explained in the
Directive, a copy of which was furnished to Applicant along with the SOR.  They were also
explained in pre-hearing guidance from the Chief Administrative Judge.  At the beginning of the
hearing the Judge summarized Applicant’s rights, and he stated that he understood them.  Applicant
advised that he intended to represent himself.  Tr. at 5-8.  
In regard to Applicant’s argument that he lacked “information on what needs to be done”
(Appeal Brief at 1), the Directive contains a list of disqualifying and mitigating conditions for each
Guideline, which are sufficient to apprise a reasonable person of the ways in which security
concerns can be rebutted or mitigated.  Moreover, during the hearing the Judge told Applicant that
she would hold the record open to enable him to provide “anything to show that you’ve actually
taken any action at all” in regard to his debts, thereby suggesting that corroborating evidence would
be relevant and material in evaluating Applicant’s claims of debt payment or of identity theft, and
Applicant replied, “I understand.”  Tr. at 73.  We conclude that Applicant was apprised of his rights
and duties to a degree sufficient to have enabled him to present his case for mitigation or to make
an informed judgment about securing representation in the event he required assistance.  Applicant
was not denied the due process afforded by the Directive.  See ISCR Case No. 11-14723 at 2-3 (App.
Bd. Oct. 3, 2014).1
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
1To the extent that Applicant’s various arguments imply that the Judge might have been biased against him, we
note that Judges are presumed to be unbiased and that claims to the contrary must satisfy a “heavy burden” of persuasion. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-13949 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 5, 2013).  We find no reason to conclude that the Judge acted
in such a manner that would persuade a reasonable person that she lacked the requisite impartiality.  
4
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
5
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed; William S. Fields           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
