 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-07449 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 3, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 13, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 15, 
2015, scheduling the hearing for August 17, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 
25, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 62-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She served in the 
U.S. military from 1980 until she retired in 2000. She has worked for her current 
employer or a predecessor defense contractor since her retirement from the military. 
She seeks to retain her security clearance, which she has held since she was in the 
military. She attended college for a period, but she did not earn a degree. Her husband 
passed away in 2010. She has one adult child.1 
 
Applicant’s late husband also retired from the military. He handled the family’s 
finances. He developed cancer in 2006, and required surgery and multiple medical 
procedures. He was no longer able to work. The family’s income was greatly reduced, 
which caused a financial strain. Applicant felt bankruptcy was her most viable option. 
She filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in 2012, and her debts were discharged the 
same year. She had some additional financial problems after the bankruptcy.2 
 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling $2,490, a $7,033 federal tax lien, 
and the 2012 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant admitted that she owed the debts at one 
point, but she stated that the taxes were paid and she is paying the other four debts. 
 
The $7,033 federal tax lien was filed in 2008. It was for tax years 2003, 2004, 
and 2005, when Applicant’s late husband was in charge of handling the finances and 
filing the joint tax returns. The delinquent taxes were paid through payments and the 
IRS withholding refunds. It is unclear when the 2003 taxes were paid, but the 2004 
taxes were paid by 2011. The 2005 taxes were paid and resolved by 2012, but the lien 
was not formally released until June 2015. Applicant received a refund after filing her 
2014 tax return.3  
 
Applicant is making regular payments on the remaining four debts. She credibly 
stated that she intends to maintain the payments. Her finances are not perfect, but she 
is able to pay her bills while living a frugal lifestyle. She received financial counseling in 
conjunction with her bankruptcy.4  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20, 27-28, 32-33; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 20, 23-24, 31-32; GE 1-4; AE B. 
 
3 Tr. at 21, 24-25; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4; AE C. 
 
4 Tr. at 21-22, 26-30, 33-34; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that she was unable to pay. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant was unable to recover financially from her husband’s illness and death. 
She filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in 2012, and her debts were discharged the 
same year. She developed additional problems, but her taxes were paid in 2012, three 
 
5 
 
years before the SOR was issued. She is making regular payments on the four 
remaining debts. Her finances are not perfect, but she is able to pay her bills while living 
a frugal lifestyle.  
 
  I find that Applicant’s financial problems were caused by conditions that were 
beyond her control. They occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. The 
above mitigating conditions are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service, her stable work history, the 
factors that led to her financial problems, and the steps she has taken to remedy those 
problems. I am convinced her finances are sufficiently stable to warrant a security 
clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:5   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
5 There is no SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
