 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 12-10377 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 14, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86). On January 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).  The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a security clearance for 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether his clearance should be granted.  
 
On February 20, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On April 2, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On April 8, 2015, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On April 21, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for May 26, 2015. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were received into evidence 
without objection.  
 
Applicant did not call any witnesses, testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A through H-2, which were received into evidence without objection. I held the 
record open until June 5, 2015, to afford the Applicant an opportunity to submit 
additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE I through AE L, which were 
received into evidence without objection. On June 2, 2015, DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant constructively admitted all of the SOR allegations 
with explanations. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old sheet metal mechanic employed by a defense 
contractor since April 2011. He seeks a secret security clearance as a condition of 
continued employment. (GE 1; Tr. 15-17)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1981. He did not pursue higher 
education and learned his job skills from on-the-job training. (GE 1; Tr. 17-18) 
Applicant married in March 1999. His wife is employed full-time as a receptionist at a 
law firm. Applicant has three adult children, one son and two daughters. Applicant did 
not serve in the armed forces. (GE 1; Tr. 18-21) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists eight allegations under this concern – four collection 
accounts, two charged-off accounts, one state tax lien, and failure to file federal and 
state tax returns in 2008. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.h)  
 
Applicant’s financial problems began when he was laid off and unemployed 
from August 2009 to April 2011. His income dropped from $2,400 a month to 
approximately $972 a month, which he received in unemployment compensation. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant also was required to pay a car loan he co-signed for one of his daughters 
when she defaulted. (GE 2; Tr. 21-25) 
 
The following summarizes the status of each SOR debt:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – Collection account for utility company in the amount of $595. Paid 
in full. DEBT RESOLVED. (Tr. 25-26; AE A-1, A-2) 
 
SOR ¶1.b – Collection account for cable service in the amount of $327. Paid in 
full. DEBT RESOLVED.  (Tr. 27; AE B) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – Charged-off account for car repossession in the amount of 
$15,319. Applicant co-signed for his daughter’s car loan and she defaulted. He has a 
pending written offer with the creditor to settle this account. DEBT BEING 
RESOLVED. (Tr. 27-29, 42; AE C-1, C-2, C-3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – State tax lien in the amount of $516. Paid in full. (DEBT 
RESOLVED. (Tr. 29-32; AE D) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – Charged-off credit card account for $453. Paid in full. (DEBT 
RESOLVED. (Tr. 32; AE E) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – Charged-off credit card account for $706. Paid in full. (DEBT 
RESOLVED. (Tr. 32; AE F) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g – Collection account for a furniture company in the amount of 
$1,663. Applicant is making $150 monthly payments until account is paid off. (DEBT 
BEING RESOLVED. (Tr. 32, 42-43; AE G-1, G-2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – Applicant failed to file his state and federal income returns for 
2008. After Applicant was laid off, he did not have the money to pay his taxes. 
Applicant has since filed both his state and federal returns and is current on all of his 
state and federal income taxes. (Tr. 32-36, 43; AE H-1, H-2) 
 
Post-hearing, Applicant submitted a budget that reflects he is living a modest 
lifestyle and within his means. He testified that his net monthly remainder is 
approximately $1,800. (Tr. 38-42; AE I) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted three work-related reference letters from two supervisors 
and one co-worker. Applicant is a dependable and trusted employee. He has an 
excellent work ethic and is a definite asset to his company’s mission. (AE J – AE L) 
 
 
  
 
4 
 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
 
5 
 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                                     Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides three financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts”; “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations”; and 
“(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required ….” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt and failure to file his tax returns is established by 
the evidence presented. The Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 
19(a), 19(c), and (g).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. After Applicant was laid off for 
approximately 20 months, his income significantly decreased. His daughter also 
defaulted on a car loan for which he co-signed. These events could not have been 
anticipated. Applicant remained in contact with his creditors1; however, he was unable 
to remain current on his accounts because he simply did not have the money to pay 
them. 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) is partially applicable and 20(d) is fully applicable. Although he did 
not receive financial counseling, his debts are being resolved and there are clear 
indications that his financial problems are under control. Applicant has made a 
concerted effort to repay his creditors. He has paid six of his debts in full, is making 
monthly payments on one debt, and has a pending written offer to settle one of his 
debts. Additionally, Applicant has filed his 2008 state and federal state income tax 
returns and is current on all of his taxes. AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside [his or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether [he or she] maintained contact with [his or her] creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep [his or her] debts current. 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. He is 
current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within his means, and his SOR debts have 
been resolved or are being resolved. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element 
in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept 
of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2 (a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Applicant’s debts have been explained, paid or are being resolved. Due to 
circumstances beyond his control, his debts became delinquent. Despite his financial 
setback, it is clear from Applicant’s actions that he is on the road to a full financial 
recovery. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
8 
 
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s years of financial 
responsibility before falling into debt, the circumstances that led to his financial 
difficulties, his financial recovery, the steps he has taken to resolve his financial 
situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, the mature and 
responsible manner in which he dealt with his situation, his reference letters, and his 
testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, 
and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude he 
has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
