KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge did not err in his conclusion that Applicant’s circumstances raised security
concerns.  The Judge’s material findings are supported by substantial evidence.  Applicant failed
to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence.  
CASE NO: 14-01761.a1
DATE: 08/03/2015
DATE: August 3, 2015
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-01761
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
2, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On May 19, 2015, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant left the military in 2012 and began working for a Federal contractor.  His SOR
alleges six delinquent debts, which he attributes to his separation and divorce from his wife.  He has
not used a credit card in five years and his current finances are in order.  Applicant has made some
payments to his creditors, having promised to pay some of his debts after he resolves others.  The
Judge found that his payment history to one of them has been inconsistent, in view of evidence that
he made one payment of $496 and several more of $50.  Applicant owes a balance of nearly $6,200
on it as of April 2015.
One of Applicant’s debts is for a mortgage loan for over $150,000.  After he separated from
his wife, Applicant found it difficult to make his mortgage payments.  He missed payments and
made partial ones for about a year before contacting the lending company.  Applicant claimed that
the system was designed to ensure that the buyer failed.  He attempted to resolve the debt through
a deed of foreclosure but was not successful.  He moved out of the house in 2012, stating in his
answer to the SOR that he rented the house and has made payments every month.  “It is unknown
if he still resides in the house.”  Decision at 3.
The mortgage lender entered into an agreement with Federal banking regulators as a result
of an enforcement action concerning deficient servicing and foreclosure processes.  Applicant
received a check for $1,000 as part of this agreement.  Applicant has settled and paid one of the
debts, providing documents in corroboration.  The Judge found this debt to be resolved.  Applicant’s
annual income is $106,080.  He contributes 6% of his income to a retirement account, his employer
contributing another 4%.  He has a savings account with a balance of $1,200 and an emergency cash
fund of $500.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted that Applicant’s divorce was a circumstance outside his control that affected
his financial condition.  She concluded, however, that he had not acted responsibly in regard to his
debts.  Concerning the largest of these, the mortgage, the Judge stated that Applicant had not
provided sufficient evidence for her to make a determination about its status.  She stated “He
stopped making his mortgage payments and moved out of the house.  He then moved back in as a
tenant.”  Decision at 6.  The Judge also stated that Applicant had provided no evidence of his actions
to pay his remaining delinquent debts.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge reiterated that
Applicant had failed to provide sufficient evidence of debt resolution.  
Discussion
2
 Applicant argues that the Judge erred in concluding that his circumstances raised
disqualifying condition 19(a),1 in that he believes that he has shown himself to be willing and able
to satisfy his debts.  The Government presented evidence that Applicant has several debts that have
been delinquent for a substantial length of time, raising a concern under Guideline F.  Such a
concern is not conclusive, however, nor is it a determination that Applicant is necessarily a person
of bad character.  Rather, it places on Applicant the burden of explaining, refuting, or mitigating the
issues raised by his financial history.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  In this case, we find no error in the
Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s debts raise a reasonable concern that he is unable to resolve
them, thereby suggesting poor self control or a lack of judgment.  See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 18. 
Furthermore, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s debts raise security concerns is sustainable
under 19(c),2 as she also found, or under the general language of ¶ 18.  Therefore, even if there had
been an error, it would have been harmless.
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in some of her findings of fact.  He argues that the
Judge erred in finding that he had moved back into his house as a tenant after vacating it.  He also
contends that his payment history to one of the debts was not inconsistent.  We examine a Judge’s
findings to see if they are supported by “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept
as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  
Applicant argues that he did not move back into the house as a tenant.  Rather, he rented the
house out to others.  The challenged finding is based on Applicant’s answer to the SOR, and it is not
an unreasonable interpretation of the answer, read in and of itself.  However, even if the Judge erred
in her finding, it did not likely affect her overall decision, which focused primarily on the lack of
evidence of debt resolution.  Otherwise, the Judge’s findings are based on substantial evidence or
constitute reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
11-00970 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2012).  Applicant has not cited to a harmful error in the Judge’s
findings. 
Applicant cites to his evidence in mitigation.  However, his argument is not sufficient to
rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-03223 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 17, 2015).  Applicant’s argument consists basically of an
alternative interpretation of the record, which is not enough to show that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g, ISCR Case No. 14-
02950 at 4 (App. Bd. May 14, 2015).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts[.]”  
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations[.]”  
3
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.     
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
