 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04775 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Bruce R. Heurlin, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the alcohol consumption security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 17, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 25, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 2, 
2015, scheduling the hearing for July 22, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through N, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 30, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2013. He is applying for a security clearance for the first 
time. He has a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. He has never married, but he 
cohabitates with his girlfriend. He does not have children.1 
 
In 2009, Applicant had too much to drink before he moved his car in a bar’s 
parking lot and fell asleep in the car. He was asleep behind the wheel when the police 
woke him and arrested him. His blood alcohol concentration (BAC) was about 0.21%. 
He was charged with driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol. He was placed in a 
diversion program and received 12 hours of alcohol treatment, where he was diagnosed 
as an alcohol abuser. He paid courts costs, and the charge was dismissed.2 
 
Applicant hit a telephone pole after drinking heavily in September 2011. He was 
charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI), BAC over 0.15. He pleaded guilty and was 
sentenced to 120 days in jail, which were suspended; probation for 18 months; a $900 
fine; and $390 court costs. He was required to complete a 12-hour DWI education 
program, attend a DWI impact panel, and complete 40 hours of community service. He 
was only permitted to drive with an ignition interlock device. He completed all the terms 
of his sentence and probation.3 
 
Applicant started drinking alcohol when he was in high school. His drinking 
increased when he was in college. He received his DUI shortly before he graduated 
college in 2009. He did not drink as much in graduate school until shortly before his 
2011 DWI. He was having relationship problems with his then girlfriend and drank more 
frequently and heavier for the two-week period leading up to his DWI.4 
 
Applicant admits that he should have learned his lesson after his 2009 DUI, but 
he credibly stated that the 2011 DWI clearly opened his eyes. He no longer drinks and 
drives. He drank in moderation until he stopped drinking in March 2015. He is an 
accomplished athlete, and he still competes at a high level. He exercises at least an 
hour a day, and he eats healthy foods. He met his current girlfriend shortly after his 
2011 arrest. She supports his healthy lifestyle, which does not include excessive 
drinking. He loves his job, and a security clearance is necessary for him to continue to 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 18-24, 47-48; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE C, D. 
 
2 Tr. at 35-40, 54, 59-60; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
3 Tr. at 40-44, 54-55; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE J. 
 
4 Tr. at 35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3.  
 
 
3 
 
grow in the company. He is aware that if he is given another chance, it is unlikely that 
he will receive another.5 
 
Applicant received an alcohol assessment from a licensed independent 
substance abuse counselor/licensed clinical social worker (LISAC/LCSW) at a 
recognized substance abuse counseling center in June 2015. The counselor concluded: 
 
Although [Applicant’s] MAST (Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test) score 
(over a life time) does indicate problem drinking, there is no indication at 
this time that he is a problem drinker or suffers from an alcohol abuse or 
alcohol dependence disorder. In addition, there is no indication that he is a 
risk of reoffending, i.e., drinking or driving.6 
 
 Applicant submitted numerous letters and documents attesting to his excellent 
job performance, honesty, professionalism, work ethic, responsibility, trustworthiness, 
reliability, judgment, and integrity.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 21-22, 44-52, 56, 61-64; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE B, E. 
 
6 AE K. 
 
7 AE F-I, L-N. 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant has two alcohol-related driving arrests. He admits that he drank alcohol 
to excess and to the point of intoxication. While attending alcohol treatment after his first 
arrest, he was diagnosed as an alcohol abuser. The above disqualifying conditions are 
applicable. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol-related arrest was in September 2011, almost four years 
ago. He completed the required substance abuse programs after his arrest. He is in a 
good relationship with his girlfriend who supports his healthy lifestyle. He is highly 
regarded in a job that he loves. It should not have taken two arrests, but I believe he 
has learned his lesson. He received a favorable assessment from an LISAC/LCSW at a 
recognized substance abuse counseling center.  
 
 I find that Applicant has established a pattern of responsible alcohol use and that 
uncontrolled drinking is unlikely to recur. His current alcohol consumption does not cast 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) are 
applicable. AG ¶ 23(d) is partially applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. Applicant exhibited 
extremely poor judgment when he drove on two occasions after heavy drinking. 
However, I am satisfied that he finally learned his lesson, and the conduct will not be 
repeated.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
