 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ADP Case No. 14-05351 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate trustworthiness concerns 
raised by his financial situation. Notwithstanding full-time employment since 2007, 
Applicant accumulated over $20,000 in delinquent debt and has yet to take action to 
address his past-due debts. Eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On December 3, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging that Applicant’s circumstances raised trustworthiness 
concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR, 
waived his right to a hearing, and requested a decision on the written record (Answer). 
 
 On April 20, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains five documentary exhibits that are 
admitted into evidence, without objection, as exhibits (Ex.) 1 – 5. Applicant did not 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). 
 
2 
 
 
submit a response to the FORM within the allotted 30-day period, and the case was 
forwarded to the hearing office. I was assigned the case on July 1, 2015.  
 
 On July 2, 2015, I contacted the parties to provide Applicant a final opportunity to 
submit a response to the FORM. See Hearing Exhibit I. Applicant submitted a response, 
his performance reports, and two reference letters, which were marked and admitted 
into evidence, without objection, as Ex. A – C. The record closed on July 17, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, a naturalized U.S. citizen, has been working for his current employer 
since 2007. He earned a degree in computer programming in 1995, and is employed as 
a senior systems support analyst. His performance reports reflect that he generally 
exceeds his employer’s expectations. His references write glowingly about his 
trustworthiness, reliability, and other pertinent character traits.  
 
Applicant is married. As of the submission of his application for a position of trust 
(application), his wife was living in his country of birth and her petition to become a 
permanent U.S. resident was pending action by U.S. immigration authorities.  
 
The SOR reflects seven delinquent accounts. Applicant denied the judgment 
debt in 1.a. He previously told a background investigator that the judgment was for past-
due rent for an apartment he never lived in. He successfully disputed the debt and it 
does not appear on his most recent credit report, Ex. 5. He admits the remaining six 
delinquent debts totaling over $20,000. He did not provide any information or 
documentation showing that he has taken action to resolve these past-due debts.  
 
Applicant indicated on his application that he had retained a credit counseling 
service to help him resolve his past-due debts. During his background interview, he 
corrected the misimpression he gave in his application regarding the credit counseling 
service. Applicant told the investigator that he retained the credit counseling service in 
2012, and was paying them $100 a month to help him remove negative information from 
his credit reports and raise his overall credit score. Applicant further informed the 
background investigator that the credit counseling service was not assisting him in 
resolving his past-due debt, as the monthly service charge did not include this benefit. 
 
Applicant states that he fell behind on his financial obligations helping his elderly 
and sick parents. His father passed away several years ago, but he continues to 
financially support his mother. One of his long-time references writes about Applicant 
financially supporting his parents. (Ex. B)  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. 
The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all 
available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that 
 
3 
 
 
assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.2  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust, an administrative 
judge must apply the provisions of the Directive, to include the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG or guidelines).3 In addition to brief introductory explanations, the guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all available and 
reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
 In addition to the guidelines, the Directive sets forth procedures that must be 
followed in trustworthiness adjudications. The Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant, on the other hand, is 
responsible for presenting evidence to mitigate concerns arising from their conduct or 
circumstances. An applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their 
eligibility for a position of trust.4 In resolving questions about an applicant’s eligibility for 
a public trust position, an administrative judge must resolve any doubt raised by an 
applicant’s conduct or circumstances in favor of national security.5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern regarding an individual who accumulates a substantial amount of 
delinquent debt is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
                                                          
2 Directive, § 3.2. See also, ISCR Case No. 14-00590 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 10, 2014) (“The standard 
applicable to trustworthiness cases is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988) regarding security clearances: such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent 
with the interests of the national security’.”). Cf. DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(January 1987), as amended, ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7, C3.1.2.1.2.3, C6.1.1.1. 
 
3 Directive, Enclosure 2. See also, Memorandum from the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for 
Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, directing that the adjudicative guidelines be applied to all 
adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive and DOD Regulation 5200.2-R. 
 
4 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14 – E3.1.15. 
 
5 Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(b).  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant’s accumulation of over $20,000 in delinquent debt raises this concern. 
It also establishes AG ¶¶ 19(a), inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 19(c), a 
history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 An individual’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the analysis, 
because a trustworthiness adjudication is not aimed at collecting an applicant’s debts. 
Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. Accordingly, Applicant may mitigate the concern by establishing one or 
more of the following mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation appears to stem from the financial sacrifices 
he has made to help his family. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. He also mitigated concerns 
initially raised by the judgement debt in SOR 1.a, which was listed on an earlier credit 
report, Ex. 4. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to this debt. However, Applicant’s laudable efforts to 
assist his parents and evidence refuting one of the SOR allegations are insufficient to 
mitigate the concerns raised by his accumulation of over $20,000 in delinquent debt. 
Applicant has been employed full time since 2007. Furthermore, he has been aware of 
the Government’s concerns regarding his finances for some time and has yet to take 
action to address his past-due debts, to include three collection accounts of less than 
$300. Each of these relatively minor debts remains unpaid. His financial situation 
remains a concern. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).6 I hereby incorporate my comments under Guideline F. I 
gave due consideration to all the favorable and extenuating factors in this case, 
including Applicant’s favorable character references and good work record. However, a 
significant amount of delinquent debt remains unresolved, and the serious 
trustworthiness concerns raised by such debt remain unmitigated. After weighing the 
favorable and unfavorable evidence, I conclude that Applicant failed to meet his burden 
in mitigating the financial considerations concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with doubts and questions about Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:          For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.g:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a position 
of trust. Applicant’s request for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
6 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
