1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-04557
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant is repaying a tax debt incurred in 2012. Another debt arose from
circumstances beyond his control. His current finances are sound and he is not likely to
experience financial problems in the future. His request for a security clearance is
granted.
Statement of the Case
On November 28, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed background investigation, which
included Applicant’s responses to interrogatories from Department of Defense (DOD)
 See DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended, Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive.2
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).3
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included six exhibits (Items 1 - 6) proffered in support4
of the Government’s case.
2
adjudicators,  it could not be determined that it is clearly consistent with the national1
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information.  2
On October 14, 2014, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).3
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. On
April 22, 2015, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in4
support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on May 22, 2015, and was advised
he had 30 days from the date of receipt to submit additional information in response to
the FORM. The record closed on June 21, 2015, without any response to the FORM
from Applicant. The case was assigned to me on July 31, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $11,631 for
three delinquent debts (SOR 1.a - 1.c). Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations.
(FORM, Items 1 and 2) In addition to his admissions, I make the following findings of
fact.
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He requires a
security clearance for his job as a draftsman with a defense contractor, where he has
worked since October 2012. Applicant is the oldest of seven children raised by a single
mother. He obtained an associate’s degree in 2010, paying his own way with money
from work and small student loans, all of which have been paid off. Even while attending
school since 2006, Applicant has been steadily employed. (FORM, Items 2 - 4)
When he submitted his EQIP, Applicant disclosed the debt alleged at SOR 1.b. In
2007, he wanted to help his mother by co-signing a loan to buy a car. The expectation
was that she would make the monthly payments; however, his mother lost the car to
repossession in 2009. Applicant has not lived with his mother since 2008 and was
unaware of the delinquency until 2012, but there have been no efforts to recoup from
him any balance remaining after resale. (FORM, Items 2 - 4)
The debt alleged at SOR 1.a is for a delinquent cell phone account. Although it
was listed in interrogatories sent to Applicant by DOD adjudicators, it is not listed in
either credit report in the record. It also was not discussed in Applicant’s subject
interview on July 13, 2014. (FORM, Items 4 - 6)
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 Directive, E3.1.14.7
 Directive, E3.1.15.8
3
The debt alleged at SOR 1.c is for unpaid taxes in 2012. The welder’s job
Applicant held that year was the first time any of his employers did not withhold federal
income taxes. He was not aware of this when the tax bill came due, and he was unable
to pay the full amount right away. In his response to interrogatories, he provided
documentation of his repayment plan with the IRS. This debt is not reflected in either of
the credit reports provided with the FORM.
Applicant’s finances are sound. There is no information in this record that
suggests Applicant is not meeting his regular obligations or that he has incurred any
additional unpaid debts. After accounting for all of his monthly expenses, Applicant has
about $450 in positive cash flow. (FORM, Item 4)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue6
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls7
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  8
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).10
4
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such9
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.10
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information supports the allegations in the SOR. The facts established
herein raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations). Applicant incurred the SOR 1.c tax debt in 2012
and he is jointly liable for the delinquent car loan at SOR 1.b. The validity of the SOR
1.a cell phone is questionable.
By contrast, Applicant is repaying the tax debt through an agreement with the
IRS. The car repossession debt arose from his mother’s failure to pay and is not the
subject of any identifiable collection effort against Applicant. Applicant’s action to
resolve his tax debt was proactive. Along with the health of his current finances, the
record suggests that these purported financial problems will not recur. The security
concerns about Applicant’s finances are mitigated.
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). A fair and commonsense
assessment of all available information shows that any doubts about Applicant’s
suitability for access to classified information have been resolved.
5
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
