 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01763 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines J (criminal 
conduct) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing    
(e-QIP) on May 1, 2013. On June 18, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guidelines J and E. DOD CAF took that action under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
On July 21, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision based 
on the administrative record. On December 1, 2014, Department Counsel submitted a 
request for a hearing. The case was assigned to me on April 8, 2015. The Defense 
 
2 
 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued the Notice of Hearing on April 24, 2015. 
The hearing was held as scheduled on May 11, 2015. At the hearing, Department 
Counsel offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 16. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) 
A through D. All exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on May 19, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Background  
 
a. Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked 
as an information assurance security analyst for that employer since September 2014. 
He graduated from high school in 1983, served in the Army from 1983 to 2005, and 
retired with an honorable discharge. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2006 and a 
master’s degree in 2011. He has been married three times. His first marriage began in 
January 1986 and ended in divorce in August 2002. His second marriage began in 
September 2002 and ended in divorce in May 2005. He married his current wife in 
August 2010. He has two children, ages 17 and 29. He has held a security clearance 
since 1987.1 
 
b. Under Guideline J, the SOR alleged that Applicant was charged with assault-
related offenses on seven occasions. One incident involved felony charges. Six of those 
charges were dismissed, and the disposition of the remaining allegation was not 
alleged. The SOR cross-alleged the seven assault-related charges into one Guideline E 
allegation and separately alleged that Applicant falsified his security clearance 
application by failing to disclose that he was charged with felony offenses. In his Answer 
to the SOR, he admitted the Guideline J allegations, did not respond to the cross-
alleged Guideline E allegation, and denied the falsification allegation. His admissions 
are incorporated as findings of fact.2 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a - 1987 criminal charge. On March 26, 1987, Applicant was charged 
with simple battery, a misdemeanor. Applicant’s first wife was the purported victim. Law 
enforcement records did not reflect the disposition of the charge. In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant indicated he was not convicted of that charge. At the hearing, Applicant 
testified that he did not hit his wife during this incident.3 
 
1990 Incident. A Commander’s Report of Disciplinary or Administrative Action 
dated July 3, 1990, revealed that Applicant was administratively reprimanded in writing 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6-8, 92-93, 103; GE 1. 
2 SOR and Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. There was a typographical error in SOR ¶ 1.b. It 
alleged that Applicant was charged with offenses in “2205.” Applicant had no objection to amending that 
year to “2005.” See Tr. 12. 
3 Tr. 66-68; GE 4, 13, 14; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
for a simple assault consummated by a battery (domestic disturbance) incident. The 
report indicated that a verbal altercation between Applicant and his first wife escalated 
into a physical confrontation when he struck her several times in the chest, neck, and 
head with a closed fist. She received a bloody lip, but declined medical treatment. When 
questioned by the military police, he admitted that he and his wife argued, but denied 
striking her. This incident was not alleged in the SOR.4 
 
1992 sworn statement. In this statement, Applicant indicated that his mother was 
an alcoholic and beat him as a child. He further stated: 
 
Although I have never experienced any psychiatric or psychological 
treatment as a result of my mother’s abuse, I do believe it has affected my 
interpersonal relationships, especially with my wife. There have been 
times when I have hit my wife and I believe being abused myself makes it 
easier for me to strike another. In late 1988, my wife and I saw a marriage 
counselor for 20 plus weeks at a [military hospital]. This counseling helped 
me to see things in a different perspective.5  
 
2003 Incident. In an affidavit, Applicant related that his second wife suffered from 
depression and attacked him while he was driving a car in April 2003. He stated that he 
hit her in the process of defending himself. The following day, she attacked him again. 
She was charged with assault and eventually sentenced to probation and participation 
in spouse abuse classes. She was referred to the military family advocacy program 
(FAP). During a FAP interview, she told a counselor that Applicant hit her and gave her 
a black eye during the April incident. A FAP investigation substantiated that Applicant hit 
her. He appealed that FAP finding. The Case Review Committee declined to consider 
his appeal because of his unwillingness to participate in a reassessment. As a result of 
the FAP finding, he attended Anger Control Training for about a month. This incident 
was not alleged in the SOR.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b - 2005 criminal charges  
 
a. On January 12, 2005, Applicant was charged with cruelty to children - 1st 
degree, a felony; battery, a misdemeanor; obstructing or hindering persons making 
                                                          
4 GE 12. Conduct not alleged in the SOR will not be considering in applying the disqualifying 
conditions, but “may be considered (a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has 
demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is 
applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person analysis under Directive Section 6.3 . . . ISCR 
Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 24, 2003).” ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct 26, 2006). 
5 GE 11.  
6 GE 9, 10. See note 4, above, concerning the consideration of non-alleged conduct.  
 
4 
 
 
emergency telephone call, a misdemeanor; and false imprisonment, a felony. These 
charges were dismissed on June 17, 2005.7 
 
b. In a personal subject interview (PSI) dated February 7, 2008, Applicant 
described this incident by stating he had an argument with his second wife that 
escalated into a physical confrontation. His wife was throwing around his clothing. They 
became involved in a scuffle. She scratched him and he pushed her back. He left the 
apartment to cool down. She barricaded the door. He pushed his way through the 
barricade, and she called the police. She apparently told the police that he locked her in 
a closet.8  
 
c. At the hearing, Applicant initially testified that he did not recall what happened 
during this incident. He later testified that this incident involved him swearing around his 
children. He also noted that false imprisonment allegation was shown to be false when 
authorities saw there a swinging door on the closet where his wife claimed she was 
locked.9 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c - 2006 criminal charge. On March 16, 2006, Applicant was charged 
with battery domestic violence - 1st degree, a misdemeanor. This charge was dismissed 
on July 18, 2007. In a PSI dated February 7, 2008, Applicant indicated that he learned 
the victim incurred a cracked rib and dislocated her shoulder during this incident. At the 
hearing, Applicant testified that this incident involved a female roommate. He stated that 
she had been drinking and an argument between them started. While he was in the 
bathroom, she opened the door. He pushed her back from the door and closed it. She 
claimed she fell from being pushed. He stated she never fell. As a result of this incident, 
he had to attend an anger management course.10 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d - 2008 criminal charge. On July 9, 2008, Applicant was charged with 
assault on family member. In a PSI dated May 16, 2013, he indicated that he believed 
this charge was dismissed. At the hearing, Applicant testified that this incident involved 
a different female roommate than the one in the SOR ¶ 1.c incident.  He claimed this 
complainant was an alcoholic. He denied having assaulted her and claimed he did 
nothing wrong.11 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e - 2009 criminal charge. On June 6, 2009, Applicant was charged with 
assault on family member. In a PSI dated September 6, 2013, an investigator noted this 
                                                          
7 Tr. 67-69, 104-105; GE 4, 8, 14. 
8 GE 8. 
9 Tr. 67-69, 104-105; GE 4, 8, 14. 
10 Tr. 69-75; GE 2, 4, 8, 14. 
11 Tr. 75-77; GE 3, 14. 
 
5 
 
 
charge was dismissed. Applicant testified that this incident involved his current wife. He 
claimed she is an alcoholic and gets violent when she drinks. He acknowledged that 
there was probably some pushing and shoving during this incident. He indicated that 
both of them were arrested.12 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f - 2011 criminal charge  
 
a. On November 5, 2011, Applicant was charged with assault – 2nd degree, a 
misdemeanor. A police report reflected that Applicant and his wife got into an argument 
in a pub in a resort town. She left the pub. He followed her. The argument continued 
outside. She indicated that he threw her to the ground. She fought with him, got away, 
and returned to the hotel in which they were staying. They began to argue again in the 
hotel. She claimed, when she grabbed the telephone to call the police, he threw her 
down on the bed and eventually to the floor. She indicated that he punched and kicked 
her several times in the back and abdomen while she was on the bed and the floor. 
When she was able to get away from Applicant, she called the police. The police 
stopped him as he was driving away from the hotel. He told a police officer that she 
assaulted him and he had scratches on his neck, chest, and forearms. She responded 
by saying she did grab him in an attempt to stop him from assaulting her. The police 
report noted that she was bleeding from a pierced ring above her left eyebrow and had 
redness and scratches on her neck. Children were present during their confrontation in 
the hotel room. Applicant’s then 14-year-old son, corroborated her version of the events 
by stating that Applicant took the phone from her, threw her onto the bed, choked her by 
putting his hands on her throat, and punched her in the back several times. The charge 
against Applicant was dismissed on December 16, 2011.13 
 
b. At the hearing, Applicant testified that he did not physically assault his wife 
during the November 2011 incident. He indicated that she became very aggressive after 
consuming alcohol. When she attacked him, he tried to restrain her, which he claimed 
led to him being considered the aggressor. He denied choking her, throwing her to the 
ground, punching or kicking her, and causing her to bleed near the ring piercing.14  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g - 2013 criminal charge.  On June 18, 2013, Applicant was charged 
with battery. The sheriff’s report reflected that Applicant and his wife had an argument 
over each other’s marital fidelity. She claimed he grabbed her by the arm and held her 
down on the bed. He purportedly dragged her to the living room and bent her wrist. The 
sheriff noted no signs of injury to her. He claimed his wife went “crazy” and threw his 
cell phone on the floor, breaking it. He also stated that they had no physical contact.        
At the hearing, he denied assaulting her during this incident and claimed she falsified 
allegations against him to have him removed from the house. A court record reflects 
                                                          
12 Tr. 77-78; GE 5, 13. 
13 GE 4, 14, 15. 
14 Tr. 78-81; GE 4. 
 
6 
 
 
that this charge was dismissed on July 17, 2013, because the victim filled out a “drop 
charge” affidavit and indicated she did not want to pursue the charge.15  
 
 Recent incidents not alleged in the SOR16  
 
a. On October 9, 2013, Applicant was charged with domestic battery by 
strangulation, a felony. The sheriff’s report reflected that Applicant and his wife had an 
argument. She claimed he slapped her with an open hand in the face and head ten or 
more times, kicked her in the thighs and buttocks five or more times, and struck her 
back against the floor five or more times. She also claimed he choked her around the 
neck to the point she almost lost consciousness. He was held in police custody for two 
days. A court record reflected that this charge was dismissed on February 14, 2014, 
because the victim did not wish to cooperate.17   
 
 b. On May 29, 2014, Applicant was charged with battery domestic violence. The 
sheriff’s report reflected that Applicant claimed his wife was drunk, started an argument, 
and threw a phone in the house. The sheriff noted Applicant’s wife smelled of alcohol, 
but was not intoxicated. She claimed Applicant pulled her out of a bedroom by her 
wrists and pushed her with both hands to the chest, which caused her to hit the floor. 
She reportedly stated that she did not want Applicant arrested because he is the one 
who provides income for the household. Her sister, who was present in the house, 
stated Applicant pushed his wife onto the living room floor. At the hearing, he denied 
assaulting her during this incident.18  
 
c. On July 24, 2014, a sheriff went to Applicant’s house for a suspected battery 
domestic violence offense. Applicant’s wife told the sheriff that Applicant grabbed her 
upper left arm and shoved her to the ground. She also claimed he struck her with a 
vacuum that caused her thumb to blister with blood and grabbed her by the neck and 
hair and dragged her. The sheriff reported that she had no marks or redness on her 
neck, but apparently several photos were taken of other unspecified injuries. Applicant 
indicated that his wife was drunk, and he did not know how she sustained her injuries. 
The sheriff’s report did not indicate any charges were filed for this incident. At the 
hearing, he denied assaulting her during this incident.19 
 
 d. At the hearing, Applicant testified that all of the recent charges had been 
dismissed. He also indicated, after his May 2014 arrest, a judge issued him an order to 
                                                          
15 Tr. 81-82; GE 2, 3, 6. 
16 See note 4, above, concerning the consideration of non-alleged conduct. 
17 Tr. 82-95; GE 2, 3, 16. 
18 Tr. 85-86; GE 2, 16. 
19 Tr. 86-87; GE 16. 
 
7 
 
 
not have any contact with his wife. At that time, his wife began living with her sister, and 
she was later arrested for assaulting her sister. When he returned home on one 
occasion, his wife was present in their house and was intoxicated. The police were 
called. Even though Applicant explained to the police that she was not living there at the 
time, the officer arrested Applicant for violating the no contact order. The next day, a 
judge held him in contempt of court and placed him in jail overnight for violating the 
order. He stated he was arrested twice for violating the no contact order.20 
 
 Counseling. Besides attending anger management classes as noted above, 
Applicant consulted with a psychiatrist for about six weeks during his present marriage. 
These counseling sessions addressed marital issues. He noted that his wife refused to 
attend the counseling sessions. His wife consulted a chemical addiction center in July 
2014 and had a follow-up appointment in August 2014, but any benefits derived from 
those consultations appear to have been limited. He testified that his wife continues to 
consume alcohol and indicated that, when she does so, he now departs their residence 
to avoid being arrested.21 
 
Falsification allegation 
 
 a. Applicant submitted an e-QIP on May 1, 2013. In the police record section of 
the e-QIP, he responded “No” to the question that asked whether he was ever charged 
with a felony offense. In response to other questions in that section, he did disclose that 
he was charged with criminal offenses on three occasions between 2006 and 2011, 
including twice for assault-related charges. In January 2008, he submitted an e-QIP in 
which he did disclose the felony false imprisonment charge alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.22  
 
 b. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he misunderstood the word 
“charged” to mean convicted or sentenced and stated he had never been found guilty of 
any crime. He also noted the charges in question were beyond the seven year reporting 
requirement. At the hearing, he testified that his security officer told him to go back only 
seven years in reporting charges. He further stated that he now realizes that he 
misinterpreted the question and should have reported the felony charges on his latest  
e-QIP.23 
 
Character Evidence. Applicant presented letters of reference from coworkers that 
indicated he is trustworthy and a man of integrity. They also stated he was dedicated to 
protecting the interests of the U.S. Government.24 
                                                          
20 Tr. 82-91, 98-100, 102-103. 
21 Tr. 91-94, 98, 103-104; GE 4, 8; AE D.  
22 GE 1, 7. 
23 Tr. 94-98, 100-102; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
24 AE A-C. 
 
8 
 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
 
9 
 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
Two disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 31 are potentially applicable in this 
case: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant has been charged with domestic violence offenses on numerous 
occasions. He has not been convicted of any of those charges. In domestic violence 
cases, however, the reluctance of victims to pursue charges against the household’s 
primary income earner is not surprising. In this case, sufficient evidence was presented 
to establish that he has assaulted ex-wives, cohabitants, and his current wife on several 
occasions. Some of these incidents were corroborated by third-party witnesses or by 
the complainant’s injuries. I did not find his denials of the alleged domestic violence 
incidents to be credible. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 Mitigating conditions for this guideline are set forth in AG ¶ 32. In this case, the 
potential mitigating conditions are: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;  
 
10 
 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offenses; and   
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s history of domestic violence spans from 1987 to 2014. In many of 
these incidents, the complainants most likely were not innocent victims and may have 
been co-combatants. While he may have been provoked in certain instances, he also 
was not an innocent party, but appears to have been a willing participant. These 
incidents involved at least five separate female complainants and did not occur under 
unusual circumstances. The evidence is sufficient to establish that Applicant engaged in 
a pattern of domestic violence.  
 
 Although Applicant has sought marital counseling, insufficient evidence was 
presented to conclude the incidents of domestic violence are unlikely to recur. He 
testified that his current wife becomes aggressive when she consumes alcohol. She 
continues to drink and had refused to participate in counseling. Stressors that led to the 
incidents of domestic violence in the past continue to exist. While he stated that he now 
leaves the house when she is drinking, I am not convinced his strategy for avoiding 
further incidents will be successful. The likelihood of him becoming involved in future 
incidents of domestic violence is high.  
 
 Some of the incidents of domestic violence are recent. Based on the evidence 
presented, I cannot find that Applicant’s criminal behavior does not cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. There is insufficient evidence of reform 
or rehabilitation. None of mitigating conditions apply.   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
11 
 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available evidence 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior. . .; and 
 
* * * 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
AG ¶ 16(c) and 16(d) apply to Applicant’s domestic violence as discussed above. 
 
In submitting his e-QIP in May 2013, Applicant disclosed that he had been 
charged with assault-related offenses. He stated that he did not disclose the felony 
charges because he misinterpreted the question and was told by his security officer to 
report charges only occurring in the past seven years. He reported the felony charges 
on a previous e-QIP. His explanation is plausible. I find that Applicant did not 
intentionally falsify his most recent e-QIP when he failed to disclose that he previously 
had felony charges filed against him. I find in favor of Applicant on SOR ¶ 2.b. 
 
AG ¶ 17 lists four personal conduct mitigating conditions that are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
12 
 
 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
For the reasons set forth in the Analysis section under Guideline J, the Guideline 
E security concerns have not been mitigated.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and examined all of Applicant’s 
alleged wrongdoing as a whole. I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines J 
and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed 
under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. I have taken into account 
Applicant’s military service as well as his civilian employment. Insufficient evidence was 
presented to conclude that Applicant has reformed and rehabilitated himself and is 
unlikely to engage in domestic violence in the future. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under 
the criminal conduct and personal conduct guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
