 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-04013 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on December 20, 2013. On 
February 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 28, 2015; and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on June 4, 2015. On June 12, 2015, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
 2
received the FORM on June 18, 2015, and did not respond. The case was assigned to 
me on August 4, 2015.  
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old naval designer employed by a defense contractor 
since June 1996. He has held a security clearance since July 1996. 
 
 Applicant married in May 1999 and divorced in March 2005. They had one child, 
now 12 years old. Applicant’s SCA reflects that their daughter lives with his ex-wife. The 
record does not reflect whether he pays child support.  
 
 In March 2010, Applicant was diagnosed with dystonia, a neurological disorder 
that causes uncontrollable muscle spasms and extreme pain. He moved in with his 
mother because he was unable to take care of his daily needs and personal affairs. In 
August and September 2011, he underwent two brain surgeries, which were sufficiently 
successfully to enable him to return to work. The medical bills attached to his answer to 
the SOR reflect that he continues to receive medical treatment and incur medical 
expenses. (Item 4 at 9.)  
 
 The SOR alleges 31 delinquent debts, of which 27 are medical debts, reflected 
on credit bureau reports (CBRs) dated February 18, 2015 (Item 6) and January 30, 
2014 (Item 7). The SOR alleges that 13 debts totaling $2,153 were owed to a medical 
provider, 10 debts totaling $2,153 were owed to a collection agency, and three debts 
totaling $877, including one judgment for $763, were owed to unidentified creditors. 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he submitted evidence that the medical debts 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.m, 1.n, and 1.o, reflected in the February 2015 CBR (Item 6 at 2-3), had 
been paid. (Item 4 at 9-10.) He stated that all the medical debts were now being 
collected by the same collection agency, and he submitted a statement from the 
collection agency, dated February 24, 2015, acknowledging receipt of a payment and 
reflecting a balance of $2,463. The statement from the collection agency does not 
identify individual accounts; it simply lists the accounts as “various creditors.” (Item 4 at 
8.) The balance of $2,463 corroborates Applicant’s statement that additional medical 
debts have been referred to the collection agency, because the SOR and the CBRs on 
which the SOR is based reflect a total of $2,153 referred to the collection agency. If all 
alleged medical debts are now in the hands of the collection agency, they would total 
about $7,062, and the balance of $2,463 would reflect significant progress in resolving 
the medical debts.  
 
The non-medical debts are SOR ¶ 1.a, a utility bill charged off for $295 in 
October 2011 (Item 7 at 5); SOR ¶ 1.aa, a cell phone account referred for collection for 
$500 in August 2012 (Item 7 at 9); SOR ¶ 1.bb, a satellite television service referred for 
collection for $305 in July 2013 (Item 7 at 10); and SOR ¶¶ 1.dd and 1.ee, two 
judgments for $8,763 and $4,689 filed in January 2008 for delinquent credit-card 
 3
accounts (Item 7 at 4). The January 2014 CBR reflects that the date of last activity on 
the utility bill was September 2010 and that the account was closed by the consumer. 
(Item 7 at 5.) Applicant’s SCA reflects that in September 2010 he was not living with his 
mother. (Item 5 at 9.) Garnishment orders were filed in February 2012 to satisfy the two 
judgments on the credit card accounts, but the record does not reflect the amounts 
being collected by garnishment, and neither judgment is reflected as satisfied. (Items 8 
and 9.) 
 
In a personal subject interview (PSI) in February 2014, Applicant stated that he 
and his ex-wife had obtained the credit cards together, that he became solely 
responsible for them after the divorce, but that he could not afford to pay them because 
of the legal debts he had incurred as a result of the divorce. He stated that he was 
unaware of the delinquent utility bill, cell phone account, and satellite television account, 
but that, if he found that he was responsible for them, he would make arrangements to 
pay them. (Item 10.)1 
 
In his answer, Applicant stated that the utility bill and cell phone bill had been 
paid in full, but he submitted no documentary evidence of payment. He stated that he 
had payment plans for the two credit card accounts reduced to judgments, but he 
submitted no evidence of a payment plan or any payments pursuant to a plan. 
Department Counsel commented on the lack of documentary evidence in her 
submission, which was included in the FORM, but Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM. Applicant has submitted no evidence of his current financial situation. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
                                                          
1 The PSI summary is not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. In the FORM, Department 
Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to comment on the PSI summary and make corrections, 
additions, deletions, and updates. She also informed him of his right to object to the PSI summary as 
unauthenticated and inadmissible. She cautioned Applicant: “If no objections are raised in your response 
to the FORM, or if you do not respond to the FORM, the Administrative Judge may determine that you 
have waived any objections to the admissibility of the summary and may consider the summary as 
evidence in your case.” Based on Applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM, I have determined that he 
has waived any objection based on lack of authentication. 
 4
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 5
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his CBRs, establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 6
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent and 
numerous. The medical debts are the result of his debilitating disease, but the record 
does not reflect whether the effects of the disease are ongoing or likely to recur.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established for the medical debts, but not the other debts alleged in 
the SOR. Applicant’s marital breakup and his debilitating disease were conditions 
largely beyond his control. The evidence reflects that he has acted responsibly by 
making payments on his medical debts. This mitigating condition is not established for 
the credit cards, which were delinquent well before Applicant was disabled. The utility 
bill was charged off at about the time of his brain surgery, but he has not claimed that it 
was delinquent because of his disability. The bills for cell phone service and satellite 
television service became delinquent after he returned to work. He claims that these 
debts have been paid or are being paid through payment plans, but he has not 
supported his claim with documentary evidence. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. There is no evidence of financial counseling, and 
no evidence that Applicant’s non-medical debts are being resolved. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the medical debts. A “good-faith effort” within the 
meaning of this mitigating condition means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A person is not required to establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The 
adjudicative guidelines do not require that an individual make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR 
be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant 
has been making payments to the collection agency for the medical debts and has 
made significant progress. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established for the non-medical debts. Applicant has asserted 
that they are paid or are being paid through payment plans, but he has not supported 
his assertion with documentary evidence. If the two judgments for delinquent credit card 
accounts are being satisfied by garnishment, the requirement for a “good-faith effort” is 
not satisfied. Payments by involuntary garnishment are “not the same as, or similar to, a 
good-faith initiation of repayment by the debtor.” ISCR Case No. 09-5700 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 24, 2011), citing ISCR Case No. 08-06058 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2009). 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant has not disputed any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
 7
Whole-Person Concept  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
Because Applicant requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I 
have no opportunity to evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See 
ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). Likewise, I am unable to 
evaluate whether he has any residual impairment due to his dystonia. 
 
 This is a sad case. Applicant has worked for the same defense contractor for 
more than 19 years and held a security clearance for the entire time. He has suffered 
through a debilitating illness. However, he has presented no evidence of the quality of 
his performance, and no evidence of his current financial situation. He has not 
submitted documentation of his claims that some debts were paid or were being paid, 
even after Department Counsel pointed out in the FORM that there were serious 
evidentiary deficiencies in his answer to the SOR.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 8
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.z:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.aa-1.bb:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.cc:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.dd-1.ee:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
