 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-03077 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 12, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of 
Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as 
amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
On February 9, 2015, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge.1 The case was assigned to me on June 12, 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s answer is dated September 5, 2014, but she did not sign it or have it notarized until February 
9, 2015. 
 
2 
2015. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
June 19, 2015, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on July 27, 2015. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 4, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c through 1.f, 1.h through 1.q, 
and 1.t through 1.w. She denied the remaining allegations. Her admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. She earned a master’s degree in 2004. She married in 
2004 and does not have children. She has not served in the military. She has been 
employed by a federal contactor since May 2013. Before then she was employed in 
another state from January 2011 to March 2013. Previous to then, she was steadily 
employed with the same employer from January 1999 to January 2011. She indicated 
she was unemployed for one month in 2013 while she was moving. She also has a part-
time job where she works approximately 20 hours a week. Her husband has a child and 
pays child support.2  
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in January 2009. It was dismissed in July 
2009, upon Applicant’s request, after she was able to refinance her mortgage loan. She 
stated she filed bankruptcy to save her house. When her house was no longer in 
jeopardy the bankruptcy was dismissed.3  
 
 Applicant denied that she failed to file her federal income tax returns for tax years 
2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2010, and 2011. She timely filed “married filing separately.” 
She admitted she owes taxes, but could not afford to make a lump-sum payment when 
the taxes were due. She stated she had a payment arrangement with the IRS to pay her 
2005 tax debt beginning in 2006. Her explanation for not paying her taxes each year on 
time was that she did not have enough money withheld, and she thought she corrected 
the problem each year. She testified she has a payment agreement with the IRS to 
satisfy the 2009 tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c ($11,243).4 She stated the total balance 
owed to the IRS is now $7,728. She believed that the balance also includes unpaid 
taxes for years 2007, 2008 and 2011, and she has an agreement to pay $100 a month 
until they are satisfied.5 Based on the documents Applicant provided, I am not 
convinced that the balance includes other tax years. She has an installment agreement 
                                                          
2 Tr. 25-32, 88. 
 
3 GE 6. 
 
4 AE C includes documents from the IRS. I am unable to verify the current balance on the 2009 tax lien.  
 
5 AE C. It is unknown what the current balance owed is for tax years Applicant failed to pay.  
 
3 
with the IRS that appears to include tax years 2007, 2008 and 2011, but she has not 
started making payments. Her 2011 tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.d-$397) is unpaid. Applicant 
made monthly payments of $112 toward her tax debts from July 2006 to April 2013. She 
indicated that she stopped making installment payments to the IRS for a period when 
she filed bankruptcy in 2009 because she did not have the money. She resumed 
payments, but then stopped paying in April 2013, because she again did not have 
enough money. Some of the early tax-year debts were paid from refunds from later tax 
years and through installment payments. Applicant testified she filed her 2012 through 
2014 tax returns on time. 6  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f (past-due balance of $5,743) is a mortgage loan. Applicant 
stated that she purchased a house in 2007. She and her husband moved to a new state 
in January 2011 and rented the house. She had difficulty paying the mortgage loan 
when the tenants defaulted on the rent payments in November 2012. She then fell 
behind with the mortgage payments in February 2013 and defaulted in June 2013. She 
attempted to modify the loan several times with the bank, but was unsuccessful. 
Applicant testified that she tried to make mortgage loan payments after she defaulted on 
the loan, but the creditor would not accept them. She and her husband lived in the 
house during this period. They used the extra money to pay other bills. She participated 
in a loan rehabilitation program and made payments from August 2014 to February 
2015, when the loan was modified. She testified and provided documents to show her 
loan payments are now current.7 
 
 Applicant testified she obtained student loans from 2000 to 2004 to attend 
graduate school (SOR ¶ 1.g balance $93,639). She assumed that because the creditor 
did not contact her the loans were in forbearance. She never made a regular payment 
on the loans. She never contacted the creditor to advise it that she was employed. She 
began making $300 payments in June 2014 as part of a rehabilitation program and 
subsequently completed the nine required payments. She stated this loan is now in 
forbearance until 2016. The documents provided show there is a new holder of the loan 
and that two student loans were purchased by the new creditor and consolidated. The 
current balance owed on the two loans including accrued interest is $171,309. The 
documents show that Applicant’s first payment is not due until June 2016. It will be 
approximately $757 a month.8 
 
 Applicant obtained additional student loans in 2008 to take online courses. (SOR 
¶¶ 1.h - $2,960; 1.i - $1,140, 1. n- $174, 1.t - $3,402, and 1.u - $3,171) She took classes 
for a year and a half., but did not earn a degree. She assumed the loans were in 
forbearance or deferred. Applicant’s documents reflect a combined balance for the 
loans is now $56,844. She provided a document to show she began a rehabilitation 
program in June 2015 for these loans and is required to pay $71 for nine months. 
                                                          
6 Tr. 32- 48; AE C. 
 
7 Tr. 48-59; AE D. 
 
8 Tr. 60-65, 69-72; Answer to SOR; AE E. 
 
 
4 
Applicant admitted she was working at the time, and she used some of the student loan 
money to pay other expenses.9 
 
 Credit reports from May 2013, June 2014, and May 2015 confirm the alleged 
debts.10 Applicant provided proof she has paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.r ($61) and 1.s 
($50).11 She provided a document from July 2015 that shows she consulted with a debt 
management company, which provided a proposed payment plan to resolve her debts. 
The total balance of the debts listed in the plan is $39,890. This does not include her 
student loans.12 Other than the two debts noted above, none of her delinquent debts are 
paid. Her goal is to pay her debts. She believes her husband also has student loan debt 
and tax debt. Her current salary is $45,000 and her husband’s is $49,000. She does not 
know how much she earns from her part-time job.13 
 
 Applicant provided a document to show she received 66% of her income for a 
six-week period from July 2014 to September 2014, and in January 2015 due to medical 
issues.14 She provided performance appraisals showing she fully meets the 
expectations of her employer. She also provided an award certificate. Applicant intends 
to satisfy her other debts before she has to start paying down her student loans. 15  
 
 A character witness testified on behalf of Applicant. She previously worked for 
Applicant and described her as a fair supervisor, who treated her subordinates as 
individuals, and as a person who emphasized the importance of following rules and 
complying with the manuals. Applicant always emphasized doing the right thing. The 
witness considered Applicant trustworthy.16  
  
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
                                                          
9 Tr. 65- 75; AE E. 
 
10 GE 2, 4, and 5. 
 
11 Tr. 80-82; AE F. 
 
12 Tr. 75-83; AE B. 
 
13 Tr. 82-83, 91-92. 
 
14 Tr. 83-87; AE A.  
 
15 Tr. 83, 87-89; AE G. 
 
16 Tr. 93-98. 
 
5 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
6 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns 
as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
 There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant failed to file federal income 
tax returns from 2005 to 2011. AG ¶ 19(g) does not apply. I find in her favor on that 
allegation. Applicant has two tax liens from 2009 and 2011. She has 11 delinquent 
consumer debts totaling approximately $38,000. She has student loans that were 
delinquent and total over $220,000. Most of her debts have been delinquent for many 
years. Applicant is unable or unwilling to pay or resolve her delinquent debts. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely pay her federal income taxes and tax liens were entered 
against her. Although she has made payments towards some years’ taxes, she still 
owes taxes. She appears to have a current payment plan to pay $100 a month to 
resolve her 2007, 2009, and 2011 tax debts. Applicant’s mortgage was past due, but 
 
7 
after obtaining a modification for the loan, it is now current. She filed bankruptcy, but it 
was later dismissed.  
 
 Applicant’s student loans were delinquent. She participated in a rehabilitation 
program and two of the debts are in forbearance until June 2016. The balance on these 
loans is more than $172,000. Regarding her other student loans, she is currently 
participating in a rehabilitation program that began in June 2015. The balance on these 
loans is more than $56,000. 
 
 Applicant has numerous debts that are unpaid and unresolved. Based on 
Applicant’s past and current financial history, I cannot find that future financial problems 
are unlikely to recur. Her financial situation casts doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
  
 Applicant provided some information that she received less than her full salary 
when she had medical needs in 2014 and 2015. These were conditions beyond her 
control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b) Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant failed to provide evidence that she acted 
responsibly regarding her finances and delinquent debts, many of which were seriously 
delinquent before her medical problems arose. She contracted with a debt management 
company in July 2015 and made a plan to resolve her financial issues, but she has not 
yet fully implemented it. She has numerous consumer debts that she has not made 
payments. She incurred additional student loans, even though she had substantial 
student loans that were deferred. She admitted she was working full time when she 
incurred the additional student loans and used some of the money for other expenses. 
She never made a regular payment on her student loans, until she participated in a 
rehabilitation program. AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies. 
 
 There is some evidence of financial counseling through the debt management 
contract Applicant recently signed. Applicant paid two small debts in the SOR (¶¶ 1.r 
and 1.s). AG ¶ 20(d) applies to those debts. There are not clear indications that her 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. She has tax debts that she is 
making small payments on. The $172,000 of student loans will require payments in the 
next year, and after she rehabilitates her other student loans, she will have additional 
payments. The amount of the payments is unknown. She has not made payments on 
any of the numerous consumer debts, which includes a judgment from 2008. AG ¶ 20(c) 
partially applies, and AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
8 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that she is unwilling or unable to pay. 
She has not made sufficient attempts to resolve her debts. Although, she has a 
payment plan with the IRS, she repeatedly failed to adequately address the problem. 
She owes more than $220,000 in student loans, which, when the full monthly payments 
become due, will likely seriously affect her ability to pay other delinquent debts. She 
made no efforts prior to receiving the SOR to address her consumer debts. Her debt 
repayment plan has not yet been fully implemented. She failed to offer a reasonable 
explanation for her financial problems. She does not have a credible track record to 
show she will repay her creditors. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust 
position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated financial 
considerations’ trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.c-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.f-1.i:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.j-1.m   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.n:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.o-1.q:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.r-1.u:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.v-1.w:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
