 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 14-03106 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding alcohol consumption 
and personal conduct.  Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 23, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On October 6, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
                                                          
1
 Item 2 (e-QIP, dated January 23, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Consumption) and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF 
adjudicators were unable to make an affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated October 9, 2014,2 Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was 
mailed to Applicant on June 16, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a 
period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished 
a copy of the Directive as well as the Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant 
received the FORM on June 29, 2015. A response was due by July 29, 2015. On July 
14, 2015,3 Applicant submitted information and documentation which addressed the 
allegations. The case was assigned to me on July 31, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the factual allegations in 
the SOR pertaining to alcohol consumption (¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., a portion of 1.e., and 1.f.) 
He denied the remaining allegations or portions thereof. He failed to admit or deny the 
allegations pertaining to personal conduct (¶ 2.a.), except to say: “I reconstructed my 
past history to the best of my ability and cooperated truthfully to the absolute best of my 
ability.”4 Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving in various positions with his current employer, during which time there were 
corporate mergers, since February 1984.5 He had been granted a secret security 
clearance in June 1984, but in August 2003, his clearance was revoked due to his drug 
involvement.6 A 1975 high school graduate,7 Applicant received a bachelor of science in 
mechanical engineering 1983.8 He has never served with the U.S. military.9 Applicant 
                                                          
2
 Although Applicant dated his Answer to the SOR as “11/9/14,” the Notary’s jurat is dated October 9, 2014. 
 
3
 Applicant’s one-page submission is dated July 14, 2015, but a memorandum to Department Counsel from 
a legal assistant forwarding the document is dated July 7, 2015. 
 
4
 Item 1 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated October 9, 2014), at 2. 
 
5
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 11-14; Item 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated March 26, 2013), at 1. 
 
6
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 45-46. 
 
7
 Item 3, supra note 5, at 1. 
 
8
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 10-11; Item 3, supra note 5, at 1. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
was married the first time in August 1988 and divorced in June 2002; and married the 
second time in June 2009.10 He has no children. 
 
Personal Conduct & Alcohol Consumption  
 
Applicant was a multi-substance abuser. He was a marijuana user while in 
college. Because of his cocaine abuse while holding a security clearance, in 2003, his 
secret security clearance was revoked.11 His other substance of choice is alcohol. 
Applicant first consumed alcohol at the age of 15 when he drank a half bottle of wine at 
a school dance. He abstained until he was 18 years old, when he resumed his 
consumption of alcohol by drinking wine and beer.  His quantity and frequency from the 
ages of 18 to 21 were four to five beers at a time about four times per year. With the 
exception of a period of abstinence from December 1999 until May 2001, from the age 
of 21 until June 2006, his quantity and frequency increased to six beers at a time one 
time per week. In June 2006, and continuing until at least March 2013, it decreased to a 
bottle of wine or six beers two times per month.12 
 
Alcohol enables Applicant to relax and become sociable. Applicant 
acknowledged that it takes four beers for him to become intoxicated, and he admitted 
he drinks to intoxication two times per month. Nevertheless, Applicant denied that he 
has a problem with alcohol. He conceded that it “possibly caused disappointment” in his 
first marriage as well as embarrassment, but he denied that it had any impact on his 
work, home life, friendships, school, physical or emotional health, reputation, judgment, 
reliability, financial responsibility, or ability to hold a clearance.13 Over a 30-year period, 
from 1976 to at least 2006, Applicant has been involved in several alcohol-related 
incidents involving police and judicial authorities. 
  
In June 1976, after consuming four beers, Applicant was arrested and charged 
with driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI), a misdemeanor, and in November of 
that same year, he was found guilty, upon his plea, of reckless driving, a misdemeanor. 
He was fined $125 and ordered to be on probation for 12 months (SOR ¶ 1.f.).14  
 
In August 1985, after consuming “one shot” of an unspecified liquor, Applicant 
was arrested and charged with DUI, a misdemeanor. He was eventually found guilty, 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
9
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 14. 
 
10
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 16-19. 
 
11
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 42, 46; Item 3, supra note 5, at 6-7. It should be noted that Applicant’s cocaine 
abuse was not alleged in the SOR, but since Applicant raised it in both his e-QIP and during his interview with an 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), such drug abuse will be discussed briefly further 
in my analysis under the Whole-Person Concept below. 
 
12
 Item 3, supra note 5, at 7. 
 
13
 Item 3, supra note 5, at 7. 
 
14
 Item 5 (Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Identification Record, dated January 23, 2013), at 3; Item 1, 
supra note 4, at 2; Item 3, supra note 5, at 4; Item 2, supra note 1, at 35-36. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
upon his plea, of a reduced charge of driving while ability impaired (DWAI), a 
misdemeanor. He was fined an unspecified amount (SOR ¶ 1.e.).15  
 
In February 1990 or 1992, after consuming “a few beers,” and while looking for a 
parking spot, Applicant’s vehicle struck another vehicle. He was arrested and charged 
with DUI, a misdemeanor. He was eventually found guilty, upon his plea, of a reduced 
charge of DWAI, a misdemeanor. He was fined an unspecified amount, ordered to 
perform 40 hours of community service, and ordered to attend an alcohol education 
class (SOR ¶ 1.d.).16  
 
On or about December 16, 1999, after working a 17-hour day, Applicant returned 
home to find that his dogs had not been fed. He uttered some harsh comments to no-
one in particular, except perhaps his dogs, spoke to his stepson, ate a sandwich, and at 
about 11 p.m., went to bed without seeing his wife.17 Applicant’s first wife told a different 
story. She said that upon arrival at the house, Applicant was intoxicated and started 
yelling at her. She was afraid to come out of her room, and she felt that he was going to 
kill her or himself. She also said that her son was afraid that Applicant was going to hurt 
his mother. In any event, the police were called at about 1 a.m. Applicant was 
awakened by them and arrested for domestic violence and harassment, both 
misdemeanors. Bail was set at $4,000. On January 26, 2000, the charges were 
dismissed and the bond released, provided Applicant agreed not to consume alcohol for 
30 days. Applicant denied that he was ever charged, but the court and FBI records 
reflect that he was charged. However, there is no evidence that any further actions were 
taken by the court and there is no evidence that Applicant was convicted of the charges 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.).18 
 
 On June 24, 2006, after consuming four beers over a period of three and one-
half hours at a restaurant, and another two to three beers at a friend’s house over an 
additional period of two to two and one-half hours, Applicant was stopped by the police 
after making a left turn on a red arrow. He refused to take any blood, breath, urine, or 
sobriety tests. He was arrested and charged with DUI, a misdemeanor, and open 
alcohol container. He was eventually found guilty, upon his plea, of a reduced charge of 
DWAI, a misdemeanor. He was fined an unspecified amount, ordered to perform 80 
hours of community service, sentenced to the county jail for five days, and ordered to 
attend alcohol classes one time per week for six months. He attended a Mothers 
                                                          
15
 Item 1, supra note 4, at 1; Item 3, supra note 5, at 4; Item 2, supra note 1, at 36-37. 
 
16
 Item 1, supra note 4, at 1; Item 3, supra note 5, at 5; Item 2, supra note 1, at 37-38. The evidence 
regarding the actual date of the incident is unclear as Applicant estimated it was in 1990, but the OPM investigator 
contends it was in 1992. 
 
17
 Item 3, supra note 5, at 5; Item 2, supra note 1, at 38-39. 
 
18
 Item 6 (Court and Police Records, various dates); Item 5, supra note 14, at 4; Item 3, supra note 5, at 5; 
Item 2, supra note 1, at 38-40.  
  
 
5 
                                      
 
Against Drunk Driving (MADD) panel and remained on parole for one year (SOR ¶ 
1.b.).19  
 
Other than the MADD and other alcohol educational classes, there is no 
evidence that Applicant ever received any alcohol education, treatment, or alcohol 
counseling. There is no evidence that he was ever in an alcohol rehabilitation program, 
or that he was ever diagnosed with alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by any duly 
qualified medical professional, or that he was ever evaluated for such conditions. 
Applicant said that after his most recent alcohol-related incident with police authorities, 
he had “finally gotten the message that [he] cannot and will not ever drink and drive 
again.”20  The situation is made more complicated by the fact that Applicant’s household 
clearly involves the excessive consumption of alcohol. In March 2013, Applicant’s wife 
was in a voluntary alcohol rehabilitation program awaiting possible incarceration 
following her third DUI.21 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”22 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon 
a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”23   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
19
 Item 1, supra note 4, at 1; Item 3, supra note 5, at 3-4; Item 2, supra note 1, at 33-34, 40; Item 5, supra 
note 14, at 5. 
 
20
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 43. 
 
21
 Item 3, supra note 5, at 8. 
 
22
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
23
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”24 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.25  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.”26 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”27 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
24
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
25
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
26
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
27
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
7 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.”  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, “habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” may apply under 
AG ¶ 22(c). AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) have been established by Applicant’s various 
alcohol-related incidents, his DUI charges, his DWAI convictions, his reckless driving 
conviction, his domestic violence and harassment charges, and his repeated and 
continuing consumption of alcohol to the point of intoxication or impaired judgment.  
 
 The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. Under AG ¶ 23(a), the disqualifying 
condition may be mitigated where “so much time has passed, or the behavior was so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” In addition, when “the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or 
issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if 
an alcohol abuser),” AG ¶ 23(b) may apply.  
 
AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) minimally apply. Applicant has been involved in several 
alcohol-related incidents involving police and judicial authorities over the 30-year period 
from 1976 to at least 2006. Most of the incidents involved drinking and driving, but one 
incident involved domestic violence. While he conceded that alcohol “possibly caused 
disappointment” in his first marriage as well as embarrassment, he denied that it had 
any impact on his work, home life, friendships, school, physical or emotional health, 
reputation, judgment, reliability, financial responsibility, or ability to hold a clearance. 
Applicant said that after his most recent alcohol-related incident with police authorities, 
he had “finally gotten the message that [he] cannot and will not ever drink and drive 
again.” He acknowledged that it takes four beers for him to become intoxicated, and he 
admitted he drinks to intoxication two times per month. Yet, he continues to deny that 
he has a problem with alcohol.  
 
Applicant has consistently minimized the significance of alcohol in his life. Even 
after several alcohol-related convictions, court-imposed punishment, and several 
alcohol education classes, including a MADD class, Applicant remains essentially in 
 
8 
                                      
 
denial regarding his relationship with alcohol. He continues to consume alcohol to the 
point of intoxication or impairment. Accordingly, while he has not been involved in an 
alcohol-related incident since 2006, given Applicant’s continuing relationship with 
alcohol, it is likely that his alcohol abuse will recur and it does cast doubt on Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Furthermore, after careful consideration of the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on 
alcohol consumption, I conclude Applicant’s continued alcohol consumption after his 
alcohol-related convictions and minimizing his alcohol problem indicates he is unwilling 
or unable to curtail his alcohol consumption. As such, his conduct demonstrates a lack 
of judgment or a failure to control impulses which is inconsistent with the holder of a 
security clearance. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(e), it is potentially disqualifying if there is “personal conduct, or concealment of 
information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . .” 
 
 AG ¶ 16(e) has been established by Applicant’s involvement in several alcohol-
related incidents leading to criminal convictions, fines, imprisonment, community 
service, and mandated attendance at alcohol education classes over the 30-year period 
from 1976 to at least 2006; his continued consumption of alcohol to the point of 
intoxication or impairment at least two times per month; and his denial that he has an 
alcohol problem.   
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. If “the offense is so minor, or so much time has 
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 17(c) may apply. Also, AG ¶ 17(d) 
may apply when “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” Similarly, AG ¶ 17(e) 
 
9 
                                      
 
may apply if “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”  
 
 AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) do not apply, and ¶ 17(e) minimally applies. Applicant’s 
alcohol-related criminal conduct, while generally considered to be misdemeanors, 
cannot be considered minor offenses. While his DUI/DWAIs and domestic violence 
occurred several years apart during the 30-year period, his continuing consumption of 
alcohol to the point of intoxication or impairment at least two times per month, effectively 
rule out the application of AG ¶ 17(c). His inability to acknowledge his alcohol problem, 
despite years of negative experiences because of it and his failure to address his 
problem through counseling or other positive steps, also effectively rule out the 
application of AG ¶ 17(d). Applicant’s purported recognition that drinking and driving is 
unwise is a positive step, but because he continues to become intoxicated two times per 
month, his steps to reduce his vulnerability are minimized. After becoming intoxicated, 
he may decide to drive as excessive alcohol consumption often affects judgment and 
decision-making. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines G and E in my analysis below.      
 
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He has been 
serving in various positions with his current employer, during which time there were 
corporate mergers, since February 1984. He was granted a secret security clearance in 
June 1984. He has not been involved in any alcohol-related criminal conduct since 
2006. There is no evidence of security violations or alcohol consumption at work. On 
those occasions when he was involved in various criminal incidents, he has complied 
with the various mandates of the courts. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant was a multi-substance abuser. He was a marijuana user while in college. 
Although he had been granted a security clearance in June 1984, he subsequently 
violated the law, policy, and his fiduciary responsibilities by abusing cocaine. Because 
of that cocaine abuse while holding a security clearance, in 2003 his secret security 
clearance was revoked. He is also an alcohol abuser with several alcohol-related 
incidents. He spent time in jail, paid fines, did community service, and attended 
education classes. Nevertheless, he continued to consume alcohol. He denied having 
an alcohol problem, but now concedes that he shouldn’t drink and drive. He still 
consumes alcohol to the point of intoxication two times per month. Applicant does not 
seem to be able to avoid alcohol. The environment in which he resides is affected by it. 
Applicant’s wife has her own alcohol problems.  
 
 I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.28 Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has failed to mitigate the alcohol consumption and personal conduct 
security concerns. (See AG && 2(a)(1) - 2(a)(9).) 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
28
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against  Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
