 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP1 Case No. 14-01822 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant admitted owing 12 delinquent debts totaling $10,399 and provided no 
evidence of efforts to resolve them or to become financially responsible in the future. He 
did not mitigate resulting trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
On November 18, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under DoD 
                                                          
1 The SOR and FORM mistakenly identified this as an ISCR security clearance case in various locations 
throughout the documents. However, the SOR properly notified Applicant that the DoD CAF reviewed his 
eligibility to occupy a designated ADP I/II/III position, and was submitting the case to an administrative 
judge to make such a determination. DOHA Hearing Office administrative personnel have since 
confirmed that Applicant is applying for a trustworthiness determination rather than a security clearance. 
The adjudicative criteria are the same for ISCR and ADP eligibility determinations. Accordingly the SOR 
heading error, and Department Counsel’s statements in the FORM concerning Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance or access to classified information, instead of an ADP I/II/III public trust position, are 
harmless errors.    
 
2 
 
 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DoD 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, 
dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
  
On July 25, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) On February 23, 2015, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six 
Items.2 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) mailed Applicant a 
complete copy of the FORM on March 4, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on March 
17, 2015, and was provided 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. He timely submitted an additional statement in which he 
accepted responsibility for the SOR-listed debts, expressed his understanding of the 
resulting security concerns, but objected to denial of his clearance on that basis for 
various reasons. He made no objection to consideration of any contents of the FORM; 
and did not request additional time to respond. Department Counsel had no objection to 
the admissibility of this response to the FORM, which I marked Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, 
and admitted into the record. On June 18, 2015, DOHA assigned the case to me.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts totaling $10,399. In his responses to the 
SOR and FORM, Applicant admitted the truth of these allegations and accepted 
responsibility for the debts described therein. (Item 2; AE A.) Applicant’s admissions are 
incorporated in the following findings. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He was married in March 2005 and divorced in May 
2006. He has a three-year-old son, whose mother sued him to establish paternity and 
obtain a child support order in May 2012. He graduated from high school in 2002, and 
was honorably discharged from a six-year enlistment in the Air Force in May 2009. He 
quit his subsequent job as a broadband technician to attend some college classes 
between January 2010 and December 2011, without completing a degree. Since then 
he has held full-time employment, except for a few weeks when he quit another job to 
pursue his current employment in September 2013. (Item 4; Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant’s financial delinquencies consist of medical bills, a student loan, a 
credit card account, and utility debts. They arose over the past four years, and he 
offered no evidence of any payment toward, or other effort to resolve, any of them. (Item 
2; Item 5; AE A.) 
                                                          
2 Error! Main Document Only.Item 6 is inadmissible and will not be considered or cited as evidence. It is 
an unsworn summary of an interview of Applicant that was conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management on December 17, 2013. This summary was not certified by him to be accurate. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of adoption by 
Applicant or evidence from an authenticating witness. Applicant’s admissions in Item 2, and full data 
credit report in Item 5, also make the contents of Item 6 cumulative. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s seven delinquent medical bills (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.f, 1.g, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l) 
total $8,269 and were placed for collection at different times between February 2011 
and November 2013. They range from $150 to $3,420. Applicant said that each one 
resulted from an unexpected medical emergency during a time when he had either no 
or inadequate medical coverage, but provided no elaboration of the circumstances 
under which any of the debts were incurred. (Item 2; Item 5; AE A.) 
 
 In November 2013 Applicant was reported to be more than 120 days past due, in 
the amount of $331, on his delinquent $4,200 student loan. The balance due had grown 
to $4,799 at the time of that credit report. Only the $331 delinquent amount alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e was included in the $10,399 total discussed above. No payments toward this 
loan were substantiated, so his total delinquent debt would have exceeded $15,000 by 
the close of the record. (Item 2; Item 5; AE A.) 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent credit card and utility debts totaled $1,799 at the time of 
his November 2013 credit report. They were placed for collection or charged off 
between March 2011 and September 2013. (Item 5.) His explanation for these (and his 
other) delinquent debts was, “Between the cost of living, child support, and other needs 
of my child the amount of extra income I have makes it difficult to pay debts right away.” 
(Item 2.) He further submitted, “The fact is my cost of living expenses increased to a 
point where trying to pay off excess debt just wasn’t a possibility in the last few years.” 
(AE A.)  
 
 Applicant reported in his November 2013 e-QIP that he was approximately 
$3,000 delinquent on his court-ordered child support payments due to the “Rough 
economy.” (Item 3 at 35.) He was unable to provide an address for his child, whose 
mother has custody, on that document although he did so for his sister and half-
brothers. (Item 3 at 26-27.) He provided no financial statement or budget information 
showing his income or living expenses, so his claim to have prioritized spending for his 
child’s needs over resolving the debts alleged in the SOR is not persuasive.  
 
 Since the record contains no information concerning Applicant’s current income 
and regular expenses, his ability to avoid incurring additional delinquent debt cannot be 
evaluated. He submitted no evidence concerning the quality of his professional 
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect 
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. No character 
witnesses described his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was unable 
to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his 
case decided without a hearing.  
   
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
 
4 
 
 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. DoD contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt over the past four years since 
leaving active duty in the Air Force. This evidence raises security concerns under both 
of these conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has substantially more than $10,000 in delinquent debts that continue 
at present without any apparent means of resolution. He did not show that these debts 
arose from conditions beyond his control or that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances, particularly concerning the medical bills. He documented no counseling 
to assist with debt resolution, nor did he demonstrate an ability to avoid recurrence of 
financial problems. According to the record evidence, all of the SOR-alleged debts 
remain unresolved and no documented basis to dispute the legitimacy of any of them 
was provided. Applicant therefor failed to establish mitigation of trustworthiness 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual who is 
accountable for the decisions and choices that led to his financial difficulties. He has 
essentially ignored his voluntarily-incurred delinquent debts, and provided no evidence 
of efforts to resolve them despite his awareness of the resulting trustworthiness 
concerns. He failed to demonstrate good judgment or permanent behavioral change. 
His ongoing delinquent debts establish continuing potential for pressure, coercion, or 
duress, and make continuation of financial problems likely.   
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability to occupy a public trust position. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant did not meet his burden to mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns arising from his ongoing financial irresponsibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
