1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-03123
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David Hayes,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On October 31, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under  Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
(DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 27, 2015. A notice of
hearing was issued on June 2, 2015, scheduling the hearing for August 6, 2015.
Government Exhibit (GX) 1 was admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant
testified, presented the testimony of three witnesses, and submitted Applicant Exhibits
(AX) A through P, which were admitted without objection. The transcript was received
on August 14, 2015. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
2
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts
relating to Pakistan. The request and the attached documents are included in the
record as HE I. Applicant presented documents concerning Pakistan, which are marked
as AX C-E. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegation in ¶ 1.b with
explanation, and denied the remaining allegations.
Applicant was born in Pakistan in September 1977. While in Pakistan, he
attended high school. He did not serve in the military. He immigrated to the United
States in February 2000 with his family. (Tr. 18) Applicant became a naturalized citizen
in 2011. (AX D)  Applicant has a United States passport. (AX K) He obtained his
undergraduate degree in Pakistan. He is attending graduate courses in business
administration. While in Pakistan, Applicant received a job offer from an American
company. He also has worked for local government. Before his current position,
Applicant held a position of public trust for two years. (Tr. 36) Applicant has been
employed with his current employer, as an architect system administrator. (Tr. 61)  He
completed a security clearance application on October 25, 2013. This is his first request
for a security clearance with the DOD.  
The SOR alleges foreign influence security concerns because of Applicant’s
parents, two brothers, and his financial support to his father. 
Applicant is married to a U.S. citizen. They have four children who are U.S.
citizens. (Tr. 24; AX H-J). Applicant and his wife own a home in the United States. The
value of the home is about $600,000. He also owns another property, which he uses an
a rental property. He earns $285,000 a year. (Tr. 23) Applicant’s investments are in the
United States. His bank accounts and other financial holdings are in the United States.
Applicant owns several companies. (AX L-O) He has no assets or investments in
Pakistan. (Tr. 22) The approximate total of Applicant’s personal and professional
property is about $1 million. (Tr. 21).
Applicant’s parents are citizens of Pakistan but reside with him in the United
States. They have lived in the United States for almost two years. Applicant provided
documentation from the United States Immigration Service regarding their current
status. (AX A and B) The petition for an alien relative (I 30) has been approved.
Applicant’s parents are waiting for their green cards, which should arrive within two
months. (Tr. 15) Although Applicant provided approximately $800 a month in financial
support to his father when he lived in Pakistan, that is no longer the case. Applicant
believes he now gives his father about $300 a month.  His parents have no connection
to the Pakistani government or military. 
3
Applicant has two brothers. One brother is married and lives in the United States.
This brother lives with his wife and son. Applicant’s sister-in-law works for an American
company and has an H-1B visa. Applicant’s brother has an H-4 visa and is dependent
on his wife. (Tr. 18) They have lived in the United States for more than a year.
Applicant’s brother’s son has special needs and they will likely remain in the United
States so that their son can receive educational care. (Tr. 73)  Applicant’s  other brother
is a citizen and resident of Pakistan, and is a career military officer in the Pakistani
Army. Applicant does not know where his brother is currently stationed. (Tr. 74) He
believes he works with the United Nations as a U.N. soldier. His brother has no
knowledge of Applicant’s work. Applicant speaks to his brother maybe twice a year via
Skype. (Tr. 75) Applicant saw his brother in 2010 when he visited his parents. (Tr. 75)
Applicant does not intend to return to Pakistan now that his family is here. (Tr. 75)
Applicant’s colleague, who has held a security clearance for 11 years, testified
that she has known him for about one and a half years. She described Applicant as
devoted to his job. Applicant is a person who helps and mentors people.  (Tr. 39)
Another former colleague, who has known Applicant for about 10 years,
described him as a great engineer who worked on his team. (Tr. 46) The witness
testified that Applicant is diligent, studious, ethical and prompt. At that time, Applicant
handled sensitive data. The witness knows and socializes with Applicant and his family.
He recommends Applicant for a security clearance. (Tr. 47)
A friend testified that she has known Applicant and his family for about three
years. She is also a realtor who sold Applicant his home. She describes Applicant as a
family man. He is very intelligent, a gracious host, and a lovely person. She knows that
he is proud to be an American. (Tr. 52) The witness is friends with his wife and
socializes with them. (Tr. 54) 
Applicant is a respected member of the community. He is a law-abiding citizen.
He respects his neighbors and fellow community members. Applicant is a hard-working
individual who strives to excel in life on a personal and professional basis. He
volunteers at the neighborhood school, and is involved in community cultural events.
 Applicant emphasized that his parents are honest people who taught him to be
honest and to work hard. His father instilled the value that a dream is possible when
you work hard and are honest and have respect for all the people who surround you.
(Tr. 58) 
Applicant was credible when he stated that the United States is his home. This is
where he wants to live for the rest of his life with his wife and family. (Tr. 57) He has
been working in the industry for more than six years. He is now pursuing an MBA.  He
enjoys his work and wants to provide a service to the U.S. Government.
4
Administrative Notice
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic with a population of more than 167
million people. After September 11, 2001, Pakistan supported the United States and an
international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom to remove the Taliban from
power in Afghanistan. Despite this support, members of the Taliban are known to be in
the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan, the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
(Kpk), and in the Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and Pakistan.
The Taliban, Lashkar e-Tayyiba (LT), the Haqqani Network, and al Qaida
operate in Pakistan, and in some instances elements of the Pakistan government may
be covertly aiding these terrorist or anti-U.S. entities. Taliban financing has been traced
from Pakistan to Afghanistan, allowing the insurgency in Afghanistan to strengthen its
military and technical capabilities. It is likely that in November 2008 it was responsible
for the attack in Mumbai, which caused numerous casualties. The Haqqani Network
attacked the U.S. Embassy in Kabul in September 2011. Pakistan has intensified its
counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for dealing with militants has been mixed.
The U.S. Department of State has defined several areas of Pakistan to be
terrorist safe havens. The security situation in Pakistan worsened in 2008, driven in part
by insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous
Afghanistan-Pakistan border. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide
vital sanctuary to al Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist
groups. Al Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the
Afghanistan insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and
Western interests in Pakistan and worldwide. Together with the Pakistan Taliban and
other extremist groups, Al Qaida uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan
and prepare regional and transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain
equipment and supplies. Al Qaida and its extremists have waged a campaign of
destabilizing suicide attacks throughout Pakistan. The attacks targeted high profile
government, military, and western-related sites. Nearly 1,000 individuals were killed in
2008 due to such attacks. In the last three months of 2009, terrorists based in Pakistan
conducted at least 40 suicide terrorist attacks in major cities of Pakistan and killed
about 600 Pakistan civilians and security personnel. 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to
Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Since 2007, several American citizens present in
Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other reasons. The human rights situation
in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial killings, torture, and disappearances occur.
Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police corruption is widespread, and the Pakistan
Government maintains several domestic intelligence agencies to monitor politicians,
political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign intelligence
agents. Credible reports indicate that authorities use wiretaps and monitor mail,
phones, and electronic messages without the requisite court approval. In addition,
Pakistan continues to develop its own nuclear infrastructure, expand nuclear weapon
stockpiles, and seek more advanced warhead and delivery systems. In the aftermath of
5
Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, the United States cut off military aid to
Pakistan for several years.
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan became allied with the United States in
counterterrorism. Pakistan committed to elimination of terrorist camps on the
Afghanistan-Pakistan border and sent thousands of troops to the region and sustained
hundreds of casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency
efforts and demonstrated determination and persistence in combating militants. The
United States is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster Pakistan’s military forces and
security. In 2003, President Bush announced that the United States would provide
Pakistan with $3 billion in economic and military aid over the next five years beginning
in 2005.
On May 1, 2011, U.S. special operations personnel raided a large compound in
Pakistan and killed Osama bin Laden, the leader of al Qaida. The raid raised concerns
that the Pakistan government had knowingly permitted terrorists, militants, and
insurgents to find safe havens in Pakistan.
As of August 2014, the U.S. State Department continued to warn U.S. citizens to
defer all non-essential travel to Pakistan, as the presence of several foreign and
indigenous terrorist groups poses a potential danger to U.S. citizens throughout
Pakistan.
In January 2015, Secretary of State for the United States Department of State,
John Kerry visited Pakistan and the visit underscored the long-term cooperation
between the United States and Pakistan and highlighted areas of ongoing activity,
including, military exchange and training.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
6
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline B (Foreign Influence)
The security concern under Guideline B is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
7
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
A disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). A
disqualifying condition also may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group,
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶
7(b).
Applicant’s parents are citizens of Pakistan, but reside with him in the United
States. One of Applicant’s brothers lives in the United States but is a citizen of
Pakistan. Based on this evidence, AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are not applicable.
Applicant’s second brother is a citizen and resident of Pakistan, and is in the
Pakistani military. Security concerns could arise in connection with the potential that
hostile forces might seek protected information from Applicant by threatening harm to
his brother in Pakistan. This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation. Based on
this evidence, AG 7(a) and 7(b) are raised.
Since the Government produced evidence to raise  disqualifying conditions in AG
¶¶ 7(a) and (b), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the
Government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it,
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States,
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is
8
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is
associated with a risk of terrorism.
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Pakistan
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or
his brother living in Pakistan, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a
possibility in the future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence
activities as effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Pakistan has a
significant problem with terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with his brother in Pakistan
creates a potential conflict of interest because this relationship is sufficiently close to
raise a security concern abut his desire to assist a family member by providing sensitive
information. 
Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.”  AG ¶ 8(a). The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well
as each individual family tie must be considered.  ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App.
Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) can mitigate concerns when “there is no
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(c) can
mitigate if “contact of communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation.” 
AG ¶ 8(a) has applicability. Applicant’s parents, wife, children, and one brother
reside in the United States.  He does not keep in touch with his brother in Pakistan on a
regular basis, but his parents may speak to him. He has shown mitigation under AG ¶
8(a), and Applicant met his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his
relationships with relatives living in Pakistan] could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation.”
AG ¶ 8(b) applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant
connections to the United States. He has lived in the United States since 2000. He
married his American spouse and has three children who are U.S. citizens. His parents
are now living in the United States with Applicant and are in the process of becoming
U.S. citizens. He is a family man who wants to provide for his family in the United
States. When Applicant took an oath and swore allegiance to the United States when
he became a naturalized U.S. citizen, he manifested his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity
to the United States over all other countries. 
9
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the
potential conflict of interest created by his relationship with his wife’s family living in
Pakistan. He rarely communicates with this brother in Pakistan. Moreover, there is no
evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Pakistan government or those
conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant, or his family
members. As such, there is a reduced possibility that either Applicant or his brother
living in Pakistan would be specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or
exploitation. Of course, the primary risk to his brother living in Pakistan is from terrorists
and other lawless elements and not the Pakistan Government.
In sum, Applicant’s ties with his parent are significant. Still, he has not been to
Pakistan since 2010. Applicant’s connections to the United States are strong. He has
no desire to return to Pakistan. He is committed to his personal and professional life in
the United States. His wife and three children live with him in the United States. There
is substantial mitigation in this case. Applicant spoke about his undivided loyalty to the
United States.  His connections to the United States heavily outweigh his connections
to his family in Pakistan. He has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties
in the United States that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor
of the United States. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated under Guideline
B.  
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen. He is an educated man, who lives with his wife,
children and parents in the United States. His one brother resides in the United States
10
with his wife and special needs child. His substantial financial assets are in the United
States. Applicant has strong personal and professional ties to the United States.
 A Guideline B decision concerning Pakistan must take into consideration the
geopolitical situation and dangers there. The country is dangerous because of violence
from terrorists and other lawless elements. Terrorists continue to threaten Pakistan, the
interests of the United States, and those who cooperate and assist the United States.
Pakistan does not fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many
instances. Still, the United States and Pakistan remain allies in the war on terrorism.
Pakistan and the United States have close relationships in diplomacy and trade. They
also have profound policy disputes.
 Applicant’s parents and brothers are citizens of Pakistan. His connections to
them make Applicant more vulnerable as a target of coercion by lawless elements in
Pakistan. His brother in Pakistan will be at a greater risk if his clearance is granted.
However, they have no knowledge of Applicant’s work. More importantly, his primary
duty is to his own wife and his children who are U.S. citizens. He has no intention of
returning to Pakistan, and he will seek advice to resolve any issues that may arise in
the future with the help of his employer. For all these reasons, Applicant has mitigated
the security concerns under foreign influence.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
