 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03286 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to file his state income tax return for tax year 2011, and owes an 
unspecified debt to the state. He has child support arrearages of around $36,000 that is 
being paid through wage withholding, and had his mortgage foreclosed in 2011. His 
evidence is insufficient to show that he has a track record of financial responsibility, that 
he does not have a current financial problem, or that his financial problem is being 
resolved or is under control. He failed to mitigate the Guideline F security concerns. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 23, 2014. 
On September 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on 
October 17, 2014, and elected to have his case decided on the written record.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated March 31, 
2015, was provided to him by transmittal letter dated May 14, 2015. Applicant was 
allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material in 
extenuation and mitigation. As of July 30, 2015, Applicant had not responded to the 
FORM or submitted any information. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me on August 4, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations with explanations. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as a finding of fact. After a review of the record evidence, I make 
the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old technician employed by a government contractor. He 
served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 1990 until 1996, when he was honorably 
discharged. He then served in the Navy Reserve from 1998 until 2002. He attended 
college during 1998 – 1999, 2004 – 2005, and in 2008, but did not receive a degree. He 
married his first spouse in 1992 and divorced in 1997. He married his second spouse in 
1997, and divorced in 2010. He has three children ages 19, 20, and 21.  
 
According to Applicant’s 2014 SCA, the DOD granted him eligibility for a secret 
clearance in 1998. It is not clear from the information provided whether Applicant has 
possessed a clearance since then. His employment record shows that from 1997 to 
2005, and from 2011 to 2012, he worked for private companies. He worked for a 
government contractor from 2005 to 2011, and he has worked for his current employer, 
a government contractor from 2011 to present.  
 
Applicant disclosed in Section 26 (Financial History) of the 2014 SCA that he 
failed to file his state income tax return for tax year 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.a). He explained that 
he filed his federal income tax return, but forgot to file the state income tax return. He 
believes he owed $400; however, the state is claiming a $1,500 tax deficiency. 
Applicant stated in his 2014 SCA that he was going to contact the state to ascertain the 
extent of his tax debt and make arrangements to pay it. 
 
In his answer to the 2014 SOR, Applicant claimed that he was in the process of 
working with a state collection agency to file an amended 2011 income tax return and 
then he intended to make arrangements to pay the tax debt. He presented no 
documentary evidence to support his claims. I note that the January 28, 2014 credit 
report included in the FORM shows that the state released a tax lien in October 2011, 
presumably after it was paid or Applicant established a payment plan. Applicant’s pay 
statement also shows that the state is withholding $157 monthly from his earnings for 
tax purposes. 
 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant disclosed in his 2014 SOR that he was $53,000 in arrears on his child 
support obligation. (SOR ¶ 1.b) He explained that when his youngest child turned 18, he 
was in arrears for a small amount of money, and the state ordered an audit on the 
account. The divorce order required Applicant to pay $800 or 25% of his monthly 
income in child support, whichever was greater. Applicant claimed he paid $800 a 
month, but failed to increase his child support payments to meet the 25% a month 
required by the court order. Because of his salary increases, the court determined that 
be owed $36,000 in child support. In August 2012, the court ordered the withholding of 
$650 monthly from Applicant salary. Applicant’s October 2014 pay statement shows that 
$650 was withheld that month.  
 
Applicant also disclosed that in around 2009, he became delinquent on his 
mortgage payment because of divorce-related expenses and child support obligations. 
(SOR ¶ 1.c) He averred that his earnings were insufficient to pay his mortgage, debts, 
and living expenses. His home was foreclosed in 2011. The total loan balance was 
$112,000, and the mortgage was $6,000 past due. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
claimed that part of the foreclosure agreement established when he returned the 
property, “all balances were supposed to be zeroed.” Applicant averred that he 
contacted the creditor to resolve the debt, but received no response. Applicant 
documented that he disputed the debt through the credit bureau in October 2014. He 
presented no evidence to show the legal basis for the dispute or whether it was 
resolved on his favor.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his 2014 SCA four delinquent credit card debts. The 
FORM credit reports show these accounts were paid. Additionally, the 2014 SOR 
alleged two service providers’ delinquent accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e). Applicant 
initially disputed the debts, but later paid them both in July 2014. 
 
Applicant’s gross monthly pay is around $5,000, with a net income of $3,383. 
Except for his earnings, he provided little information about his financial situation. He did 
not provide any information about his monthly expenses, and whether his current 
income is sufficient to pay his current day-to-day living expenses and debts. There is no 
information to indicate whether he participated in financial counseling or whether he 
follows a budget. The 2015 credit report shows numerous accounts in good standing 
and several accounts paid after being delinquent or charged off. It also shows the 
delinquent mortgage alleged in the SOR (which is being disputed), one unpaid credit 
card debt that was sold to another debt collector, and an unpaid $10 medical debt. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
 
4 
 
 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG lists disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
Applicant’s failure to timely file his state income tax return, and his delinquent or 
in collection accounts raise the applicability of the following financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 
19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” and AG ¶ (g) “failure to file annual 
 
5 
 
 
federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the 
same.”  
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply and do not 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. Applicant 
claimed he forgot to file his 2011 state taxes, that he was in the process of refiling his 
2011 state income tax return, and that he intended to make payment arrangements. He 
presented no documentary evidence to show that he filed his 2011 income tax return, 
the extent of his debt, or that he has paid or made arrangements to pay the delinquent 
taxes. 
 
 Concerning SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant’s documents show that his child support 
obligation was modified in 2012 from $800 to $650 monthly, because one child became 
18 years old. He averred that he was $36,360 in arrears because he was paying only 
$800 monthly, instead of 25% of his monthly income. Applicant failed to submit 
documentary evidence to show that he was paying his child support obligation 
consistently before 2012. 
 
 Concerning SOR ¶ 1.c, Applicant averred that he became delinquent on the 
mortgage because of his divorce, which could establish circumstances beyond his 
control. Notwithstanding, Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to show that he 
was financially responsible under the circumstances. Applicant presented no 
 
6 
 
 
documentary evidence of any efforts to resolve this debt, or to show that he was 
released of any financial obligation after the property was foreclosed. It is not clear from 
the document he submitted attached to his answer to the SOR whether the online 
dispute pertains to the mortgage foreclosure. 
 
 Furthermore, Applicant provided little information about his current earnings and 
financial position, except for his pay statement. He did not provide any information 
about his monthly expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his 
current day-to-day living expenses and debts. There is no information to show that he 
participated in financial counseling or that he follows a budget. The available information 
is insufficient to establish clear indications that he does not have a current financial 
problem. 
 
 I considered that Applicant’s 2015 credit report shows numerous accounts in 
good standing and several accounts paid after being delinquent or charged off. It also 
shows the delinquent mortgage alleged in the SOR, one unpaid credit card debt that 
was sold to another debt collector, and an unpaid $10 medical debt. On balance, I find 
that Applicant presented insufficient information to establish that his financial problem is 
being resolved, or is under control.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant failed to submit evidence to show that he has a track record of financial 
responsibility, that he does not have a financial problem, or that his financial problem is 
being resolved or is under control. He failed to mitigate the Guideline F security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
