 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04847 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
 Decision  
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 25, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). Based on a review of Applicant’s e-QIP and the 
ensuing investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on February 11, 2015, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security 
concerns under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
On March 5, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 13, 2015, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
marked as Items 1 through 5. On June 1, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM 
and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit objections and supply additional 
information. Applicant timely submitted a response to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on July 31, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had six delinquent debts totaling $17,236 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a-1.f). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
($5,959) and 1.f ($4,987). He indicated that he was not denying the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.c, and 1.e, but did not have knowledge of those debts. He believed he paid the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, but provided no proof of payment. His responses to SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
through 1.e are interpreted as denials. His admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact.1 
 
 Applicant is a 62-year-old senior official who has been working for a federal 
contractor since June 2009. He has earned multiple law degrees. He worked as a 
civilian employee of the U.S. Army in a number of civil service positions from May 1974 
to June 2009 and progressed from a WG-8 to an acting GS-15. Divorced twice, he 
married his current wife in 2009. He has four children and three stepchildren. He has 
held a security clearance for many years.2 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his divorce in 2005 and medical 
problems. As part of the divorce, he agreed to be responsible for the debts his ex-wife 
incurred. He initially thought those debts were about $8,000, but later learned they were 
about $25,000. He also agreed to pay $1,200 per month in child support. Furthermore, 
he experienced a number of significant medical problems during this period. His medical 
problems resulted in high out-of-pocket copays for prescription medications. He 
acknowledged that he made some financial mistakes, but stated his “mind was very 
cloudy” due to his medical problems. In addition, he supported his eldest son who also 
had significant medical problems. Applicant worked a second job to recover financially, 
but found it difficult to do so.3   
 
 Credit reports in the record contain substantial evidence of each alleged debt. 
The dates of last activity for the debts range from October 2007 to January 2014. In his 
Response to the FORM, Applicant indicated that the credit reports demonstrate the 
debts became delinquent two or three years after the divorce because he was trying to 
pay them. After consulting with a bankruptcy attorney, he was advised that he did not 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 2. 
 
2 Items 2, 3; Applicant’s Response to the FORM.   
 
3 Item 2; Applicant’s Response to the FORM . 
 
 
3 
 
 
qualify for Chapter 7 bankruptcy and decided against filing Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He 
stated that he paid his mortgage, student loans, taxes, and other debts.4 
 
 Applicant provided no proof that he made payments toward the alleged debts. No 
documents were presented to show that he has taken any other action to resolve them.5  
 
 The record does not reflect Applicant’s net monthly income, his total monthly 
expenses, or his total monthly debt payments. The amount of his net monthly remainder 
(discretionary income) is unknown. In his Response to the FORM, he indicated that he 
refinanced his home in 2014 and that his child support payments ended in July 2015. 
He also stated that his current wife has significant health problems, but did not 
elaborate. Additionally, he noted that his company recently cut his pay by 20% and he is 
being threatened with a furlough.6  
 
 In his Response to the FORM, Applicant stated, “[I]n policing its Security Policy, it 
is not the Government’s role to be the moral Police of the American Public, nor is it the 
Government’s job to assure that Private Individuals make good on their debts to other 
Private individuals.” He essentially contends that an individual’s indebtedness is a 
private matter and not the Government’s business. “The only question for Government, 
should be does this individual pose a threat to National Security, a real threat of 
divulging Secret information, and nothing more.”7 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
                                                          
4 Items 4, 5; Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
5 Item 2; Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
6 Response to the FORM.  
 
7 Response to the FORM.  
 
 
4 
 
 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence established two disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Security clearance adjudications are not debt-collection procedures, but 
proceedings to evaluate an individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. ISCR 
 
6 
 
 
Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person who is unwilling to fulfill his legal 
obligations does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability 
required of persons granted access to classified information. ISCR Case No. 98-0810 
(App. Bd. Jun. 8, 2000). The security eligibility of an applicant is placed into question 
when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring 
financial difficulties. ISCR Case No. 99-0296 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 18, 2000). As a general 
rule, an applicant is not required to be debt-free or develop a plan for paying off all 
debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, 
accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent 
to effectuate the plan. ISCR Case No. 09-08462 at 3 (App. Bd. May 31, 2011). Contrary 
to Applicant’s contention, the Government has a valid interest in examining his finances 
to determine whether he presents a security risk.   
 
Applicant divorced in 2005, suffered a number of significant health problems, and 
has been supporting his eldest son who also has health problems. Each of these events 
was a condition beyond his control that contributed to his financial problems. However, 
Applicant merits only partial credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because he failed to provide 
sufficient evidence to conclude he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Little is 
known about his financial situation. The amount of his monthly income, expenses, and 
debt payments are unknown. It is not known whether his has any discretionary income 
to make payments on the delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant failed to establish that any of the mitigating conditions fully applied to 
his financial problems. His delinquent debts are ongoing. No documentary evidence 
was presented to show that he has taken any action to resolve those debts, including 
the $9 debt in SOR ¶ 1.e. Insufficient evidence was presented to conclude his financial 
problems are unlikely to recur. He provided no documents showing he has a legitimate 
basis for disputing any debts. His financial problems continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.8 I gave due consideration to the information about Applicant in the 
                                                          
8 The adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
 
7 
 
 
record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating evidence, does 
not outweigh the security concerns at issue. Applicant’s handling of his financial 
problems leaves me with doubts as to his current eligibility to access classified 
information. Following the Egan decision and the “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard, doubts about granting Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance 
must be resolved in favor of national security.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
