KEYWORD: Guideline G; Guideline J
DIGEST: A Judge has no authority to serve as an investigator in a case.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 14-03956.a1
DATE: 08/25/2015
DATE: August 25, 2015
In Re:
---------
 
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 14-03956
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq. , Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On December 2, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On June 12, 2015, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Shari Dam denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge failed to consider all of
the relevant evidence, thereby rendering her adverse decision arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has a history of alcohol abuse.  In 1996 and again 1997 he was found guilty of
underage drinking.  In 2007, he was convicted of DWI, fined, and placed on probation for two years. 
In 2012, he was again charged with DWI, fined, and placed on probation until 2017.  He did not
present evidence that he had participated in a substance abuse evaluation or treatment program.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted that the record contained no evidence that would mitigate the concerns
raised by Applicant’s misconduct, for example participation in a treatment program, favorable
prognosis from a health care provider, or that his misconduct was committed under duress, etc.  She
also noted that Applicant had not provided character or employment references.
Discussion
Applicant argues that the Judge did not include or consider information obtained by the
investigator in his case, which, he argues, would demonstrate mitigation.1  However, the Directive
provides that an applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the concerns raised by admitted or proven facts and that the applicant has the ultimate
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness decision.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15. In
this case, Applicant admitted each of the allegations under both Guidelines, and Department Counsel
provided evidence in the form of his trustworthiness application and a printout of his state criminal
history.  Taken together, these admissions and documents constitute substantial evidence of
trustworthiness concerns, thereby giving rise to Applicant’s burden of persuasion as to mitigation. 
See ISCR Case No. 11-03500 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2012) for explanation of substantial evidence. 
1The record in this case does not include a written report of investigation produced by the Government
investigator who interviewed Applicant.  Other than the Applicant’s security clearance application, the only other
document in the record was a criminal history printout from the state of Applicant’s residence.  Applicant is arguing that
the Judge erred by not seeking out and considering documents that were not made part of the record, including a police
report.  
2
The record shows that Applicant was given a copy of the Directive, which describes his right
to submit written matters in response to the File of Relevant Material (FORM) within 30 days of
receiving it.  These documents may contain objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or
explanation as appropriate.   Directive ¶ E3.1.7.  Department Counsel sent him copies of the
evidence upon which the Government was relying, along with notice that he had 30 days from
receipt to submit documents as set forth in the Directive.  FORM at 2.  The FORM and attached
evidence were accompanied by a cover letter from DOHA, which also notified Applicant of his right
to submit “any material you wish the Administrative Judge to consider” before making her decision. 
Cover Letter, dated February 23, 2015.  Applicant did not submit any documents in reply to the
FORM.  Decision at 2.  
Insofar as he was given adequate notice of his right to submit evidence, a right he did not
exercise, Applicant cannot fairly complain that the Judge did not seek out evidence on her own.  A
Judge is an impartial fact-finder and has no authority to serve as an investigator in a case.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 14-01925 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 26, 2015).  See also ADP Case No. 05-01237 at 3
(App. Bd. May 10, 2007) (A Judge in a DOHA proceeding is “an impartial presiding official”).  We
resolve this assignment of error adversely to Applicant.  
Applicant’s brief asserts matters from outside the record.  We are not permitted to consider
new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  Given the paucity of mitigating evidence in the record,
the decision is sustainable.  The standard applicable to trustworthiness cases is that set forth in
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) regarding security clearances:  such a
determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’” See, e.g., ADP Case No. 12-04343 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2013).  See also Kaplan v.
Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. Cir. 2013), cert. denied.
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.   
Signed: Michael Ra’anan                   
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                   
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
