 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03921 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Charles Hultstrand, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns, but he did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 17, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 25, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 2, 
 
2 
 
2015, scheduling the hearing for July 23, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 31, 2015.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, M 
through P, and R through X, which were admitted without objection.  
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 2.a by changing the date in the 
allegation from “March 21, 2014,” to “February 13, 2013.” The motion was granted 
without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since February 2013. He has held a security clearance 
in the past, but it lapsed while he held a job that did not require a clearance. He has a 
bachelor’s degree, and he attended graduate school without earning a post-graduate 
degree. He is married with two minor children.1 
 
 Applicant worked for a company from about June 2010 to June 2011. His job 
required extensive travel, which he described as “100% of the time.” The travel was 
affecting his marriage, and he quit the job in June 2011. He was unemployed from June 
2011 through September 2011, and again from about November 2011 through October 
2012. He relied on his savings and his wife’s income while he was unemployed, but a 
number of debts became delinquent.2 
 
 The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts, but several of the debts are duplicate 
accounts. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.m are duplicate accounts, and the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.n, 1.p, and 1.q are also duplicate accounts. When the 
duplicate accounts are omitted, the SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts with balances 
totaling about $38,000. Each debt is listed on at least one credit report. Applicant denied 
all the allegations on the basis that the debts were paid, current, in a payment plan, or 
otherwise resolved.  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 22, 37-38; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 27-29, 38-40; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant established that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($549), 1.b ($52), 1.c 
($3,442), 1.n ($2,704), 1.o ($1,997), and 1.r ($535) have been paid, settled, or 
otherwise resolved.3  
 
The ten debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.l are defaulted student loans 
totaling about $29,000. As of April 2015, Applicant was in a payment plan wherein he 
paid $4.52 per month on all the loans. The loans were later put in forbearance, which 
was scheduled to end on August 25, 2015.4  
 
Applicant’s finances are currently stable. He is able to pay his debts while also 
saving for unexpected expenses and contributing to retirement accounts.5 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
February 2013. He answered “No” to all the financial questions under Section 26, 
including the following: 
 
 Other than previously listed, have any of the following happened? 
 
In the past seven (7) years, you defaulted on any type of loan? (Include 
financial obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those 
for which you were a cosignor or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency? (Include financial obligations for which you were the 
sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosignor or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? (Include 
financial obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those 
for which you were a cosignor or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you have been over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt not previously entered? (Include financial obligations for which 
you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosignor 
or guarantor).  
 
You are currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt? (Include financial 
obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which 
you were a cosignor or guarantor).6    
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 30-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-5; AE A-C, M-P, R. 
 
4 Tr. at 31, 43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-5; AE D. 
 
5 Tr. at 34-35, 43; AE S-X. 
 
6 GE 1.  
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in March 2013. The 
interviewer asked him about a series of delinquent debts as listed on his credit report. 
Applicant discussed his finances and debts with the investigator. Applicant stated that 
he had not listed the debts because he did not recall them, and some of the accounts 
had been resolved through a credit counseling service.7   
 
 Applicant admits that he should have answered “Yes” to the financial questions 
on the SF 86, but he denied intentionally falsifying the questionnaire.8 He testified: 
 
I previously held a top secret clearance with [defense contractor]. And I 
had the completed, I can’t remember the document, I completed a top 
secret application. 
 
And at the time I was copying from the completed top secret to the current 
secret application. And so at the time I was also under a lot of personal 
stress and marriage issues that were brought up. 
 
And so in getting this job, I was trying to focus on the roles of my job, 
finally being able to provide for my family and filling out this application all 
at the same time. And when it came to, I believe it was Section 26, the 
financial, I did mistakenly select no.9 
 
Applicant further testified that he had a copy of his SF 86 that was completed in 2010, 
and he “was literally verbatim copying from one to the other. And when it came to that 
section, [he] mistakenly checked no.” He stated that it took a day or two to complete the 
SF 86, and a number of answers were updated. He stated that he was going through 
the questions and answering “No,” but he did not “think clearly about the [financial] 
question at the time to change the answer from no to yes.” He stated that he did not 
have a motive to falsify the SF 86 because a security clearance is not a requirement of 
his job.10  
 
 I did not find Applicant’s explanations credible. Applicant is well educated, and 
the questions are straightforward. He updated a number of answers to questions that 
were innocuous, but he failed to update the one question that could have caused him 
the most consternation. I find that he intentionally provided false answers on his SF 86 
when he failed to divulge derogatory information about his finances.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
7 GE 2.  
 
8 Tr. at 23-25; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
9 Tr. at 23. 
 
10 Tr. at 24-25, 40-43, 45-47. 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable to pay. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
7 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant quit his job because the excessive travel was affecting his marriage. 
He was unemployed for an extended period, which caused financial problems. He 
obtained his current job in February 2013, and all his debts have been paid, settled, 
brought current, or otherwise resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) are applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant intentionally provided false information about his finances on his 2013 
SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable.   
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
8 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant discussed his delinquent debts during his background interview in 
March 2013. However, having found that Applicant intentionally provided false 
information on his 2013 SF 86, I have also determined that he provided false 
information when he denied the omission was intentional. It would be inconsistent to 
find the conduct mitigated.11  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 03-22819 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2006), in which the Appeal Board reversed the 
Administrative Judge’s decision to grant the applicant’s security clearance: 
 
Once the Administrative Judge found that Applicant deliberately falsified a security 
clearance application in September 2002, the Judge could not render a favorable security 
clearance decision without articulating a rational basis for why it would be clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant 
despite the falsification. Here, the Judge gives reasons as to why he considers the 
falsification mitigated under a “whole person” analysis, namely that Applicant has 
matured, has held a position of responsibility, recognizes how important it is to be candid 
in relation to matters relating to her security clearance, and has changed her behavior so 
that there is little likelihood of recurrence. However, the Judge’s conclusion runs contrary 
to the Judge’s rejection of Applicant’s explanations for the security clearance application 
falsification. At the hearing (after earlier admitting the falsification in her March 2003 
written statement to a security investigator), Applicant testified that she had not 
intentionally falsified her application. Given the Judge's rejection of this explanation as 
not being credible, it follows that the Judge could not have concluded Applicant now 
recognizes the importance of candor and has changed her behavior. 
 
 
9 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant resolved his financial problems. However, he intentionally provided 
false information about his finances on his 2013 SF 86. There are concerns about his 
judgment, honesty, and willingness to comply with rules and regulations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns, but he did not mitigate the 
personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:   For Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
