KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Directive does not allow the Board to consider the impact of an unfavorable
decision.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-02041.a1
DATE: 08/17/2015
DATE: August 17, 2015
In Re:
------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02041
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 2, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On May 12, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Richard A. Cefola denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision was based
upon outdated evidence and whether the decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Defense contractor for six years.  Much of the debt alleged in the
SOR resulted from medical problems he experienced in 2009.  The Judge found that, despite having
been given time in which to resolve these debts, he had not addressed them.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge resolved some of the allegations in Applicant’s favor, including a large debt for
a vehicle.  However, he resolved the majority of the SOR allegations, which resulted from
Applicant’s medical treatment, against him.  He stated that Applicant had failed to act responsibly,
in that, having been given four months to pay these debts, he had yet to act on them.1  The Judge
stated that Applicant had about $2,400 in past-due debt that he had yet to address.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge based his conclusions on outdated credit reports.  He
stated that the interest on the debts makes them higher than the amount of the original obligations. 
We note, first of all, that the Government’s burden of producing evidence of security concern arises
only with regard to allegations that have been controverted.  Directive ¶ E3.1.14.  In this case,
Applicant admitted all of the allegations that the Judge found against him.  Therefore, these
allegations were not controverted, and the Government bore no burden of production as regards to
them.  Insofar as Applicant denied some of the allegations, the Government produced evidence in
the way of Applicant’s security clearance application; two full credit reports, dated November 2008
and December 2013; and two one-page credit summaries from a reporting agency, dated November
2014 and January 2015.  These documents included information not only about the controverted
allegations but about those Applicant had admitted as well.  These admissions alone, but especially
when viewed in conjunction with the evidence the Government produced, were sufficient to shift
to Applicant the burden of presenting evidence in mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  See also ISCR
Case No. 11-02087 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2012).  Applicant submitted a number of documents to
1The Decision does not explain the significance of four months, although we note that that was the period of
time that elapsed between the dates of the SOR and of the hearing.  We also note that the Judge held the record open for
three months after the hearing, until April 23, 2015, to enable Applicant to submit additional evidence.  
2
the Judge, including evidence showing that he had paid certain debts, performance evaluations from
his job, etc.  If he believed that more up-to-date evidence about the allegations was required, it was
his responsibility to provide it.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00434 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 20, 2015). 
We note that, at the close of the hearing, when asked if he had additional matters to address,
Applicant replied, “No, everything seems good.”  Tr. at 43.  Nowhere in the documents that he
submitted after the hearing did Applicant refer to the possibly outdated nature of the credit reports. 
Considering the record that was before the Judge, we find no factual error concerning the extent and
nature of Applicant’s debts.  To the extent that this assignment of error is a challenge to the Judge’s
findings, we conclude that the material findings of the Judge are based upon substantial evidence. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-00970 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2012).
In presenting his case on appeal, Applicant refers to matters from outside the record, which
we cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant cites to his having held a clearance for many
years without incident or concern, as well as to evidence of his good work performance.  Applicant’s
argument is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence. 
Nor is it sufficient to show that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-
00723 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2014).  Applicant also notes that a clearance is a requirement for his
continued employment.  The Directive does not permit us to consider the impact of an unfavorable
decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01443 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 28, 2015).  
Given the record that was before him, the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.     
Signed: Michael Ra’anan               
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                 
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
Signed: James E. Moody                      
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
