 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03211 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted sufficient documentary evidence to mitigate Guideline F 
security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On October 31, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. Applicant received the SOR on 
November 13, 2014. 
 
In a November 24, 2014, Response to the SOR (SOR Response), Applicant 
admitted one of 13 allegations raised in the SOR and requested a determination based 
on the written record. On June 22, 2015, the Government issued a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) that contained eight attachments. Applicant responded to the FORM 
with additional information. The case was assigned to me on August 11, 2015. Based 
on my review of the case file and submissions, I find Applicant mitigated financial 
considerations security concerns.    
 
 
 
 
2 
          Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a Defense contractor. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree in 2002 and 2007, respectively. He is divorced 
and has two children. At work, he is praised for his knowledge, reliability, and 
performance.  
 
 In 2008, Applicant and his wife separated. Applicant tried to help his estranged 
wife live comfortably in their separation, hoping they would reconcile. By the end of the 
year, it was clear they would divorce. In 2009, Applicant’s wife lost her job. By the end 
of 2009, Applicant found that maintaining two households was financially overwhelming. 
Consequently, he was left with delinquent debts and the challenge of trying to address 
them. In 2012, his situation was compounded when his house was hit by a storm, 
causing $25,000 in damage. Of that sum, he was responsible for approximately $4,200.   
 
It is unknown whether Applicant has received financial counseling. He disclosed 
tax debts, student loans, and other debts on his February 2013 security clearance 
application (SCA). The 13 debts alleged in the SOR amount to approximately $142,294. 
Applicant only admits the first debt cited (1.a) for $3,300 state tax lien. He disputes that 
he has a state tax lien from 2006. All but one debt for $629 (1.b) has been documented 
as paid or satisfied. He believes the medical debts noted are for services incurred by his 
children that were not covered by health insurance. He currently lives within his means 
and uses a budget. 
 
At issue in the SOR are the following delinquent debts: 
 
1.a - $3,300 state tax lien – Paid. Tax Execution Letter, Response to FORM at 4. 
 
1.b - $629 – Disputed/Unclear. Applicant argues that this 2006 tax lien was 
recently paid, but has not yet been withdrawn by the state. While there is no evidence of 
payment, there is also no entry on Applicant’s more recent credit report regarding this 
lien.  
 
1.c - $297 medical debt – Paid. Receipt, Response to FORM at 6. 
 
1.d – 1.g $230, $59, $59, $10 medical debts – Paid. Letter, Item 3, Response to 
SOR at 10. 
 
1.h - $80 utilities collection – Paid. Receipt, Response to SOR at 16. 
 
1.i - $186 medical debt – Settled. Receipt, Response to FORM at 7. 
 
1.j - $124,975 student loan default – Rehabilitated. Applicant has been in regular 
and timely payment on these loans since early October 2014. He provided 
documentation of those payments back to February 2015. Receipt, Response to FORM 
at 10-11. 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
1.k - $8,215 student loan charged off – Rehabilitated. This loan is part of the 
family of student loans noted above. Receipt, Response to FORM at 10-11. 
 
1.l - $4,464 auto loan collection – Paid. Receipt, Response to FORM at 12. 
 
1.m - $75 medical debt – Paid. Letter, Item 3, Response to SOR at 10. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
 
 
 
4 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant was 
delinquent on over $140,000 in delinquent debts. (SOR 1.a-1.m) This is sufficient to 
invoke two of the financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 
 
 
 
5 
Applicant specifically attributed at least some of his delinquent debts to his 
marital separation and divorce. The evidence tends to support his assertion. Moreover, 
the scant facts indicate that he acted reasonably at the time, given his efforts to save his 
marriage and compensate for his wife’s lack of income. There is insufficient evidence, 
however, to attribute his medical debts to services provided to his children on an 
emergency basis. He provided evidence showing that about half of the delinquent debts 
at issue were resolved before he received the SOR. He also began repayment of his 
student loans before the SOR was issued. Although it is unknown whether he has 
received financial counseling, it is clear that his former financial problem is under 
control. Finally, although Applicant disputes that the state tax lien at 1.b for 
approximately $600 is no longer outstanding, he failed to provide documentary evidence 
showing that it has been paid. In light of the foregoing, I find that AG ¶ 20(b) - AG ¶ 
20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old captain who has earned a master’s degree. He is 
divorced and raising two children. He had numerous delinquent debts noted in his credit 
report, many of which he attributed to financially hard times during his separation and 
divorce. He provided evidence that all but one delinquent debt noted in the SOR has 
been addressed, including many which had been addressed before the SOR was 
issued. The most significant debt, related to his student loans, has been rehabilitated. 
His statement that he began repayment on the loans in mid-October 2014 is highlighted 
by documentary evidence showing regular payments have been timely made since the 
beginning of this year. Only a disputed state tax lien for about $600, which Applicant 
claims was paid too recently to have yet been withdrawn by his state, remains 
unproven.  
 
Applicant now uses a budget and is living within his means. No new debts have 
been cited. Although whole-person information is limited, his evidence regarding the 
delinquent debts at issue is comprehensive and organized in his Response to the 
FORM. Applicant has demonstrated that his plan for addressing his debts was 
successful and that his finances are now under control. There is no evidence he has 
 
 
 
 
6 
any adverse finance-related issues at this time. Indeed, the evidene shows that he is 
now living within his means. I conclude Applicant mitigated financial considerations 
security concerns.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m  For Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
