 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05582 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines G, 
alcohol consumption; H, drug involvement; and I, psychological conditions, but failed to 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns under Guideline F. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines G, alcohol 
consumption; H, drug involvement; I, psychological conditions; and F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On March 26, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
based on the record. On May 18, 2015, the Government requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. On June 3, 2015, Department Counsel from the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) amended the SOR to include an additional allegation. 
The case was assigned to me on June 12, 2015. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
June 19, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 29, 2015. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 6, 
2015.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Based on Applicant’s testimony, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR 
and include in paragraph 4.b the words “2013 and 2014.” Applicant did not object and 
the motion was granted.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the SOR allegations under Guidelines G, H, and I, and admitted 
the allegations under Guideline F. I have incorporated his admissions into the findings 
of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 37 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2000 and a juris 
doctor in 2003. He is not licensed to practice law. He married in 2012 and divorced in 
2014. He does not have children. He has not served in the military.2  
 
Applicant worked after he completed school, but was only earning enough to pay 
his monthly bills. From approximately 2006 to 2012, he worked as a consultant, but the 
income was inconsistent. He then worked for a federal contractor for 20 months before 
being laid off and resuming his consulting job in January 2014. His income is based on 
contracts he receives. Sometimes he does not have contracts and his income then 
fluctuates and often does not meet the level of full-time employment. When he is paid, 
he is paid by the hour.3  
 
The allegations under Guidelines G, H and I stem from one incident. In May 
2013, Applicant was recently separated from his wife, and they were going through a 
divorce. They had recently lost a child by miscarriage. He had moved to a new state 
due to a job his wife had accepted. He did not have a support system in the new state. 
Work was stressful because people were being laid off. He had difficulty sleeping and 
                                                          
1 Tr. 92-94. 
 
2 Tr. 30-32. 
 
3 Tr. 32-35, 68-69, 74-75. 
 
3 
 
 
was suffering from anxiety. His primary care physician prescribed medication to help his 
symptoms. He could not recall if she specifically told him not to consume alcohol while 
taking the medication.4 
 
Applicant went to work, but was not feeling well. He left work because he felt 
sick. He was taking an over-the-counter cold medicine. He admitted he was having a 
bad day. When he got home he consumed a couple alcoholic drinks. He talked to his 
supervisor at work, who asked how he was feeling. He told him he felt physically bad 
and was sick. His supervisor was concerned and misinterpreted Applicant’s response 
and contacted the police to conduct a welfare check on Applicant. His supervisor 
provided a written statement that acknowledged that Applicant was not abusing drugs or 
alcohol, nor did he attempt suicide or was a suicide risk. He explained that the wellness 
check was due to a miscommunication.5  
 
The police made contact with Applicant. He stated one officer was verbally 
abusive and the other appeared to be concerned for Applicant’s safety. Applicant was 
cooperative, and he was advised that due to liability issues he would be escorted to the 
hospital. The police report noted there was alcohol on the counter in Applicant’s house 
and a substance on a plate that appeared to be crushed pills. None of it was 
confiscated or tested. Applicant does not know what was on the plate. He credibly 
testified that he has never used illegal drugs. He explained there were people in and out 
of his house that day. Applicant provided the hospital with a urine and blood sample. 
The results were not given to him. He was evaluated by a psychiatrist who apologized 
to him. Applicant was then released and took a taxi home. He admitted he was drinking 
alcohol and was probably intoxicated at the time of the incident, but does not remember 
if he had taken any medication. He denied he was suicidal or at risk.6  
 
Applicant denied he abused the drugs prescribed to him. He provided his work 
with release forms to obtain any information available. After this incident, he continued 
to take the prescribed medication until he met with his psychologist shortly thereafter. 
She took him off the medication and told him to exercise, eat right, and get enough 
sleep. He has followed her directions and managed his anxiety.7  
 
Applicant admitted he owes the debts in SOR ¶ 4.a ($4,100 and $8,959) for 
unpaid private student loans. He was paying these student loans for a period until his 
income was reduced due to lack of work. He also indicated he lost a lot of money 
through his divorce. He acknowledged these debts have not been paid. He does not 
                                                          
4 Tr. 37-50, 52, 56, 72-73. 
 
5 Tr. 37-50; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. 37-50, 53-55, 58-59; GE 2, 3. 
 
7 Tr. 43-44, 50-51, 57-58. 
 
 
4 
 
 
currently have the resources to begin to repay these debts, but intends to when he can. 
He has communicated with the creditor, but is unable to make payments at this time.8  
 
Applicant also has federal student loans. He estimated the total amount he owes 
for his federal student loans to be about $96,000. They were in forbearance and then 
deferred for a period. His monthly statement shows his payment is past-due. He 
recently requested his federal student loans be deferred again. He is waiting for a 
response to his request.9 He stated that the student loans he has are all from law 
school. He paid his undergraduate student loans.10  
 
Applicant credibly testified that he is not running from his debts, but his income 
has been inconsistent for the past ten years and he is hoping if he is employed full-time 
he will be able to resume payments. He explained he knows it looks like he is lazy, 
selfish, and unreliable, but he could not find a job when he finished school because he 
did not pass the bar exam. He then got a job and was doing okay financially until the 
economic downturn and he was laid off. He then went through a divorce. These factors 
impacted his ability to pay his debts.11  
 
Applicant admitted he has not filed his federal income tax returns for tax years 
2011, 2012, 2013, or 2014. He explained he failed to file in 2011 because he moved 
during that year, and he was not organized. He indicated he is trying to correct his past 
tax problems. He did not know how much income he earned in 2014.12  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
                                                          
8 Tr. 61, 64, 67-69, 86, 88; GE 4, 6, 7. Apparently these loans (SOR ¶ 4.a) were for fees associated with 
taking a bar examination. 
 
9 AE B, C. These loans were not alleged in the SOR and are not considered for disqualifying purposes, 
but will be considered when analyzing the whole-person. 
 
10 Tr. 61-67. 
 
11 Tr. 69-75, 81-83. 
 
12 Tr. 76-81. 
 
5 
 
 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern for alcohol consumption:  
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 I have considered the following disqualifying condition for alcohol consumption 
under AG ¶ 22:  
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 Applicant was sick at work one day. He went home from work. He acknowledged 
he was going through a difficult time in his life. He spoke with his supervisor who 
misinterpreted their communication and contacted the police to do a welfare check on 
Applicant, which resulted in Applicant going to the hospital. Applicant acknowledged he 
was drinking alcohol at home that day. He does not recall if he had taken his prescribed 
drugs on that day. There is insufficient evidence to conclude his conduct rose to the 
level of an alcohol-related incident. Rather when the police arrived he cooperated, and 
they were compelled to have Applicant evaluated for safety and liability purposes. There 
is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant’s alcohol consumption is a security 
concern. I find the above disqualifying condition does not apply and find for Applicant 
under this guideline.  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered the following disqualifying condition for drug involvement under 
AG ¶ 25: 
 
 (a) any drug abuse. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant abused prescription drugs. 
He was prescribed drugs by his primary care physician. There was no evidence he had 
used the drugs when his supervisor contacted the police in 2013 to do a welfare check. 
He provided a urine and blood sample at the hospital, the results of which are unknown. 
He was released after seeing a psychiatrist. There is no evidence of habitual abuse of 
prescription drugs or that such actions occurred over an extended period of time, as 
alleged. The government has not met their burden. I find the above disqualifying 
condition does not apply and find in favor of Applicant on this guideline.  
 
Psychological Conditions 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for psychological conditions is set 
out in AG & 27. It states:  
 
 
7 
 
 
Certain emotional, mental and personality conditions can impair judgment, 
reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is not 
required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g. clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference 
concerning the standings in this Guideline may be raised on the basis of 
seeking mental health counseling. 
 
I have considered the following disqualifying condition for psychological 
conditions under AG ¶ 28: 
 
(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but 
not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, 
paranoid, or bizarre behavior. 
 
 Applicant readily admitted he was having a bad day when the police did a welfare 
check. There is no evidence that Applicant has an ongoing emotional, mental, or 
personality condition that can impair his judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. There is 
no evidence he discontinued his prescribed medication without the consent of his 
doctor. His behavior did not rise to the level of a security concern. The government has 
not met their burden. I find the above disqualifying condition does not apply and find in 
favor of Applicant on this guideline. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following three are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
8 
 
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant has a delinquent private student loan that he is unable to pay at this 
time. He failed to timely file his federal income tax returns from 2011 through 2014. The 
above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant is unable to pay his student loans at this time. He intends to do so in 
the future when his earnings increase. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the debts 
are still owed. Applicant credibly testified that he paid his private student loans when he 
was earning more income, but due to reduced income and a divorce his finances were 
negatively affected. These were conditions beyond his control. Applicant failed to file his 
federal income tax returns for tax years 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014. This was within 
his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant has paid his loans in the past, but is unable to do so 
at this time due to his decreased income. He did not abandon his obligation. He has 
communicated with the creditor about resolving the debt. I find he has acted responsibly 
regarding his student loans and AG ¶ 20(b) applies to that debt. However, he has not 
acted responsibly regarding filing his federal income tax returns. He failed to offer a 
reasonable explanation for failing to file the returns, which remain delinquent. AG ¶ 
20(b) does not apply. There is no evidence Applicant has attended financial counseling 
or made a good-faith effort to resolve the problem. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
  
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F, G, H, and I in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG 
¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old educated man. He went through a divorce and 
experienced periods of decreased earnings that impacted his finances. In May 2013 he 
had a stressful day, combined with a misinterpretation from his supervisor that resulted 
in a police welfare check, which escalated into unsubstantiated allegations. Those 
allegations are resolved in his favor. Although he experienced financial hardship, he has 
managed his finances and intends to resolve his student loans when he has more 
expendable income. Applicant failed to file his federal tax returns for four years. They 
remained unfiled at the time of his hearing. Applicant’s conduct in failing to comply with 
his civic duty leaves me with questions and doubts about his eligibility and suitability for 
a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant refuted the security 
concerns under Guideline G, alcohol consumption; Guideline H, drug involvement; and 
Guideline I, psychological conditions. He failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 
10 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline I:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 4.b:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
