The Government submitted five items for the record.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-04716
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On December 2, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under  Guideline E (Personal Conduct),
and Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a review based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on August 4, 2015.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated May 6,
2015 . Applicant received the FORM on June 10, 2015. Applicant did not submit  a1
response to the FORM. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under
Guideline F and Guideline E, and provided explanations. 
Applicant is 62 years old. He received his undergraduate degree in 1975.
Applicant has been divorced three times. He has one child. He served in the United
States Army from 1975 until 1995, honorably retiring. He has been employed with his
current employer since 2014. (Item 2) He has held a security clearance since 1995. 
Financial
The SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling approximately $302,000, of
which one is a collection account totaling approximately $248,000. (Item 1) In his
answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he resolved the SOR allegations 1.a, 1.b and
1.c, although he was not aware of them until after his security interview. He noted that
1.b and 1.c are duplicates. He did not provide any documentation to support his
assertions. He intended to resolve the debt in SOR 1.a for $577.
As to SOR allegation 1.d for $248,747,000, for a collection account (an equity
home loan) Applicant stared that his principal residence was lost due to divorce in 2009.
He noted that the house went to foreclosure in 2010. He did not provide any other
information or documentation, other than to say that he was aware of the foreclosure
and that when the  property sold prior to foreclosure, the debt was to be discharged at
the auction. He provided no information or documentation to support this assertion.  He
commented that the mortgagor is well aware of the situation. 
During his subject interview in 2014, Applicant discussed the foreclosure on his
home. He stated the family home was lost to divorce and the fact that his ex-wife would
not sign papers so that he could sell the home. Applicant stated that he turned the
home over to the spouse. Applicant stated that the collection balance of $248,747 was
a home-equity loan that was part of the foreclosed property. There is no information
concerning how the issue was resolved. (Item 3)
Personal Conduct
When Applicant completed his February 2014 security clearance application, he
responded “Yes” to Section 26 - Financial Record questions concerning any financial
delinquencies. He denied deliberate falsification of his answers debts. He stated that he
was unaware of the allegations in SOR 1. a-1.c. He also disclosed the foreclosure. He
did not answer “yes” to routine accounts delinquent because he did not know about the
other three allegations. He put the Government on notice of financial issues by
disclosing the foreclosure. I do not find that he falsified his security clearance
application.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
3
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and
(d) credible adverse information in an adjudicative issue area that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline,
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
protected information.
Applicant answered “Yes” on his 2014 security clearance application in response
to Section 26-Financial Record. He provided details on the foreclosure of his home. He
thereby, put the government on notice of his financial issues. He did not know about the
other accounts and therefore failed to answer “Yes” to routine accounts. He did not
intentionally falsify his 2014 security clearance application.
5
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
 Applicant incurred delinquent debt in the amount of $900 and a collection
account for a home-equity loan in the amount of $248,747.00. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations)
apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against
him and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulty
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant’s debts remain
unpaid. He noted that he resolved some accounts, but he did not provide any
documentation. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC)
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
partially applies. Applicant stated that his divorce caused the foreclosure of the home.
However, he did not submit any evidence to prove a nexus, nor did he provide any
documentation to show that the debt is resolved. I cannot find that he acted
responsibly. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. There is no information in the
record despite Applicant’s assertion he paid some delinquent accounts and intent to
pay the remaining delinquent debt. There is no information to show that he has
obtained any financial counseling.  FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are  clear indications that the
problem is being resolved, or is under control) does not apply.
6
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 63-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is three times divorced.
He served in the military and honorably retired.
Applicant did not provide any documentation that he has resolved the delinquent
debts or that there is nothing owing on the collection account regarding the home equity
loan. Due to lack of documentation, he failed to mitigate the financial considerations
guideline concern. As to the personal conduct security concerns, Applicant disclosed
his home foreclosure on his 2014 security clearance application. He did not intentionally
falsifiy his security clearance application by answering “No” to routine delinquent debts.
He put the Government on notice about his financial issues and did not intend to
deceive. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F  : AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E : FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
