 
1 
 
 
             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06226 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 19, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was delinquent on four debts, in the total amount of $214,473. He 
resolved three of them. He failed to document any effort to resolve the remaining debt of 
more than $12,471. Additionally, security concerns were raised because Applicant 
possessed a valid foreign passport issued by the United Kingdom. He has surrendered 
his foreign passport to his facility security officer. Applicant mitigated the foreign 
preference concerns, but failed to mitigate the financial concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 11, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 31, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines C (foreign influence) and F 
(financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 11, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 16, 
2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on June 19, 2015, scheduling the hearing for July 9, 2015. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5. All were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
offered three exhibits marked Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted 
without objection from Department Counsel. The record was left open to allow for the 
submission of additional materials until the close of business on August 7, 2015. On 
August 7, 2015, Applicant submitted two emails, containing 14 documents. Those 
documents were marked AE D through Q. Department Counsel had no objections to AE 
D through Q and they were admitted into evidence. The record then closed. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 17, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 56 years old. He was born in India and immigrated to the United 
Kingdom in 1972. He became a citizen of the United Kingdom in 1978. He immigrated 
to the United States in 1988 and became a U.S. citizen in 1996. Applicant is married to 
his second wife and has two adult children with her. He was laid off from his consulting 
position with a Government contractor in January 2015, pending the outcome of his 
security clearance adjudication. He is currently unemployed. (GE 1; AE A; Tr. 28, 37, 
67-69, 73.) 
 
Applicant was alleged to possess a current United Kingdom passport that is valid 
from approximately March 2010 to March 2020 in SOR subparagraph 1.a. He admitted 
this allegation in his Answer. Applicant is a dual citizen of the United Kingdom and the 
United States. He renounced his Indian citizenship when he acquired his U.K. 
citizenship. He renewed his U.K. passport in 2010 after acquiring U.S. citizenship to 
avoid the long lines at customs and immigration at the airport when visiting his parents, 
who reside in the United Kingdom. However, on April 28, 2015, he surrendered his U.K. 
passport to his facility security officer. The facility security officer will retain it “until the 
passport becomes invalid due to expiration, the termination of employment or the 
employee requests the passport be returned.” The facility security officer will complete 
an incident report when the passport is returned to the employee. Applicant is unwilling 
to surrender his U.K. citizenship because he does not know where he wants to retire. 
(GE 1; AE A; Tr. 70.) 
 
In addition to the concerns raised about Applicant’s foreign passport, the 
Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he made 
financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, which raise questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR alleged that 
Applicant is delinquent on four debts, in the total amount of $214,473. In his Answer, 
 
3 
 
Applicant admitted the debts alleged in SOR subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c. He 
denied the debt alleged in subparagraph 2.d The alleged debts were listed on credit 
reports dated April 27, 2013; September 10, 2014; June 8, 2014; and July 8, 2015. 
(Answer; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5.) 
 
Applicant is delinquent on a home equity line of credit in the approximate amount 
of $12,471, on a total loan of $215,265, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 2.a. It has 
been delinquent since 2012. This debt is for a rental property Applicant owns, valued at 
$750,000. He has $488,000 in equity in this property. He testified that he has applied for 
a loan modification and claims that the loan underwriters will not accept payments on 
the loan while it is in the process of modification. He did not provide documentation to 
support these claims. Applicant has not paid on this loan in approximately three years. 
He intends to sell the home if the modification is not approved. This debt is unresolved. 
(Tr. 43-48.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent loan in the amount of $181,365, as 
alleged in SOR subparagraph 2.b. This debt is for a home equity line of credit on 
Applicant’s primary residence. As a result of a class action law suit regarding unfair 
lending practices, this debt was forgiven by the creditor as part of a settlement 
agreement with the Department of Justice. Applicant presented a letter from this creditor 
stating that he received “full forgiveness of the remaining principal balance of 
$178,503.50” on this debt. It is resolved. (AE C; Tr. 30-31, 49-52.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $20,459, as 
alleged in SOR subparagraph 2.c. This debt had been delinquent since 2010. Applicant 
settled this debt on July 29, 2015, with a payment of $4,200, as evidenced by a letter 
from this creditor. It is resolved. (GE 5; AE N; AE Q; Tr. 52-55.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent department store credit card in the 
approximate amount of $178, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 2.d. This debt became 
delinquent when a payment was credited to the wrong account. Applicant paid this debt 
in full on July 14, 2015, as evidenced by a printout of an electronic payment. This debt 
is resolved. (AE M; Tr. 56-57.) 
 
Applicant attributes his debts to periodic unemployment and underemployment 
from 2010 to the present. He was laid-off in October 2010. He found another job in 
February 2011, but took a 60% cut in pay. From March 2012 to the present, he has 
worked in various temporary consulting jobs to make ends meet. Applicant’s wife, who 
handles their finances, testified that currently they “are barely surviving.” Applicant has 
not participated in any type of financial counseling, although they have been diligently 
resolving their debts as best they can. Applicant and his wife discussed a number of 
unalleged debts that once were delinquent but have been resolved. Despite their 
financial difficulties, they fully finance their sons’ educational costs and costs of living 
abroad, including a recent $12,000 to $13,000 payment for their housing for the next six 
months.  (GE 1; Tr. 38-41, 53-54, 62, 72.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s former supervisors, past colleagues, and friends wrote complimentary 
letters of support on Applicant’s behalf, attesting to his dedication, quality of work, and 
ability to follow procedural guidelines. He presented a certificate of appreciation for 
engineering excellence that he received in August 1997. (AE E; AE F; AE G; AE H; AE 
I; AE J; AE K; AE L; AE P.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
  
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was delinquent on four alleged debts, in the total amount of $214,473. 
Some of his debts were delinquent for over five years. He demonstrated both a history 
of not addressing debts, and an inability or unwillingness to do so over a substantial 
period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following Financial Considerations mitigating conditions (MC) under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant met his burden to show he acted responsibly and resolved two of the 
four debts, identified in SOR subparagraphs 2.c and 2.d. The debt in subparagraph 2.b 
was resolved through a class action law suit, in which Applicant was a party. He failed 
to adequately address the debt, identified in SOR subparagraph 2.a. The record 
evidence reflects this debt is recent and ongoing. There is no indication that the 
circumstances under which they arose have changed. Applicant’s wife testified that on 
their current income, they are “barely surviving.” He therefore failed to fully establish 
substantial mitigation under MC 20(a).  
 
 Applicant offered insufficient evidence to support significant mitigation under MC 
20(b). He attributed the delinquencies to his unemployment and underemployment. 
There are circumstances beyond his control. However, he failed to show he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Despite the delinquencies, he has prioritized 
paying for his sons’ educational and living expenses abroad above his responsibilities to 
a remaining creditor. While he has shown himself to be a loving and responsible parent, 
he has not shown responsibility with respect to his delinquent home equity line of credit. 
 
 Applicant presented no evidence of financial counseling. He failed to provide 
documentation to support his claim that he is working with the bank on his home equity 
line of credit to repay that debt. He is still liable for the debt in subparagraph 2.a. These 
facts preclude full mitigation under MC 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
 The debt in subparagraph 2.b was resolved through a class action law suit, in 
which Applicant was a party. MC 20(e) applies to subparagraph 2.b. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
7 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
  Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and the United Kingdom. He 
exercised his U.K. citizenship when he renewed the U.K. passport, despite that fact that 
he was a United States citizen at that time and had a U.S. passport. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are described 
under AG ¶ 11. One is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant surrendered his U.K. passport to his facility security officer. It is no 
longer in his possession and he will not use it in travels. The Department of Defense will 
be notified if and when the passport is returned to Applicant. AG ¶ 11(e) provides 
mitigation with respect to this guideline. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
8 
 
 
Applicant is respected by those people who wrote letters on his behalf. However, 
Applicant has the burden to demonstrate sufficient mitigating information in this case 
and he has failed to meet that burden. Although he successfully mitigated the foreign 
preference concern by surrendering his U.K. passport to his facility security officer; 
overall, he has not demonstrated that he has acted responsibly with respect to his 
finances. He was unable to support his claim about the remaining delinquency with 
documentation. Applicant’s inability to resolve his financial obligations raises concerns 
about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to follow rules and regulations necessary 
to protect classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
