 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-05124 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg I. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 26, 2012, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On December 9, 2014, the Department of Defense 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, 
dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 20, 2015 (Answer). Applicant 
admitted the one allegation. Applicant requested his case be decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On May 19, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 through 6, 
was provided to the Applicant on June 1, 2015. He was given the opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the file on June 15, 2015. Applicant filed a Response to the FORM (Response) 
within the 30-day time period allowed that would have expired on July 15, 2015. The 
Response is dated July 21, 2015 and I admitted it to the record after the Department 
Counsel had no objection. I received the case assignment on July 30, 2015. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in Subparagraph 1.a. (Item 2)  
 
Applicant is 59 years old, married to his second wife, and has no children. He 
works for a defense contractor. Applicant is a licensed civil engineer. (Item 3; 
Response) 
 
 Applicant owes a credit card issuer $32,894 that remains unpaid (Subparagraph 
1.a). He incurred this debt, he claims, when he renovated his home. He submitted an 
$80 month installment payment agreement dated January 2015 with his Response, but 
states he is not paying that installment agreement because the account was sold to 
other creditors by the original lender. Applicant is now waiting for the latest creditor to 
offer him a payment agreement. The debt became delinquent in September 2011. 
(Items 3-6; Answer; Response) 
 
 Applicant stated in his Response that he and his wife were laid off from work 
from May 2010 to April 2011. Applicant did not submit any documentation to show that 
the unemployment four years ago now affects his current ability to resolve this debt. He 
now earns $175,000 annually, and other than his $700,000 mortgage this credit card 
debt is his only debt (Items 3-6; Answer; Response) 
 
 The credit reports in the record show Applicant disputed the credit card debt and 
then disagreed with the resolution of the dispute. Applicant’s e-QIP lists this account 
and states that he resolved the dispute with the credit issuer and was making payments 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
on the account. His Response now contradicts that statement because of the resale of 
the account. The debt remains unresolved. (Items 3-6; Answer; Response) 
 
     Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2011 to the present, Applicant accumulated one significant 
delinquent debt, totaling $32,894 that remains unpaid and unresolved. In the past four 
years, Applicant has been employed and currently earns a significant salary. He could 
have resolved this debt in the time since he completed his e-QIP. These two 
disqualifying conditions are established. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. None of them are established by Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve this large delinquent debt. 
This inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based 
on the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and 
is obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. 
Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debt. Additionally, he 
exhibited a continued lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on this 
delinquent debt during the past four years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.    
 
 
 
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
