 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-00525  
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Public Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a position of public trust. Applicant did not provide any evidence to explain, 
refute, or mitigate the financial concerns alleged in the Statement of Reasons (SOR). 
The 20 delinquent accounts, totaling approximately $29,000, remain unresolved. Her 
eligibility to occupy a public trust position is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 21, 2014, the DOD issued a SOR detailing security concerns under 
the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to 
occupy a public trust position.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. The 
Government submitted its written case on April 9, 2015. A complete copy of the file of 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the SOR 
allegations. Applicant received the FORM and did not respond. The items appended to 
the Government’s brief are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on July 31, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 31, has worked for a federal contractor since July 2011. Her position 
requires access to personally identifiable information (PII).  She is not married and does 
not have any children. On her August 2014 security clearance application, Applicant 
disclosed $40,000 in deferred student loans and 12 other delinquent accounts. The 
ensuing investigation confirmed that Applicant is indebted to 20 creditors for 
approximately $29,000, of which $25,000 is related to medical expenses. The 20 
delinquent accounts are alleged in the SOR and Applicant admits responsibility for 
them.2  
 
 Applicant blames her financial problems on her history of underemployment and 
unemployment dating back to 2007 when she graduated from college. According to her 
security clearance application, Applicant has spent the majority of the last eight years 
working for a staffing agency on temporary assignments or unemployed. It is unknown if 
Applicant had medical insurance during the times she was employed by the staffing 
company. The record does not provide any additional information to further explain the 
origin of Applicant’s financial problems.3  
 
 Applicant has not provided any evidence showing her efforts to resolve her 
delinquent accounts. Currently, all of the alleged debts remain unresolved.4  
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”5 
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.”6 Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to 
the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
                                                          
2 GE 2 – 4. 
 
3 GE 2. 
 
4 GE 1. 
 
5 DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation) ¶¶ 
C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
6 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
 
3 
 
determination may be made.7 An administrative judge’s objective is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision that embraces all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious trustworthiness concern because failure 
to “satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect sensitive 
information.”8 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information. 
 
The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that she is indebted to 20 creditors for 
approximately $29,000. The debts are substantiated by the record, which supports a 
finding that Applicant has both a history of not meeting her financial obligations and an 
inability to do so.9 Applicant did not provide any evidence to merit the application any of 
the financial considerations mitigating conditions. Her financial problems are unresolved 
and ongoing.  
 
Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a 
position of trust. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person 
factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Ultimately, Applicant failed to meet her burdens of production and 
persuasion. The security concerns raised in the SOR remain. Following Egan10 and the 
                                                          
7 See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
8  AG ¶ 18. 
 
9 AG ¶ 19 (a) and (c). 
 
10 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 
 
clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national 
security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.t:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. 
Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
                                        
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
