 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00782 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 5, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 10, 2014, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. On April 24, 2015, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed and it was 
received on April 29, 2015. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
 
2 
 
 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit 
additional information. There were no objections and the Government’s documents 
were admitted into the record. The case was assigned to me on July 22, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.e, 1.g, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.bb. He 
denied the remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He served in the military from 1977 to 2000. He retired 
with an honorable discharge. He married in 1981 and divorced in 1988. He remarried in 
1993 and divorced in 2010. He has children, ages 33, 20, and 18. He has worked for 
the same federal contractor since 2000.1 
 
 Applicant disclosed on his security clearance application (SCA), completed in 
January 2013, that he had delinquent debts, and he was working with companies to 
arrange monthly payments. He disclosed that credit card debts held jointly with his wife 
were divided as part of their divorce settlement. His wife was to make payments on 
certain credit cards and did not. He also disclosed that he was unable to make 
payments on his bills because he travels a lot for work. He disputed the delinquent 
medical bills because he indicated he had medical insurance.2 
  
 In August 2013, during Applicant’s background interview with a government 
investigator, he indicated that as part of his divorce settlement he was required to pay 
$3,000 monthly for alimony and $3,400 monthly for child support. He was to relinquish 
the ownership of the shared home to his wife. Applicant indicated that he believed the 
disputed debts were either joint debts, which were the sole responsibility of his former 
wife or new accounts his former wife fraudulently opened in his name. He indicated that 
he intended to obtain legal representation to help him resolve the numerous accounts 
that he felt were his former wife’s responsibly. He also indicated that he would attempt 
to settle any accounts that he is responsible for.3  
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted he owed the debts in ¶¶ 1.e ($803), 
1.g ($1,249), 1.k ($316), 1.l ($651), 1.m ($201), and 1.bb ($9,878 for child support 
arrearages). Except for the child support arrearages, he stated that he would pay the 
debts in full within 90 days. Regarding the child support arrearages, he stated that he is 
“perpetually in arrears for child/spousal support because of loss of income.” He stated 
that the “support levels were calculated with little room for adjustments in income and 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
 
fluctuates from month to month and work assignments.”4 The total amount of delinquent 
debt that Applicant acknowledged was his responsibility is $13,093.5 
 
Regarding the SOR debts related to tax liens in ¶¶ 1.a ($127), 1.b ($153) and 1.c 
($129), Applicant stated that he was never notified of any tax liens, and it was not 
reported on his credit report. He intended to initiate an inquiry, and if he is responsible 
he will make the payments within 90 days. He noted that his divorce was granted in 
June 2011, and all financial responsibilities regarding the house are his former wife’s.6  
 
Regarding the remaining debts, Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR, that 
the debts were either assigned to his former wife as part of their final divorce settlement; 
fraudulently opened by his former wife after they filed for divorce and he intended to 
pursue legal action to clear his name; or he was never notified of the debt and it was not 
recorded on his credit report, but he will inquire about its legitimacy and pay it within 90 
days if it is determined that he is liable for it. The total amount of delinquent debts that 
Applicant disputes is approximately $226,100.7 
 
Applicant did not provide proof that he has resolved any of the debts he admitted 
belonged to him. Applicant did not provide a copy of his divorce settlement detailing 
which debts were assigned to his former wife and which were assigned to him. He did 
not provide proof that he pursued legal action to clear his name. He did not provide a 
copy of his credit report to show which debts are no longer listed. The alleged 
delinquent debts were verified with credit reports from March 2015, March 2014, and 
January 2013.8 In addition, the tax liens were verified by judgments issued by the 
state.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
4 Item 1. 
 
5 Item 1. 
 
6 Item 1. 
 
7 Item 1. 
 
8 Items 4, 5, and 6.  
 
9 Item 7. 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has 29 delinquent debts totaling approximately $239,200. Some have 
been delinquent since at least 2011. There is sufficient evidence to support the 
application of both of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to his divorce that was final in 2011. 
He indicated many of the alleged delinquent debts were assigned to his former wife as 
part of their divorce settlement. He stated other delinquent debts were fraudulently 
opened by his former wife in his name after they filed for divorce, and he was going to 
pursue legal action. He stated that he was never notified other debts were delinquent, 
 
6 
 
 
and they were not on his credit report. Applicant did not provide documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of his disputes or provide evidence of his actions to resolve the 
issues. He did not provide any documents to show he paid any of the debts he admitted 
belonged to him. Applicant was aware as early as January 2013, when he completed 
his SCA, that his finances were a security concern. At that time, he indicated he would 
contact creditors and make arrangements to pay some of the debts. He did not provide 
evidence of his actions. Although his divorce was beyond his control, it has now been 
more than four years, and he failed to show he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. His debts are unresolved. His actions cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. There are not clear indications his 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. There is no evidence he 
initiated good-faith efforts to resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. None of the 
other mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 58 years old. He retired from the military and has worked for a 
federal contractor since 2000. Applicant has 29 delinquent debts totaling more than 
$239,200 that are unpaid and unresolved. Despite being aware of the security concerns 
related to his finances since 2013, he failed to show he has taken action to resolve his 
delinquent debts. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
7 
 
 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.cc:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
