 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------ )       ADP Case No. 14-03588 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 14, 2013, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 14, 2014, the Department of Defense 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 17, 2014 (Answer). 
Applicant had to resubmit his answer in a notarized version on October 11, 2014. 
Applicant requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On March 23, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 
through 81, was provided to the Applicant on April 22, 2015. He was given the 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant received the file on May 14, 2015. Applicant did not file a Response to the 
FORM within the 30-day time allowed that would have expired on June 13, 2015. I 
received the case assignment on August 6, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.h, 1.k, and 1.r. He admitted 
all other 20 allegations. (Items 2-7)  
 
 Applicant is 67 years old, never married, and works for a defense contractor. His 
e-QIP states that until August 2012 he lived in various hotels. Now he lives in a rented 
home. He has a high school education with a diploma from 1967. (Item 4) 
 
 The SOR alleges 22 delinquent debts and one tax lien filed by the U.S. Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) against Applicant. None of these debts are paid or resolved. 
Applicant claims the three debts he denied are paid, but he did not submit documentary 
proof to support his statement. The total amount of debt is $23,586. (Items 1-7) 
 
 The debts are owed to a variety of creditors, in addition to the IRS for $7,969 
dating from June 2010. The earliest debt in the SOR is December 2007. The creditors 
include six cellular telephone companies, various debt collectors, auto loan lenders, 
medical debts, loan companies, five cable television service providers, two insurance 
companies, and two banks. (Items 1-7) 
 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel submitted eight Items in support of the SOR allegations.  Item 8 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as 
evidence in this case. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel 
Management in March and April, 2013. Applicant did not adopt it as his own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate.  Under Directive 
¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, it 
is also cumulative. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
     Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of 
his/her job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence 
tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to 
evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his 
case decided without a hearing.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  (See 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG 
(AG ¶ 2 (a)). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
trustworthiness concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to 
the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From December 2007 to the present, Applicant accumulated 23 delinquent 
debts, totaling $23,586, which remain unpaid or unresolved.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. They are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, 
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to 
resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 No mitigating condition applies because Applicant has not provided any 
explanation of how he incurred these debts and why he has not paid them. He admitted 
all but three of the delinquent debts and other than stating that he thought those three 
debts were paid, he did not provide any information to support his statements. The 
debts remain current and cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. His finances were not beyond his control. There is no counseling 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
shown. Applicant has not paid his debts on a good-faith basis. There are no reasons to 
dispute his debts. There is no affluence at issue.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a trustworthiness determination by considering the totality of the 
applicant=s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of debts during the 
past seven years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a trustworthiness determination. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising 
under the guideline for Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept 
against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.w:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
