KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: A judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-04031.a1
DATE: 08/28/2015
DATE: August 28, 2015
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-04031
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 16, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a hearing.  On June 18, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Jennifer I. Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant graduated from a U.S. military academy, afterward serving on active duty until
2008.  He is currently employed by a Government contractor.  Applicant used marijuana in the early
2000s.  He held a security clearance at this time.  In 2005, he deliberately failed to disclose his drug
use on a security clearance application (SCA).  The marijuana use took place at a hotel party. 
Applicant stated that, although he was aware of DoD policy regarding the use of illegal substances,
he tried it out of curiosity.  Applicant did not report his drug use to anyone in the chain of command. 
He no longer associates with anyone from this party who still uses marijuana.
Applicant has since used ecstasy on two occasions, in 2009 and again a year later.  At the
time, Applicant was married and had a child.  He was no longer in the military.  Applicant was not
aware whether or not his employer had a policy against using illegal drugs, although he did note that
his conduct was against the law.  Applicant used an illegal drug once again, in 2011.  He did so at
a party, consuming tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the active component in marijuana, that had been
infused into a drink.
While on active duty, Applicant earned several medals.  Command authorities included
Applicant’s name on a list of persons who had displayed meritorious service  He has completed a
number of training courses.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted that Applicant had signed a statement of intent not to use illegal substances
again.  She also noted his promise that he no longer associates with those who use drugs.  However,
she stated that she was not persuaded by this mitigating evidence, in light of Applicant’s age at the
time of his misconduct.  The Judge cited to evidence that eight years had elapsed between
Applicant’s use of marijuana and his subsequent uses of ecstasy.  She concluded that, under the
circumstances, the three years that have elapsed since his 2011 use of THC did not constitute an
appropriate period of abstinence.  She also stated that Applicant’s omission from his SCA was done
for the purpose of concealing actions that were illegal as well as in contravention of military
policies.  She noted that, in his most recent SCA, Applicant acknowledged his prior omission. 
However, she concluded that this was neither prompt nor timely.  
2
In the whole-person analysis, she again cited to evidence of the length of time that had
elapsed since Applicant’s final act of misconduct, as well as to his having disclosed his omission
on his recent SCA.  She went on to state, however, that at the time of all his security-significant
conduct, Applicant was a mature adult who exercised a high degree of responsibility.  
Discussion
Applicant cites to his favorable evidence, such as what he characterizes as the experimental
nature of his first use of marijuana, the time that has elapsed since his last use of THC, and his
voluntary disclosure of his conduct on his most recent SCA.  He argues that this evidence, taken
together, is sufficient to meet his burden of persuasion as to mitigation.  A Judge is presumed to
have considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-07393 at 2 (App. Bd.
Jun. 26, 2015).  In the case before us, the Judge made findings about the things that Applicant has
referenced, and she discussed them in the Analysis.  Applicant’s argument is not sufficient to rebut
the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  Applicant’s argument
consists, in essence, of an alternative interpretation of the record.  However, after considering the
evidence as a whole, we conclude that the Judge’s weighing of the evidence was not arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02950 at 4 (App. Bd. May 14, 2015).
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
