 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-06552 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ralph B. Leemis, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 27, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86). On April 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The SOR 
detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
 
2 
 
 
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be granted or denied.  
 
On May 8, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On June 10, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On June 15, 2015, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On June 16, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for July 7, 2015. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were received into evidence 
without objection.  
 
Applicant did not call any witnesses, testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A through D, which were received into evidence without objection.  I held the 
record open until July 24, 2015 to afford the Applicant an opportunity to submit 
additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE E through AE NNNN, which were 
received into evidence without objection. On July 15, 2015, DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.).  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d and to amend the 
last sentence in SOR ¶ 2.a to read, “as set forth in subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b and 
subparagraphs 1.e through 1.i, above.” Without objection from Applicant’s Counsel, I 
granted Department Counsel’s motion. (Tr. 8-10) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations with 
explanations. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old chief executive officer, president, and facility security 
officer of a company he started in December 1999. He seeks a secret security 
clearance to comply with DoD requirements as a defense contractor. (GE 1; Tr. 18, 
20-22)  
 
Applicant was awarded a bachelor’s degree in mathematics in May 1982 and a 
master’s degree in theology in August 2006. (GE 1; Tr. 19-20) He married in August 
1982. He has three daughters, ages 30, 29, 27, and two sons, ages 19 and 17. His 
two youngest sons are dependent on him for support. He did not serve in the armed 
forces. (GE 1; Tr. 22-24) 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s amended SOR lists six debts consisting of five collection accounts 
and one delinquent debt totaling $12,358. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.b and 1.e – 1.i)  Details 
regarding those six debts and their status follow. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – Delinquent medical account for $1,000. Applicant testified to the 
best of his knowledge this account was paid in full. This debt does not appear on 
Applicant’s recent credit reports. ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (AE E, AE DD – AE KKKK; 
Tr. 40) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – Credit card collection account for $659. This account was paid in 
full.  ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (AE E, AE U, AE V, AE DD – AE KKKK, AE MMMM; Tr. 
40) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – Credit card collection account for $2,440. This account was paid in 
full.  ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (AE E, AE AA, AE BB, AE CC, AE DD, AE DD – AE 
KKKK; Tr. 40) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – Credit card collection account for $3,734. This account was paid in 
full and does not appear on Applicant’s recent credit reports. ACCOUNT RESOLVED. 
(AE E, AE DD – AE KKKK, AE MMMM; Tr. 41, 70-71) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g – Collection medical account for $79. This account was paid in full.  
ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (AE E, AE W, AE DD – AE KKKK, AE MMMM; Tr. 40) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – Collection medical account for $4. (Tr. 41-42) This account was 
paid in full.  ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (AE E, AE X, AE DD – AE KKKK, AE MMMM; 
Tr. 40) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i – Credit card collection account for $4,442. (Tr. 42, 70-71) This 
account was paid in full.  ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (AE E, AE Y, AE Z, AE DD – AE 
KKKK, AE MMMM; Tr. 40) 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began in 2000 when his company lost a major 
contract, his salary went to zero, and he undertook the responsibility of caring for his 
wife’s 95-year-old grandmother. In 2001, his wife was laid off. In 2002, his oldest 
daughter entered college; in 2003, his second oldest daughter entered college; and in 
2003, Applicant entered the seminary. In 2004, Applicant experienced an abdominal 
blockage; and in 2006, his third oldest daughter entered college. In 2010, Applicant 
had neck surgery. In 2012, Applicant had abdominal surgery and cancer surgery. (Tr. 
26-27) 
 
To address his financial shortfalls, Applicant liquidated his 401(k) and in 2005, 
he sold his home. (Tr. 27-28) Applicant submitted a single-bureau credit report dated 
July 3, 2015, and a combined three-bureau credit report dated July 1, 2015. The 
 
4 
 
 
single-bureau credit report reflected no delinquent accounts and a credit store of 807. 
The three-bureau credit report reflected respective credit scores of 776, 698, and 800. 
Two credit bureaus reflected no delinquent accounts, and one credit bureau reflected 
one delinquent account. (AE C, AE D; Tr. 34-36) Applicant paid his creditors, and 
when money was short, he paid the minimum amounts. (AE E; Tr. 36, 49-50) 
Applicant’s credit bureau report dated July 22, 2015, submitted post-hearing, reports a 
credit score of 807. (AE LLLL) 
 
Since 2015, Applicant’s company’s performance improved substantially. For 
example, in 2013, his company’s annual income was $800,000 and in 2014, it was 
$1.6 million. (Tr. 48-49)  
 
Applicant lives at his mother-in-law’s house and pays her $400 monthly 
mortgage. He owns two cars that are both paid off. (Tr. 42-44) Applicant’s post-
hearing budget reflects that he leads a modest lifestyle and lives within his means. His 
net monthly remainder ranges from about $2,200 to $2,400. (AE NNNN) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that when he completed his November 27, 2012 SF 
86, he answered the questions pertaining to delinquent accounts truthfully and 
honestly, and to the best of his knowledge. Applicant was making payments to his 
creditors directly and not to any collection agencies. Applicant did not receive anything 
from his creditors suggesting that he had delinquent accounts. He opined that as a 
result of moving, his mail may not have been forwarded to his new address. Nor did 
he review his credit report, because he had “[n]ever needed to.” The first time 
Applicant reviewed his credit report was in March 2015, as a result of these 
proceedings. (Tr. 30-35)  
 
 On December 20, 2012, Applicant was interviewed during an Office of 
Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI).  During that interview, 
the OPM investigator brought Applicant’s SOR debts to his attention. He stated he 
would look into those debts and resolve them. In his SOR answer, OPM PSI, and in 
his testimony, Applicant did not deny the existence of his debts, but maintained that he 
did not knowingly provide false information. (SOR answer; GE 2; Tr. 36-39, 57-68) 
Applicant submitted snapshots from 2012 to 2015 of his bank account showing that he 
was making payments on his SOR debts, demonstrating that they would not have 
been 120 days delinquent when he completed his SF 86. (AE C, AE D; Tr. 47-49) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 As an uncompensated pastor, Applicant works with his local municipality to 
assist homeless veterans, works with a local church for prison ministry, does one-on-
one mentoring for young men, and provides a range of counseling services. (Tr. 50-
53) As a pastor and one who adheres to what the Bible teaches, Applicant believes in 
paying his bills and would not lie to keep a clearance. (Tr. 53) 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant submitted 14 reference letters from a range of individuals to include 
pastors, long-time friends, business associates, parishioners, and family members. 
These letters collectively convey that Applicant is a dedicated family man and an 
individual of highest integrity whose character is above reproach. (AE F – AE T) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
 
6 
 
 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                                     Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
 
7 
 
 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant’s company lost a major 
contract, his wife lost her job, and he experienced several costly medical problems. 
None of these mitigating factors could have been anticipated. Although not qualifying 
as a mitigating condition, three of his daughters started college. During this time, 
Applicant remained in contact with creditors. 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) is partially applicable. Although there is no evidence that Applicant 
received financial counseling, his financial problems are clearly resolved and under 
control. AG ¶ 20(d) is fully applicable. As noted above, all of Applicant’s debts are paid 
in full and resolved. 1 AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. 
  
Personal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside [his or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether [he or she] maintained contact with [his or her] creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep [his or her] debts current. 
 
8 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case in regard to the allegation Applicant provided a false 
security clearance application: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
On November 27, 2012, Applicant provided an SF-86 which asked questions 
about delinquent debts in the last seven years. Applicant responded “No” to several 
questions pertaining to his delinquent debts. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) both apply 
because he provided incorrect answers when submitting his SF about his delinquent 
debts. Further review is necessary. 
   
Applicant credibly stated when he completed his SF-86 he was not aware that 
he had any delinquent debts. On December 20, 2012, during his OPM PSI, he did not 
deny the existence of his debts and advised the investigator that he would look into 
them. He certainly did that and ensured they were all paid. The fact that he moved 
several times, was paying his creditors directly, and did not review his credit report 
adds credence to his testimony. 
 
Applicant was candid and forthright at his hearing about his financial situation. I 
conclude Applicant’s alleged falsification of his SF-86 is refuted. Although he provided 
incorrect information on his SF-86, the falsification allegations are not substantiated. I 
am satisfied he did not deliberately and intentionally fail to disclose his delinquent 
debts with intent to deceive.2 I find “For Applicant” in the Findings section of this 
decision with respect to SOR ¶ 2.   
                                                          
2
The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden 
of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or 
prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a 
Judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
    
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s financial conduct. Credit 
reports submitted by the Government document his SOR delinquent accounts. This 
process has no doubt made an impression on Applicant and demonstrates the need to 
exercise diligence when monitoring one’s credit. 
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept in this case outweighs 
the adverse evidence. There is no evidence of any security violations. Applicant is a 
law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. His current financial problems 
were caused by factors beyond his control. Applicant’s employment in the defense 
industry weighs heavily in his favor. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, lives 
within his means, and his SOR debts have been resolved. The Appeal Board has 
addressed a key element in the whole person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at 
the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to 
conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E 
and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 
9, 2004)). 
 
10 
 
 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.’) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted).  
 
Applicant has achieved some important educational and employment goals, 
demonstrating his self-discipline, responsibility and dedication. He holds a bachelor’s 
degree in mathematics and a master’s degree in theology. In addition to his 
contribution to the defense industry, Applicant is an active pastor making a significant 
contribution to his community.  
 
The mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s years of financial 
responsibility before falling into debt, the circumstances that led to his financial 
difficulties, his financial recovery, the steps he has taken to resolve his financial 
situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, his reference letters, 
and his testimony and demeanor.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c - 1.d:  Withdrawn 
Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.i:  For Applicant 
 
         Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a   
as amended:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
