 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04866 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
From November 2010 to July 2013, Applicant illegally used marijuana, cocaine, 
mollies, and prescription medications while in college. He disclosed the illegal drug use 
in his security clearance application and during an investigative interview. He provided 
evidence that he no longer uses illegal substances or associates with people using 
illegal drugs. He is successfully performing in his employment position. He mitigated the 
drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 6, 2013, Applicant submitted Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (GE 1.) On December 15, 2014, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated 
by the President on December 29, 2005. 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement). The 
SOR detailed reasons why the DoD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether his clearance should be denied, granted, continued, or revoked.  
 
On January 15, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On May 27, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On May 29, 2015, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the 
hearing for June 15, 2015. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered two exhibits; Applicant did not offer any exhibits. There 
were no objections to the Government’s exhibits (GE), and I admitted GE 1 and 2. The 
record remained open until July 6, 2015, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit 
information. On June 22, 2015, DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.). 
Applicant timely submitted two exhibits, which I marked as AE A and B.       
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted all SOR allegations. His admissions are 
accepted as factual findings.   
 
Applicant is a 24-year-old information technology (IT) consultant. (Tr. 12) He 
graduated from high school in 2009. He has never married, and he does not have any 
children. (Tr. 13.)  He attended college from August 2009 to May 2013, and graduated 
with a bachelor’s degree. (GE 1.) In July 2013 he began a position with his current 
employer. (GE 1.)  
 
When Applicant completed his November 2013 SF 86 (SF 86), he disclosed that 
he used marijuana from November 2010 to May 2013, approximately less than eight 
times. He noted that he used the marijuana at his fraternity house and parties. During 
an investigative interview in February 2014, Applicant candidly disclosed that he also 
used marijuana one time in July 2013, while at his former university.1 He stated he 
never purchased marijuana. (GE 1, GE 2.) While testifying he said he estimated that he 
used it about five times. (Tr. 22.) He stated he does not intend to use marijuana in the 
future. (Tr. 15.) He was a college sophomore when he began using the illegal 
substance. 
 
Applicant disclosed in his SF 86 that he used an illegal stimulant, “molly,” less 
than five times between February 2011 and April 2013. While testifying, he said that he 
used it at college or concerts. He said he never purchased it. (Tr. 22; GE 1.)  
 
Applicant disclosed in his SF 86 that he used cocaine less than three times 
between December 2011 and April 2012. He was a college junior at the time. He noted 
that he used it at his fraternity house and parties. He never purchased it. (GE 1.) He 
                                            
1 It is unclear if Applicant had started his employment at the time he used marijuana in July 2013. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
testified that he used it fewer than five times. (Tr. 22.) He has no intention to use 
cocaine in the future. (Tr. 17.)  
 
Applicant disclosed in his SF 86 that between December 2010 and April 2012 he 
used prescription medications, Adderall, Concerta, and Vyvanse, which were not 
prescribed to him. (GE 1.) He testified that he used the prescription medications about 
five times to help him stay awake and study. 2  Someone in his fraternity gave the 
medications to him. (Tr. 24, 27.)    
 
Applicant repeatedly stated that he used marijuana, cocaine, and mollies for 
experimentation purposes while he was in social settings. (GE 1, GE 2.) He said he did 
not use illegal drugs during vacations. While working in summer internship programs, he 
underwent drug screenings and did not test positive for drugs. (Tr. 25.)  
 
In June 2013 Applicant moved to another state to start employment with his 
current employer and removed himself from people illegally using drugs at college. (Tr. 
15.) In October 2014 he moved to another state where he presently resides and works 
for the same employer. He does not want to jeopardize his career by coming into 
contact with illegal substances or associate with people who use them. (Tr. 17.) His 
family and friends are aware of his illegal drug use. (GE 2.) His girlfriend does not use 
illegal drugs. (Tr. 17.) 
 
Applicant submitted his last quarterly performance evaluation from February 
2015 to May 2015. His manager commented that Applicant is “operating above his 
current level.” (AE B.) He noted that Applicant is “one of my top performers this year.” 
(AE B.) He recently received a promotion. (Tr. 13.) 
 
Applicant has never been arrested, charged, or convicted of a drug-related 
offense or any other offense. (GE 1.) He submitted a signed Letter of Intent not to use 
any illegal substance in the future. (AE A.) He expressed remorse while testifying. 
 
Policies 
 
 Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
                                            
2During an investigative interview in February 2014, Applicant told the investigator that he used the 
prescription medication “on three different occasions during each semester.” (GE 2.)  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995) § 3. Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
Two drug involvement disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a), and 25(c) could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “any drug abuse,”3  and 
                                            
3AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
“illegal drug possession.” These two disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant 
admitted that he possessed and used four illegal substances from November 2010 to 
July 2013.4     
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004.) Applicant disclosed in his SF 86 and during an investigative interview, that he 
possessed and used illegal substances a number of times from November 2010 to July 
2013. His use of illegal substances occurred while he was in college and living in a 
fraternity. He has not used illegal substances since July 2013. Based on his honest 
                                            
4AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
disclosure and circumstances surrounding his usage, similar conduct is unlikely to 
recur. AG ¶ 26(a) provides mitigation. Applicant no longer associates with people who 
use illegal drugs and he avoids environments where drugs are present. He provided a 
signed statement of his intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. AG ¶ 26(b) also has 
application. 
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse drugs 
after being issued a prescription that is lawful under federal law. The legal substances 
he possessed and used were never lawfully prescribed for him under federal law. He did 
not provide proof of satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, or a favorable prognosis by a duly 
qualified medical professional.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 The factors in favor of granting Applicant access to classified information are 
persuasive. When completing his November 2013 SF 86, he honestly disclosed his 
illegal drug use while he was in college. He explained it during an investigative interview 
in February 2014 and discussed it candidly during his hearing. He expressed remorse 
over his misconduct; he no longer associates with drug users; and he stated that he has 
not used illegal drugs for two years. He is now 24 years old and has matured since 
leaving college. He has worked successfully for his employer for two years and recently 
received a promotion. These factors outweigh any factors supporting denial of 
Applicant’s clearance.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me without concerns as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He met his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug involvement. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
