 
 
 
 
1 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-03190 
  ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to submit sufficient documentary evidence to mitigate Guideline F 
trustworthiness concerns. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On August 4, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) citing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) regarding his eligibility to occupy an automated data 
processing (ADP) position designated ADP-I/II/III. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. Applicant responded to the SOR on September 16, 2014, admitting five of the 
eight allegations raised and requesting a determination based on the written record.  
 
On February 17, 2015, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) that contained four attachments. Applicant timely responded to the FORM with 
a letter and five attachments, accepted in the record as exhibits (Exs.) 1-5. The case 
was assigned to me on May 21, 2015. Based on my review of the case file and 
 
 
 
 
2 
submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations related to his 
eligibility for a public trust position.    
 
          Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 23-year-old applicant for a position of trust. He graduated from 
secondary school in May 2010. He completed some college coursework. He last 
attended college in 2013. Applicant is single, and has no children.   
 
 In 2012, at age 20, Applicant left home to support himself as a cook. He secured 
a car loan and a credit card. Inexperience led him to acquire debts. He was determined 
not to seek financial assistance from his family. He supplemented his income by 
donating plasma on a regular basis. His education became sporadic. Through 2013, he 
lived paycheck to paycheck, lacked sufficient income to meet his obligations, and was in 
“survival mode.” (Response to FORM)  
 
In his Response to FORM, Applicant wrote of several improvements he made in 
his life in terms of his finances. He noted that he has reliably paid his rent for nearly two 
years; he is current on his car loan; he obtained, used, and paid off a furniture store 
credit card; and he has made progress on his delinquent debts. Applicant has returned 
to school and is studying business. He provided no documentary evidence, however, of 
these efforts or achievements.    
 
At work, Applicant is a highly effective employee with a positive performance 
record. One reference wrote Applicant is known for his excellent communication skills, 
dependability, honesty, and diligence. Another source reports that he is trustworthy and 
dedicated. Applicant takes full responsibility for his financial problems. His Response to 
FORM is well-written, earnest, and straight-forward. 
 
At issue are eight delinquent debts, amounting to approximately $8,440. In his 
response to the SOR, he denied the obligations noted in the SOR at 1.f-1.h, which 
represent about $2,050 in debt. In his Response to FORM, he took “ownership of any 
bills and accounts that I have on my credit report as of now.” Applicant did not offer a 
credit report more current than the one included in the FORM, dated January 2014. It 
reflects the obligations noted at SOR 1.f-1.h, and notes that the $510 account balance 
at 1.h was in dispute. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision.   
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks a public trust position enters into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides 
that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth the applicable concern: failure or inability 
to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate 
poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all 
of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect information.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant was 
delinquent on eight accounts, amounting to a total debt balance of approximately 
$8,440. This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
 
 
 
4 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
Multiple delinquent debts remain unpaid. They were acquired by Applicant 
recently, through youth, inexperience, and a desire to succeed without parental aid. 
There is no evidence as to whether he sought financial advice or guidance at the time, 
or whether he has since received financial counseling. Applicant details several 
accomplishments he has made in his finances and in his personal life, but failed to 
provide any documentation corroborating such claims. With the possible exception of 
one account (SOR 1.h for $501) which was in dispute in 2014, there is no documented 
evidence of any progress on the delinquent debts at issue. Based on the scant evidence 
submitted, there is insufficient evidence to raise any of the available mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept.  
       
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Applicant is a young man with some post-secondary education and an excellent 
work record. He left home at 20 to support himself. Life as a cook and occasional 
student did not meet his financial needs. A notable amount of debt was acquired and 
became delinquent. Now 23 years old, Applicant accepts full responsibility for his 
financial errors. According to his Response to FORM, he learned from his mistakes. 
 
Applicant chose a determination based on the written record. In his Response to 
FORM, he wrote a narrative enumerating the steps he has made to improve his 
finances and his life. He failed, however, to corroborate his statements with 
documentary evidence.  
 
This process does not require an applicant to address all debts at issue. It does, 
however, demand that an applicant articulate a workable plan to address their 
delinquent debts, show that their plan has been successfully implemented, and 
document that their financial outlook has improved. Here, Applicant provided insufficient 
documentary evidence to establish that progress is being made on his delinquent debts. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by his financial situation. Accordingly, 
I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with 
national security to grant him eligibility for a public trust position.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h  Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, I 
conclude that it is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied.    
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
