 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03151 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A.Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 22, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On November 14, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR, and he elected to have 
his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. He submitted a statement 
with explanations. No other documents were submitted. On April 16, 2015, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) and it was mailed 
 
2 
 
 
to Applicant. He received it on June 15, 2015. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not 
object to any of the Government’s documents offered as Items 1 through 4. They are 
admitted into evidence. Applicant provided a response to the FORM, which along with 
his statement included with the SOR, were admitted into evidence without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on July 31, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. I have incorporated his admissions 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He has not served in the military. He married in 1983 
and divorced in 1988. He remarried in 1997 and divorced in 2010. He has four children, 
ages 32, 30, 23, and 17. He was employed from May 2000 to March 2007. He was 
unemployed from March 2007 to September 2007. He was employed in private industry 
from October 2007 to July 2012. He has worked for his present employer, a federal 
contractor, since August 2012.1  
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy on or about May 2005 and had his debts 
discharged. The amount that was discharged is unknown. He stated in his answer to the 
SOR that he had a good job, but was laid off and he “got in over my head.”2 He further 
stated: “After being laid off there was not enough money coming in to pay all my bills. I 
felt the best thing to do was to file for bankruptcy.”3 Applicant did not list on his security 
clearance application (SCA) a period of unemployment prior to 2005.4 
 
The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling approximately $31,284. The debts 
are supported by credit reports from March 2013 and April 2014.5 Regarding the 
collection account debt to a cell phone company in SOR ¶ 1.b ($985), Applicant stated 
his wife at the time used his name to obtain a cell phone and then did not pay the bills. 
He did not provide evidence of any effort to dispute or resolve the debt.6  
 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Item 1. 
 
3 Item 1. 
 
4 Item 2. 
 
5 Item 3 and 4. 
 
6 Item 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($466) is a medical bill that Applicant acknowledged “is 
most likely mine.”7 He indicated he would pay it when he has the money. It is 
unresolved. The charged off debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($14,753) is for a car loan. Applicant 
indicated he never should have purchased the car, but he needed reliable 
transportation. No other information was provided regarding Applicant’s resolution of the 
debt.8  
 
Applicant indicated that he does not know what the debt is in SOR ¶ 1.e 
($12,441). He stated he planned to investigate the debt. No other information was 
provided as to what actions he took to dispute or resolve the debt.9  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($2,462) is for the balance due on a repossessed vehicle. 
Applicant co-signed on a vehicle loan for his son who defaulted on the payments. 
Applicant contacted the creditor who wanted the full balance paid. Applicant could not 
afford to pay the balance, and the vehicle was repossessed. The current status of the 
debt is unknown.10  
 
Applicant did not recognize the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($177) and was going to 
investigate it and resolve it. He did not provide information about any actions he has 
taken regarding the debt.11 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he had some serious things come 
up in his life and did not handle them well. He planned on taking each item on the SOR 
one step at a time and have all the charges against his credit taken off within the next 
couple of years.12 In his answer to the FORM, Applicant stated in 2010 he divorced due 
to some financial issues in the marriage. He did not elaborate. He stated that since his 
divorce he is more financially stable. He stated he promptly pays his child support, rent, 
utilities, and car insurance. He is continually trying to pay the debts on his credit report 
when he has extra money. Recently he has not had extra money and is living paycheck 
to paycheck. He plans to pay the debts as soon as possible and hopes to use next 
year’s income tax refund to pay them. He will continue to make payments until they are 
paid off.13  
 
 
                                                          
7 Item 1. 
 
8 Item 1. 
 
9 Item 1. 
 
10 Item 1. 
 
11 Item 1. 
 
12 Item 1. 
 
13 Response to the FORM. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had debt discharged through bankruptcy in 2005. He has six delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR, dating back to 2007, totaling approximately $31,284 that are 
unresolved. I find the above disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
After having his debts resolved through bankruptcy in 2005, Applicant again 
experienced financial problems and has numerous delinquent debts that are 
unresolved. His delinquent debts are unpaid and therefore recent. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude his financial problems occurred under unique circumstances and 
are unlikely to recur. His finances cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant indicated he was divorced in 2010 due to “some financial issues in the 
marriage,” but he did not elaborate. His divorce was a condition beyond his control. For 
the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), there must be evidence that Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has been employed steadily since his 
divorce. He indicated he was financially stable, but also stated he was living paycheck 
to paycheck and did not have the money to pay his delinquent debts at this time. 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence of actions he took to investigate debts he 
questioned or any attempts to resolve the delinquent debts alleged. AG ¶ 20(b) 
minimally applies. 
 
There is no evidence to conclude Applicant has received financial counseling. He 
did not provide evidence that he has a realistic plan for resolving his delinquent debts or 
an established track record of payments. He did not provide specific evidence as to his 
current finances. I cannot find there are clear indications that his financial problems are 
being resolved or are under control. There is no evidence of a good-faith effort to pay 
his creditors. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Applicant did not recognize certain debts alleged. He indicated his intent to 
research them and determine their validity. He did not provide evidence of what efforts 
he may have taken to dispute the legitimacy of the debts, submit documents to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute, or offer evidence of actions he has taken to 
resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 53 years old. He has a history of financial problems, which include a 
bankruptcy in 2005 and recent delinquent debts that remain unresolved. He did not 
provide documentation to support any efforts he may have taken to resolve his 
delinquent debts. Applicant does not have a consistent track record to show he is 
resolving his financial problems. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant 
has met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude he failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline 
F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
