 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04067 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Norman D. Fleming, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G. DOD took 
that action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 
1, 2006. 
 
On February 23, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on April 20, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 24, 2015, and the hearing 
convened as scheduled on May 12, 2015. At the hearing, the Government offered 
 
2 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. The prehearing guidance issued to Applicant was attached to 
the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. Department Counsel’s email to Applicant on May 
7, 2015, was attached as HE 2 and her list of exhibits as HE 3. Applicant testified, called 
two witnesses, and offered exhibits (AE) A through D. The record was held open until 
May 26, 2015, to provide Applicant the opportunity to submit additional information. 
Applicant timely submitted AE E through L. All exhibits were admitted into evidence 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 20, 2015.  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
working in his current job since April 2013, but for different employers. He completed 
about two years of college and continues to take courses. He served on active duty in 
the Army from 2001 to 2013, attained the grade of staff sergeant (E-6), and received an 
honorable discharge. He is married. He has held a security clearance for about 12 
years.1 
 
 The SOR set forth three Guideline G allegations. These asserted that Applicant 
received in-patient alcohol treatment in 2008, 2010, and 2011. As part of his last 
treatment, he was ordered to abstain from alcohol consumption, failed to so do, and 
was disenrolled from the treatment program. In November 2012, he was 
administratively separated from the Army for alcohol rehabilitation failure. In his Answer, 
Applicant admitted each SOR allegation. His admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact.2 
 
Applicant served in the Special Forces. He deployed to Afghanistan from June 
2002 to June 2003; to Iraq three times: January 2005 to January 2006, April 2007 to 
February 2008, and August 2008 to January 2009; and to Germany from December 
2009 to June 2010. He was stationed in Korea from October 2011 to March 2013. As 
early as 2008, he was treated for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).3  
 
In an interview with an Office of Personnel Management investigator, Applicant 
stated that he drank alcohol with friends on the weekends and would be “buzzed” after 
drinking up to six beers in an evening. He indicated that he started drinking heavily after 
returning from his first deployment. He would often drink a liter of vodka over a weekend 
by himself. He has never been arrested or charged with an alcohol-related offense. His 
consumption of alcohol did not affect his work, but impacted his family life because he 
spent less time with his family. He did not consume alcohol during deployments, but 
would begin drinking heavily again upon his return. He indicated that he used alcohol to 
cope with nightmares and sleeplessness.4  
                                                          
1 Tr. 17-18, 29, 31-33; GE 1, 2; AE G.   
2 SOR; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
3 Tr. 60; GE 2. 
4 Tr. 29-47, 66-69, 72; GE 2. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant knew his alcohol consumption was excessive. In 2008, he referred 
himself for treatment and identified himself as an alcoholic. He received in-patient 
alcohol treatment for three or four weeks. During this hospitalization, he also received 
treatment for PTSD.5 
 
As part of his treatment in 2008, he was prescribed Antabuse, but stopped taking 
that medication after about one week. Following that treatment, he began drinking 
again. His continued alcohol consumption did not impact his work performance. In 
Germany in 2010, he referred himself for alcohol and PTSD treatment. He was 
medevaced to the United States for in-patient treatment. After completing that treatment 
program, he did not consume alcohol for about a year.6 
 
When stationed in Korea, Applicant started drinking again because of the peer 
pressure. In December 2011, he referred himself for treatment again. As part of this 
treatment program, he was assigned a counselor, ordered to abstain from alcohol 
consumption, and received random blood alcohol tests. He was taking medication to 
help him refrain from consuming alcohol. In November 2012, he failed a blood alcohol 
test. In March 2013, he was processed for an administrative discharge for alcohol 
rehabilitation failure and received an honorable discharge.7 
 
Applicant testified that he has not consumed alcohol since departing Korea in 
December 2012. His wife’s testimony confirmed that he stopped consuming alcohol 
over two years ago. Since his discharge, he has attended only a few AA meetings. He 
indicated that did not get much from those meetings. He relies on his wife and friends 
for support. He indicated that he does not intent to consume alcohol in the future and 
knows doing so would negatively impact his personal life. He felt a great deal of relief 
after leaving the military because he no longer had to deploy and could spend more 
time with his family. Without the stress of deployments, he indicated that he will be able 
to abstain from consuming alcohol.8 
 
Applicant’s manager testified that Applicant is an exceptional performer. He 
lauded Applicant’s leadership and technical skills. Applicant was recently elevated to a 
site lead and oversees a team of six employees. The manager became aware of 
Applicant’s alcohol problem after he invited him out for a drink and Applicant stated that 
he would go but would not drink alcohol. The manager is convinced that Applicant is 
committed to abstaining from alcohol consumption.9 
                                                          
5 Tr. 69-77, 79-80; GE 2. 
6 Tr. 64-65, 74-91; GE 2. 
7 Tr. 60-65, 91-98; GE 2. 
8 Tr. 26-28, 60-64, 98-109; GE 2, 3. Applicant’s wife testified that she may have seen her 
husband consume alcohol after his return from Korea but before his discharge from the Army. See Tr. 35. 
9 Tr. 47-58; AE A-D, L. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant’s performance appraisal for 2014 reflected an overall rating of 
“exceeded expectations.” In the Army, Applicant was awarded two Joint Service 
Commendation Medals, two Army Commendation Medals, a Joint Service Achievement 
Medal, and three Army Achievement Medals.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
10 AE G.  
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. Four are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; and  
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
In the past, Applicant identified himself as an alcoholic, and he drank 
excessively, e.g., often consuming a liter of vodka over a weekend. Although he has 
never been arrested or charged with an alcohol-related offense, he acknowledged that 
his excessive drinking led to problems in his personal life and to his discharge from the 
military. He received in-patient alcohol treatment on three separate occasions and had 
relapses following each of those treatments. The record does not establish that he was 
ever diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or as alcohol dependent; however, he was 
ordered not to consume alcohol during his last treatment. Each of the above 
disqualifying conditions applies.  
 
 Two alcohol consumption mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
6 
 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).  
 
Applicant is well aware that he has an alcohol problem. He referred himself three 
times for alcohol treatment. His military deployments were a factor that contributed to 
his excessive alcohol consumption, but that factor no longer is an issue for him. 
 
 Applicant has not consumed alcohol for over two years. He is well along in his 
recovery. He knows that further consumption of alcohol will negatively affect him and is 
committed to abstention. His wife, family, and coworkers are supporting him in his 
recovery. His alcohol problems are unlikely to recur and no longer cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
7 
 
Applicant served in the Army for 12 years. He deployed on a number of 
occasions to combat zones as a member of the Special Forces. He is a valued 
employee of a defense contractor. He not consumed alcohol for over two years and is 
committed to abstaining from alcohol. He has a support system with his wife, family, and 
coworkers. A major stressor in his life was related to his military deployments. Now that 
he is no longer in the military that stressor is eliminated and he is better able to cope 
without the use of alcohol. Record evidence supports a determination that his alcohol 
problems are unlikely to recur.  
 
Overall, the record leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
