 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04078 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 12, 2015, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 12, 2015. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 19, 2015. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on July 29, 2015. The Government offered exhibits 
 
2 
 
 
(GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. He offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The record was held open until August 17, 2015, to allow Applicant to 
submit additional documents. Applicant did not submit any documents and the record 
closed.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 6, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR. His admissions are incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He holds a master’s degree. He retired from the Army 
in 1998 in the rank of major after 20 years of service. He married in 1985 and divorced 
in 1994. He remarried in 1995 and divorced in 2004. He has children ages 28, 24, 18 
and 14. The two younger children live with their mother, and he pays child support. He 
has been employed with a federal contractor since May 2014. Before then, from June 
2012 to May 2014, he was unemployed and lived on his military pension. He was 
steadily employed from the latter part of 2008 to June 2012.2  
 
 In approximately 2005, Applicant had his debts discharged in bankruptcy. He 
estimated the amount discharged to be around $30,000 to $40,000. He attributed his 
financial problems to two divorces in nine years. He indicated his first wife ran up bills 
that he was then responsible for.3  
 
 Applicant stated during his hearing that in March or April 2015, he hired the 
Lexington Law firm to dispute his debts. The documents he provided reflect the firm 
sent correspondence to challenge the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f on May 2, 2015.4  
 
 Applicant paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($36); 1.d ($493); 1.e ($107) and 1.g 
($69) in March 2015.5 He disclosed on his security clearance application (SCA), signed 
in March 2014, that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d was delinquent since October 2004 and the 
reason was “inability to pay.”6 He disclosed in the SCA that he “arranged a payoff 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s memorandum noting Applicant contacted him and advised 
that he would not be submitting additional documents.  
 
2 Tr. 18-22. 
 
3 Tr. 23-25. I have not considered Applicant’s bankruptcy for disqualifying purposes, but will consider it 
when analyzing his credibility, in applying the mitigating conditions, and in my whole-person analysis.  
 
4 Other debts were also challenged, but they have either been resolved through payment or were not 
alleged on the SOR. 
 
5 Answer to the SOR. 
 
6 GE 2 is a credit report from April 2014 that shows the account was opened in December 2006 and the 
last activity on the account was September 2007. 
 
3 
 
 
schedule with agency.” No explanation was provided as to why he did not pay the debt 
until after he received the SOR a year later. He provided documented proof of his March 
2015 payments.7  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($12,472) is for medical services. Applicant stated he had 
a heart attack in January 2012 and believed his military medical insurer was required to 
pay the bill. He disclosed the debt on his SCA, and stated he was unable to pay the bill 
and believed the debt was charged off. In his interview with a government investigator in 
June 2014, he indicated he was covered by TRICARE for Life, a secondary insurer to 
Medicare, and the bill should have been paid.8 He also indicated that in 2012 he was 
negotiating a reduced payment with the hospital. He was waiting for the creditor to 
contact him. He testified that he has not contacted the insurer for at least six months to 
follow up on the claim. He testified that about four months ago he asked the collection 
company for an itemized bill. He stated he needed to contact the creditor, and if he 
owes the debt he will pay it. He explained that TRICARE paid most of the medical bills 
incurred from his heart attack, but some were not paid. He stated he was still working 
the issue, and he does not believe he is responsible for paying this portion of the debt. 
He also stated he intended to pay what he may owe on the debt. The record was held 
open to allow Applicant to provide additional information about his entitled coverage 
through TRICARE and the current status of the debt. He did not provide additional 
information. The bill is being challenged through Lexington Law.9 The debt is not 
resolved. 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($9,862) is a judgment filed in June 2008. Applicant 
explained he purchased a car in 2008, and subsequently had problems with the engine 
while it was on warranty. The car dealer agreed to retrieve the car, but there was a 
disagreement as to who was financially responsible. Applicant stated he never heard 
from the dealer again. He moved to a different state in 2008. In 2009 he learned there 
was a judgment entered against him. Lexington Law challenged the debt on his credit 
report and reported that it was removed from two of the credit bureaus’ reports.10 
However, Applicant did not provide proof that he contested the judgment or that it was 
vacated or released, or took any action to resolve it. Having the debt removed from a 
credit report after seven years does not mean the debt is no longer owed. The record 
                                                          
7 Tr. 39-40; GE 1. 
 
8 TRICARE for Life (TFL) is Medicare wraparound coverage for TRICARE beneficiaries who have 
Medicare Part A and Medicare Part B, regardless of age or place of residence. With TFL, you have the 
freedom to seek care from any Medicare-participating or nonparticipating provider, or at a military hospital 
or clinic on a space-available basis. Enrollment is not required, but you must pay Medicare Part B 
premiums. It is unknown if Applicant complied with the Medicare Part B premium requirement. Due to 
Applicant’s age it is unknown if he qualifies at this time for TFL or is covered under a different TRICARE 
program with different coverage.  
 
9 Tr. 26-32, 62, 66-67; GE 4; AE A. 
 
10 The judgment appears on GE 2, a credit report from April 2014, but not on GE 4, a June 2015 credit 
report. 
 
4 
 
 
was held open to allow Applicant an opportunity to provide additional evidence that the 
judgment is no longer valid. None was provided.11 The debt remains unresolved. 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($972) is a bill from March 2012 for dental services.12 
Applicant’s dental insurance did not cover the entire bill. Applicant stated he had no idea 
the services were put on a credit card. He indicated he was unaware the debt was still 
outstanding until he received the SOR.13 However, Applicant disclosed the debt and 
that it was “in collections” on his SCA and stated that the provider would not 
“compromise” and the original creditor “closed out the account.”14 He stated in the SCA 
that he would “set up a payment plan when I get work.”15 He indicated in his 
background interview that he believed the debt had been written-off, which is why he did 
not pay it. He indicated he would arrange a payment plan to resolve the debt. In early 
June 2014, he received a settlement offer and indicated his intention to pay the debt by 
the end of the year.16 At his hearing, he admitted he owed the debt, but he did not have 
an explanation for why he had not paid it. The debt is being challenged by Lexington 
Law. 17 The debt is not resolved.  
 
 Applicant estimated that from 2008 to 2012 his annual salary was between 
$42,000 and $44,000. He estimated his current salary to be approximately $45,000 and 
his military pension is $36,000. He estimated his expendable monthly income is 
approximately $500 to $600. He indicated that he was unaware of some of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. He is able to pay his monthly expenses. He indicated he intended 
to pay the debts he owes.18 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
11 Tr. 40-50, 52, 58-62, 65; GE 2; AE A. 
 
12 AE B is a copy of the collection company’s verification of the debt. 
 
13 Tr. 37-39. 
 
14 GE 1. 
 
15 GE 1. 
 
16 GE 3. 
 
17 Tr. 33-39. 
 
18 Tr. 50-51, 54-57, 62-63. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
6 
 
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant has an unpaid judgment and delinquent debts that have not been paid 
or resolved beginning in 2008. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 In March 2015, Applicant resolved the relatively small debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a ($36), 1.d ($493), 1.e ($107) and 1.g ($69). AG ¶ 20(d) applies to these debts.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant has not resolved the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.c ($9,862) that was entered 
in June 2008; the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($12,472) for services he received in 
January 2012; and the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($972) owed for dental care he received in 
March 2012. Applicant was unemployed from June 2012 to May 2014, but was able to 
pay his expenses from his military pension. He attributed his financial problems to two 
divorces in nine years. However, he had his debts discharged in bankruptcy after his 
second divorce and had a clean financial slate. Therefore, his divorces should not have 
had an impact on his finances after his bankruptcy. His reduced income during his 
unemployment was a condition beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 
20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly. Applicant has acknowledged he received 
medical and dental services. He believes his insurer is responsible for the medical debt, 
but he has not contacted the insurer in six months to address the debt. He admitted he 
owed the dental debt and does not know why he has not paid it, despite his statement in 
the SCA that he had a payment arrangement with the agency and again a promise to 
pay it made during his June 2014 interview.  
 
 The judgment against Applicant is seven years old and may have been deleted 
from his credit report, but he failed to show that since 2009, when he learned about it, 
he has taken any action to satisfy it or have it vacated. Applicant has not acted 
responsibly under the circumstances regarding his debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. Although he is 
challenging all of his debts through Lexington Law, he failed to provide a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the debts. To the contrary, he admitted he owed the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.f for dental services. Despite promises to pay it, he never did, and now 
he is challenging it on his credit report. He also received medical services. He believes 
the costs were covered by his insurer, but failed to contact the insurer in the past six 
months prior to his hearing to find out the status of the debt. Instead, he is challenging it 
on his credit report. He acknowledged he has known about the judgment entered 
against him since 2009. Although the judgment may have been removed from his credit 
reports, it does not resolve his legal obligation to pay it or have it legally vacated. He did 
not provide evidence of his attempt to do either. These debts are unresolved. 
Applicant’s financial issues are recent and did not occur under unique circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur. Applicant’s past conduct casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. There are not clear indications the problems are 
being resolved or under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c) and 20(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
8 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 57 years old. He is a retired Army major. Applicant was aware he 
had delinquent debts, many of which he disclosed in his SCA and during his 
background interview. He has been employed since June 2014 and was employed prior 
to May 2012. He failed to provide sufficient evidence to conclude he is handling his debt 
resolution responsibly. Although he was aware of an outstanding medical bill, he failed 
to contact the creditor before his hearing to determine its status. He failed to pay the 
dental debt, despite promises to do so; instead he is now challenging it. He failed to 
address the judgment that he has known about since 2009. He did not pay the small 
delinquent debts he owed until after he was issued the SOR. Applicant has the burden 
of persuasion. Disputing a delinquent debt to have it removed from a credit report after 
acknowledging its legitimacy, as Applicant has done at least with regard to the dental 
debt, raises serious questions about his judgment. I considered Applicant’s testimony 
and did not find him credible regarding his knowledge about his debts and the 
legitimacy of his disputes. Applicant’s conduct raises questions about his reliability and 
trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
