KEYWORD: Guideline G
DIGEST: The Judge made findings about Applicant’s favorable evidence and discussed that
evidence in his Analysis.  Applicant’s argument is not enough to rebut the presumption that the
Judfge considered all the evidence.  Neither is it enough to show that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Adverse decision
affirmed.  
CASENO: 14-05201.a1
DATE: 08/05/2015
DATE: August 5, 2015
In Re:
-----------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05201
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 12, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On May 29, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Mark Harvey denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor.  A high school graduate who has a certificate of
completion in administrative justice, Applicant’s record contains no evidence of security violations,
illegal drug use, or criminal offenses other than DUI.
In 2009, Applicant was arrested for DUI, his blood alcohol content (BAC) registering .29%. 
Applicant was scheduled to report for work as a security guard four hours after the time of his arrest. 
He stated that he was not sure if he would still have been under the influence of alcohol when
starting work.  He did not feel like he was under the influence of alcohol at the time of his arrest. 
Applicant was entered into a first offender program, paid a fine, and underwent three years of
unsupervised probation.  He was required to watch videos about the impact of DUI.
In late 2011, while still on probation, Applicant rear-ended a car during stop-and-go traffic. 
His BAC was .1%, more than the threshold of .08%.  Applicant was sentenced to a fine, restitution,
and to an additional three years of probation.  He received in-person instruction on the impact of
DUI.  It was suggested to him that he curtail his consumption of alcohol, although he was not told
that he was an alcohol abuser.
Applicant has never attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), nor has he had alcohol
counseling.  He drank 64 ounces of beer about a week prior to the hearing, becoming intoxicated. 
He drinks this amount about once or twice a week.  He has not reduced his alcohol consumption
since his second DUI, although he is careful not to drink and drive.  He does not believe that his
alcohol consumption has affected his personal relationships or work.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that none of the mitigating conditions applied to Applicant’s
circumstances.  He noted that Applicant has not attended AA or received counseling and that he
continues to consume alcohol to the point of intoxication.  The Judge concluded that Applicant had
not established a pattern of responsible alcohol use, nor had he provided a favorable diagnosis from
a medical professional or licensed counselor.  The Judge noted that Applicant’s first offense entailed
a .29% blood alcohol level just four hours before he was to report for duty as a security guard.  In
the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to Applicant’s favorable evidence.  He went on to state,
however, that driving under the influence of alcohol shows a lack of judgment, rehabilitation, and
impulse-control.  
Discussion
Applicant cites to some Hearing Office decisions that he believes support his case for a
clearance.  We have given these cases due consideration as persuasive authority.  However, Hearing
Office decisions are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal Board.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 12-08417 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 24, 2015).  Applicant cites to his favorable evidence,
such as his good work record, his lack of security violations, and the length of time since his last
DUI.  The Judge made findings about Applicant’s favorable evidence and discussed that evidence
in the Analysis.  Applicant’s argument is not enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record.  Neither is it enough to show that the Judge weighed
the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-01509 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 29, 2015).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.   
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
