 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02906 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Thomas Albin, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant smoked marijuana at least once, in May 2012, after being granted a 
security clearance. He was convicted of December 1998 and May 2012 drunk-driving 
offenses and of illegal possession of marijuana in May 2012. Concerns persist about 
Applicant’s reform of his illegal drug involvement. Clearance is denied. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On November 19, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), 
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and explaining why it was unable to find that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his security clearance eligibility. The 
DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
(DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 2 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on December 8, 2014, and he 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA). On April 24, 2015, the case was assigned to me to conduct a 
hearing to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. On April 30, 2015, I issued a Notice of Hearing 
scheduling the hearing for May 28, 2015. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government submitted five exhibits (GEs 
1-5), which were admitted without any objections. Applicant and two of his co-workers 
testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on June 5, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline H (SOR 1.a), and cross-alleged under Guideline J 
(SOR 2.a) and Guideline E (SOR 3.a), that Applicant was charged with operating under the 
influence of alcohol (OUI) and with possession of marijuana in May 2012, for which he was 
sentenced to 90 days loss of license and to attend counseling. The SOR also alleges 
under Guidelines H (SOR 1.b) and E (SOR 3.a) that Applicant used marijuana in May 2012 
when possessing a security clearance. Additionally, under Guidelines J (SOR 2.b) and E 
(SOR 3.a), Applicant is alleged to have been charged with driving under the influence (DUI) 
in December 1998, for which he paid a $150 fine and attended classes.  
 
When he answered the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations without 
explanation. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old high school graduate. He and his spouse have been 
married since September 1979. They have two grown children and three grandchildren. 
(GE 2; Tr. 55-56.) Applicant worked as a pipefitter for his current employer, a defense 
contractor, from February 1980 to April 1997, when he was laid off for reasons unrelated to 
his job performance. He worked in shipping at a paper mill for about five years before 
returning to his current employer around April 2003. (GEs 1, 2; Tr. 50-52, 73.) 
 
 Because of the break in his employment, Applicant had to reapply to work with the 
defense contractor. (Tr. 52-53.) On August 26, 2002, Applicant completed a security 
clearance application (SF 86) for a secret-level security clearance. In response to the 
police record inquiry concerning any alcohol or drug offenses, Applicant disclosed a 
December 1998 DUI arrest, for which he was fined $150 and required to attend alcohol 
education classes. (GE 2.) Applicant had consumed alcohol at a holiday party, and he 
crashed his truck into a wall on the way home. (Tr. 69-70.) He refused to submit to a 
breathalyzer and lost his license for a year. (Tr. 71.) Applicant admits that he was 
intoxicated on that occasion. He refused the breathalyzer because he did not like how he 
was treated by the officer, who used pepper spray on him. (Tr. 84.) Applicant was granted 
a secret-level clearance for his work as a first class pipefitter. (Tr. 54-55.) 
 
 
 3 
 To renew his security clearance eligibility, Applicant completed and certified to the 
accuracy of an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on May 10, 
2013. In response to the police record inquiries, Applicant disclosed an arrest in May 2012 
for DUI and possession of a controlled substance (marijuana). He indicated that he lost his 
driver’s license for 90 days and was required to attend 12 sessions of counseling. In 
response to whether he had illegally used any drug in the last seven years, Applicant 
indicated that he had used THC one time in May 2012. He denied any future intent and 
stated, “I NEED MY SECURITY CLEARANCE AND MY JOB AND WILL NOT RISK 
LOSING IT.” Applicant also responded affirmatively to whether he had been involved in the 
last seven years in the “illegal purchase, manufacture, cultivation, trafficking, production, 
transfer, shipping, receiving, handling or sale of a drug or controlled substance.” He listed 
one involvement, which occurred in May 2012, and added that it was a mistake that would 
not reoccur. Applicant reported his attendance at court-ordered counseling in April 2013 in 
response to drug and alcohol treatment inquiries. (GE 1.) 
 
 Applicant attended substance abuse counseling sessions three times a week from 
March 26, 2013, to April 18, 2013, in the evenings. (GE 5.) At the time he began treatment, 
he was drinking “maybe a six-pack or so” on a daily basis. (Tr. 88.) The counseling 
apparently consisted of individual interactions with the counselor but in a group setting. (Tr. 
87, 100.) He was required to submit to a urine test every week and to abstain from alcohol 
and illegal drugs. (Tr. 87.) Applicant did not have to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meetings, and he has never attended AA. (Tr. 88.) Applicant did not inform the counselor 
that he was drinking a six-pack of beer a day. (Tr. 101.) 
 
 On June 12, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). About his May 2012 arrest, Applicant explained 
that he had consumed beer and had smoked three puffs of marijuana with, and in the 
home of, a person from whom he then bought marijuana to use later. On the way home, he 
was stopped in a spot check and searched. He had a bag of marijuana in his possession 
and was charged with DUI and possession of a controlled substance. In March 2013, he 
was ordered to complete 12 sessions of counseling. About his involvement with marijuana, 
Applicant averred that he smoked marijuana once, in May 2012 with the person from whom 
he had bought marijuana. His reason for smoking the drug was that he had a very bad 
week at work. Applicant denied any intent to use marijuana in the future. He admitted that 
he possessed a security clearance when he used marijuana. Applicant was also asked 
about his current alcohol use. He reported that he drinks beer, one or two, on a daily basis 
at home to unwind. He denied drinking to intoxication and any additional alcohol incidents 
beyond the May 2012 DUI to report. Applicant was then confronted about the December 
1998 DUI. He explained that he had not listed it because it occurred more than 10 years 
ago. (GE 5.) 
 
 A criminal records check showed that Applicant was charged with operating under 
the influence (OUI)
1
 and with felony possession of marijuana in May 2012. A misdemeanor 
                                                 
1 
Under §14-227a of the pertinent state’s statutes, a person commits the offense of operating under the 
influence while driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug or both or while driving with an 
elevated blood alcohol content of .08% or more. 
 
 4 
possession charge was later substituted for the felony drug charge. (GEs 3, 4.) At his 
security clearance hearing, Applicant fabricated the circumstances of his marijuana use 
and purchase, claiming a desire to protect the identity of the person who sold him the drug. 
(Tr. 101.) He testified on direct examination that he was drinking while driving home. (Tr. 
60-61, 66.) He had purchased the marijuana in his possession, but he had not consumed 
any of his supply because the police confiscated it before he could get it home. (Tr. 62-63.) 
  
 When asked on cross-examination to detail his drug use and purchase, Applicant 
reiterated that he smoked marijuana only once, shortly before his arrest in May 2012.  He 
explained that he had “bumped into somebody at the parking lot of the package store,” and 
that he had “maybe two or three hits off of a joint” before he left the parking lot. (Tr. 81-83.) 
He claimed that he could not recall the identity of the person who provided him marijuana. 
Applicant later expressed his belief that his supplier was a high school friend from years 
ago, although he could not recall the person’s name. (Tr. 90, 96.) When confronted with his 
June 2013 discrepant account that he had used marijuana in the home of the person who 
sold him the marijuana, Applicant testified, “I got it from this guy out in [town omitted], at his 
house. I’m not going to give you no names.” (Tr. 97.) Applicant explained that he had 
brought some beers with him to the person’s home and smoked some marijuana with him: 
 
We were drinking at the time, and he happened to come up with a bag of 
weed and says, “You want to buy this?” I said well—can we try a little bit first 
before I decide. Like I said, I took a couple of hits off the stuff, and I said, 
“Okay.” I was on my way home at the time, and I got nailed. (Tr. 98-99.) 
 
Applicant admitted that his supplier was a friend, but he denied socializing with him since 
his arrest in May 2012, because they no longer worked together. (Tr. 100.) 
 
 Applicant knew when he used and purchased marijuana that it was illegal and 
prohibited activity by persons holding a security clearance. (Tr. 76-77, 83.) About his 
rationale for smoking marijuana, Applicant testified that there was stress around his house, 
and he thought he would try the drug. (Tr. 76-77.) He expressed intent not to use marijuana 
in the future “because it’s against division’s policy.” (Tr. 76.) 
 
 Applicant drinks a couple of beers a day after work at home “in the basement away 
from the wife.” (Tr. 78-79.) His spouse believes he has a problem with drinking. She 
expresses her concerns in that regard at times on a daily basis, so he drinks out of her 
presence. (Tr. 85-86.) Applicant denies any recall of the last time that he drank more than 
a six-pack in a day. He has no plans to stop drinking because he does not want to listen to 
his wife. (Tr. 86.) 
 
 Applicant’s general foreman and the shop’s operations manager testified on 
Applicant’s behalf. Neither co-worker has socialized with Applicant off the job. Both confirm 
that Applicant’s work is of first-class quality. (Tr. 20-21, 36-38.) Applicant’s general foreman 
knew that Applicant was stopped at a roadblock for DUI around the time of the offense. He 
later learned that Applicant had used marijuana from conversation in the shop that 
“[Applicant] got popped for it when he got this roadblock.” (Tr. 23-26.) He has never 
 
 5 
smelled marijuana on Applicant. (Tr. 26.) The operations manager had no knowledge of 
any security concerns involving Applicant until he was shown a copy of the SOR a couple 
of days before the security clearance hearing. (Tr. 43.) When asked to assume that the 
allegations were accurate, the operations manager indicated that he still considered 
Applicant to be security worthy. Applicant has been one of his better pipefitters. (Tr. 41, 
45.) Applicant did not inform his facility security officer or his supervisors at work about his 
marijuana use. He did not report his May 2012 arrest to his facility security officer apart 
from listing it on his May 2013 e-QIP. (Tr. 90.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
 
 6 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens),
2
 and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” Disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies because Applicant used marijuana on at 
least one occasion in May 2012. AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia,” applies because Applicant purchased the bag of marijuana that was found 
in his possession in May 2012. AG ¶ 25(g), “any illegal drug use after being granted a 
security clearance,” applies because Applicant held a security clearance when he used and 
purchased marijuana. He smoked marijuana knowing that it was illegal and prohibited 
activity by persons with a DOD security clearance. 
 
Applicant claims three years of abstinence from marijuana with no evidence to the 
contrary. In assessing whether security concerns may have become attenuated by the 
passage of time to no longer cast doubt on an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment, the DOHA Appeal Board has consistently held that it is a question for the 
administrative judge to resolve based on the evidence as a whole. See e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 14-01847 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2015); ISCR Case No. 11-12165 (App. Bd. Jan. 29, 2014). 
Applicant denies any abuse of marijuana beyond the single instance in May 2012. AG ¶ 
                                                 
2
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance. 
 
 
 7 
26(a) contemplates mitigation when the drug involvement is “so infrequent” to not cast 
doubt about a person’s current judgment: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 However, the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s marijuana abuse reflect 
adversely on his judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability, and make it difficult to conclude 
with confidence that there will be no recurrence. Applicant used marijuana with a friend in 
the friend’s home. Applicant would have the Government believe that his friend asked him 
to purchase some marijuana and that he did not go looking for the drug. Even so, Applicant 
knew that using marijuana was not only illegal but prohibited conduct while holding a 
security clearance. He used marijuana and purchased some for later. He likely would have 
used the marijuana purchased had he not been arrested on the way home and his 
marijuana confiscated. To the extent that AG ¶ 26(a) applies, it does not address the 
lingering concerns about Applicant’s use and purchase of marijuana to alleviate stress at 
home and work. 
 
 On his e-QIP, during his subject interview, and at his hearing, Applicant denied any 
intent of future marijuana involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(b), “a demonstrated intent not to 
abuse any drugs in the future” can be shown by: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation. 
 
 Concerning AG ¶ 26(b)(1), Applicant only reluctantly and after confrontation 
admitted at his hearing that he had smoked marijuana with a friend from work. He initially 
fabricated the circumstances of his drug involvement, after being advised that is it a felony 
offense to make a false statement under Title 18, Section 1001 of the United States Code. 
He falsely claimed that he had “bumped into” an old high school friend, whose name he 
cannot now recall, in the parking lot of a package store, and that this friend offered him the 
marijuana he smoked. After being confronted with the inconsistency in his accounts of his 
marijuana use, Applicant admitted that he had used marijuana with a now former co-
worker. He refused to provide the friend’s name and claimed that he has not seen this 
person since they socialized in May 2012. Under the circumstances, it is difficult to apply 
AG ¶ 26(b) without some corroboration of his claimed disassociation from drug-using 
associates, avoidance of the environment where he used marijuana, and abstinence. His 
expressed reason for not using any illegal drug in the future, in that it is against his 
department’s policy and he needs his security clearance and his employment, did not 
 
 8 
prevent him from using and purchasing marijuana in May 2012. He demonstrated an 
unacceptable willingness to disregard the prohibition against illegal drug involvement. 
Available facts are not sufficient to adequately rule out the risk of future drug involvement. 
Applicant continues to experience marital stress. His spouse’s complaints about his 
drinking have led him to drink in the basement, and work and marital stress apparently led 
him to smoke marijuana in May 2012. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern about criminal conduct is articulated in AG ¶ 31: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 The criminal conduct concerns are established by Applicant’s convictions of the 
December 1998 DUI and the May 2012 OUI and illegal possession of a controlled 
substance (marijuana). Two disqualifying conditions are implicated: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 Applicant’s alcohol-related criminal incidents occurred sufficiently far apart to allay 
concerns about a pattern of drunk-driving that is likely to recur, especially given his present 
pattern of drinking no more than one or two beers at a sitting. He has shown some 
rehabilitation by reducing his consumption from the six-pack of beer daily that he had been 
drinking around the time that he began court-ordered counseling in March 2013. Although 
his spouse continues to express her concerns about his drinking, his consumption of one 
or two beers, even on a daily basis, is not considered excessive in the absence of a 
diagnosed alcohol problem. However, for the reasons already noted under Guideline H, the 
drug-related criminal activity continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Furthermore, by lying at his hearing about the 
circumstances of his drug involvement, be it to protect the identity of the former co-worker 
or more likely to make it appear that his drug use was happenstance and aberrational, 
Applicant committed felonious conduct under Title 18, Section 1001 of the United States 
Code. Under the circumstances, I cannot find that he is successfully rehabilitated of his 
criminal behavior. Despite the passage of time since his last arrest, neither AG ¶ 32(a) nor 
AG ¶ 32(d) is adequately established. They provide as follows: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
 
 9 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant’s positive contributions at work weigh in his favor, but they do not overcome the 
criminal conduct concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concerns about personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Concerning the Government’s case for disqualification under the personal conduct 
guideline because of Applicant’s arrest record and the fact that he used marijuana while 
holding a clearance, the DOHA Appeal Board has held that security-related conduct can be 
alleged under more than one guideline, and in an appropriate case, be given independent 
weight under each. See ISCR 11-06672 (App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2012). Applicant’s drunk-driving 
and his illegal drug involvement in knowing violation of his obligations as a cleared 
employee, raise concerns about his judgment generally under AG ¶ 15. It is adverse 
information, which, when considered as a whole, would support a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, and unreliability under AG ¶ 
16(c): 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any single guideline, but which, 
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified information. 
  
 Moreover, drunk-driving and illegal drug use and purchase are activities, which, if 
known, may affect his professional standing under AG ¶ 16(e): 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, my affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. 
 
 
 10 
AG ¶ 16(e) applies in that Applicant apparently made no effort to timely inform his 
employer about his May 2012 arrest or his marijuana use. He did not inform his facility 
security officer. Applicant’s general foreman knew only that Applicant had been stopped for 
DUI at a roadblock. He did not learn until later that Applicant had been “popped” for 
marijuana. The shop’s operations manager, who also testified on Applicant’s behalf, 
learned that Applicant had been arrested and had used marijuana only a couple of days 
before Applicant’s security clearance hearing when he was shown the SOR by Applicant’s 
counsel. 
 
 Similar to AG ¶ 26(a) under Guideline H and AG ¶ 32(a) under Guideline J, AG ¶ 
17(c) provides for mitigation because of the passage of time, infrequency, or unusual 
circumstance: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
  
 Applicant posed a risk to the public and to his own health and safety by operating a 
motor vehicle while intoxicated in December 1998 and while consuming beer in May 2012. 
His offenses cannot reasonably be characterized as so minor, although they were 
infrequent. His use of marijuana, in knowing contravention of the law and his obligations as 
a cleared employee, is an aggravating factor when considering whether he possesses the 
sound judgment that must be demanded of those persons entrusted with classified 
information. 
 
 Applicant is credited with disclosing his May 2012 charges and marijuana use on his 
e-QIP. He apparently completed counseling to the court’s satisfaction. Although it is 
unclear what he learned about substance abuse, he has moderated his drinking since the 
counseling. There is no evidence that he has abused marijuana since May 2012. Applicant 
admits that he knew when he smoked marijuana that it was illegal to do so and prohibited 
while he held a DOD clearance. He shows some reform under AG ¶ 17(d), which provides 
as follows: 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
At the same time, Applicant undermined his case in rehabilitation by showing that his 
representations about his drug involvement cannot completely be relied on. His drug use 
as a cleared employee is conduct that could affect his standing on his job, and while his 
general foreman and his operations manager are aware that he has used marijuana, there 
is no indication that either co-worker knew about Applicant’s purchase and his obvious 
intent to use the drug more than the one time in May 2012. While AG ¶ 17(c), AG ¶ 17(d), 
and AG ¶ 17(e), “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
 
 11 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress,” are satisfied in some aspects, concerns persist 
about Applicant’s judgment in abusing marijuana while he held a security clearance. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).
3
 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(c), I have 
to consider Applicant’s very poor judgment in drinking alcohol while operating a motor 
vehicle and using marijuana knowing it was contrary to his obligations as a cleared 
employee. Furthermore, the investigative and adjudicative process requires, and the 
Government has a legitimate expectation, that applicants for security clearance eligibility 
will respond accurately to inquiries. By misrepresenting the circumstances of his drug 
involvement at his security clearance hearing, Applicant raised considerable doubts about 
his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9
th
 Cir. 1990.). For the reasons 
noted above, based on the facts before me and the adjudicative guidelines that I am 
required to consider, I am unable to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue security clearance eligibility for Applicant at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
                                                 
3
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 12 
  Subparagraph 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
