 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03793 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations and drug involvement 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and H (drug involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 12, 2014, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on March 18, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on April 28, 2015. As of July 29, 2015, he had not responded. The 
case was assigned to me on July 31, 2015. The Government exhibits included in the 
FORM are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old prospective employee of a defense contractor. His job 
is contingent upon receipt of a security clearance. He attended college for a period, but 
he did not earn a degree. He has never married. He has a minor child.1   
 
 Applicant started smoking marijuana when he was a teenager. It progressed to 
the point where he was smoking marijuana almost every day. He bought the marijuana 
from friends and acquaintances about every two weeks.2   
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2007 and charged with refusal to take a breathalyzer 
and possession of marijuana. A bag of marijuana was found in his car. He was found 
guilty of refusal to take a breathalyzer, and the possession of marijuana charge was 
dismissed. His driver’s license was suspended for six months, and he was fined 
$2,500.3   
 
 Applicant listed his marijuana use and his arrest and conviction on his 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), which he submitted in January 
2014. He noted that he last used marijuana in October 2013. He wrote that he did not 
intend to use illegal drugs in the future because he “need[s] a job.” He was interviewed 
for his background investigation in February 2014. He reiterated that he had not used 
marijuana since October 2013. He also stated that he did not intend to use marijuana in 
the future because he knew that it would affect his ability to obtain a job. He stated that 
he no longer associated with anyone who uses illegal drugs.4   
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems. He has a sporadic work record with 
seasonal work and extended periods of unemployment. He filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
in 2006, and his debts were discharged the same year.5   
 
The SOR alleges Applicant’s bankruptcy and 13 delinquent debts with balances 
totaling about $19,900. Applicant admitted owing all the debts. Each debt is also listed 
on at least one credit report.6   
                                                          
1 Items 3, 6.  
 
2 Items 2, 3, 6.  
 
3 Items 2, 3, 6.  
 
4 Items 3, 6.  
 
5 Items 2, 3, 6.  
 
6 Items 2, 4-6.  
 
 
3 
 
Applicant was unemployed when he submitted his SF 86 and when he was 
interviewed for his background investigation. His current job status is unknown. He told 
the background investigator in February 2014 that he was unable to pay any of his 
delinquent debts at that time, but he would start paying them if he obtained a job. There 
is no evidence of any payments toward his delinquent debts.7   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
7 Items 3, 6.  
 
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
 (a) any drug abuse;8 and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant purchased, possessed, and used marijuana for numerous years. AG 
¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) are applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 (b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
  (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant has used marijuana since October 2013. He 
stated that he did not intend to use marijuana in the future because it would affect his 
                                                          
8 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
5 
 
ability to obtain a job. He also stated that he no longer associated with anyone who 
uses drugs.  
 
 However, Applicant chose to violate the law on hundreds, if not thousands, of 
occasions by possessing and using marijuana on a daily basis. Because Applicant 
chose to proceed without a hearing, I was unable to question him and gauge his 
credibility. I find that Applicant’s drug use continues to cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are partially applicable. 
Notwithstanding, I conclude that security concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant has a sporadic work record with seasonal work and extended periods 
of unemployment. However, he was using marijuana on a daily basis. He did not pay his 
debts, but he was able to fund his marijuana use. There is no evidence of any payments 
toward his delinquent debts, but he stated that he would start paying them if he obtained 
a job. The Appeal Board has held that “intentions to pay off debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible approaches.” See 
ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-
08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)).  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d) are not 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find that financial considerations 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and H in this whole-person analysis.  
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations and drug involvement security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
