 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01836 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 6, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On February 27, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and she elected to have 
her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 6, 2015, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
 
2 
 
 
mailed to Applicant, and it was received on June 1, 2015. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object and the documents were admitted into evidence. In response to 
the FORM, Applicant submitted additional information, which was admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on August 12, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.g, and 1.l. She admitted 
the remaining SOR allegations. I have incorporated her admissions into the findings of 
fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. She has worked for her present employer, a federal 
contractor, since 1985. She married in 1983 and divorced in 2000. She has not served 
in the military. She has a 30-year-old daughter.1 
 
Applicant provided proof that she paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.m.2 The 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($6,188) was owed to the IRS for delinquent taxes for tax year 2005. 
Applicant provided documentation to show her wages were garnished from 
approximately November 2005 through August 2007 to resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g.3 
She was interviewed by a government investigator in 2006, and she disclosed that the 
reason for the delinquent taxes was because she failed to have sufficient money 
withheld from her income.  
 
Applicant indicated she paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.l, but failed to provide 
corroborating documents. She stated she contacted the creditors for the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a and 1.b and was advised there is no record of the debts. A May 2013 credit 
report reflects that SOR ¶ 1.a ($914) is an unsatisfied judgment and SOR ¶ 1.b ($592) 
is an individual account in collection.4  
 
 Applicant admitted that she failed to timely file her state income tax returns for 
tax years 2006 through 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.c). She admitted she owes delinquent taxes to 
her state for 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.e - $5,687) and 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.f - $5,597). These taxes 
remain unpaid. In her response to the FORM, she indicated that her 2006 state tax 
return is not yet filed as she is waiting for the commercial tax preparer to download the 
appropriate software for that tax year. She provided copies of her 2007 through 2012 
state tax returns that were filed on April 2, 2015. The returns show she owes the 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Item 2, attachments 2-3. 
 
3 Item 3, attachment 1. 
 
4 Item 8. 
 
 
3 
 
 
following for each tax year: 2008 - $3,374; 2009 - $3,758; 2010 - $4,067; 2011 - $4,369; 
and 2012 - $2,838. These amounts may do not include penalties and interest.5  
 
 Applicant admitted she did not timely file her 2011 and 2012 federal income tax 
returns (SOR ¶ 1.d). She filed them on April 13, 2015. It appears she is entitled to a 
refund of $1,619 for tax year 2012 and owes $3,545 for 2011. She admitted she is 
indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for delinquent 2008 and 2010 federal 
income taxes (SOR ¶ 1.h - $9,296; SOR ¶ 1.i- $9,936).6  
 
Applicant has not made payments on her delinquent state or federal income 
taxes because she is waiting for the state and IRS to provide her with the total amount 
she owes, along with penalties and interest. She then hopes she will be able to 
participate in a tax forgiveness program, which will potentially reduce the penalties and 
interest owed. Once she is provided with a total amount she owes to both the state and 
the IRS, she intends to make an initial payment and the remainder through a monthly 
installment agreement until the debts are satisfied. She indicated refunds she may have 
been entitled to were applied to her tax debts. Specifics and documents reflecting the 
application of refunds were not provided. 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to her 2000 divorce. Her financial 
problems continually worsened with time. She noted she had a daughter in college and 
a mortgage. She indicated she did not receive support, presumably from her ex-
husband. She stated she paid her taxes, but did not file on time. She experienced stress 
trying to make ends meet and keep her daughter in school. In March 2012, she had a 
stroke and was hospitalized for a month, and spent three months in a rehabilitative 
center. She continues with the rehabilitation process. She continues to work, but is 
limited in some things. She sold her house in October 2014 and stated for the first time 
she is in a position to pay what she owes and not live paycheck to paycheck. She 
indicated she is attempting to pay all of her outstanding debts. She stated she does not 
live beyond her means. She acknowledged she used poor judgment and made bad 
decisions about her finances.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
5 Response to FORM with attachments.  
 
6 Response to FORM with attachments. 
 
7 Answer to SOR; Response to FORM.  
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant failed to timely file her state income tax returns from 2006 through 
2012. She failed to timely file her 2011 and 2012 federal income tax returns. She has a 
delinquent state tax debt for 2006 and 2007. She had delinquent federal tax debts for 
2005, 2008 and 2010. Applicant has other delinquent debts that are unresolved. I find 
the above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
6 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant resolved the debts in SOR ¶ 1.k, 1.m, and 1.g. Applicant indicated she 
paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.l. I found her statements credible and find in favor of 
her on these minor medical debts. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to these debts. 
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence or documents to dispute the 
legitimacy of the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a and debt in ¶ 1.b. She did not provide 
documented proof of any actions she has taken to resolve the issues. The debts are 
unresolved. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Applicant admitted she failed to timely file her state income tax returns for 2006 
through 2012 and federal income tax returns for 2011 and 2012. She did not provide an 
explanation for why she did not file the returns on time. She did not file her delinquent 
state or federal income tax returns until April 2015, after she received the SOR. Her 
2006 state tax return is not yet filed due to a software issue. It appears she owes 
additional state income taxes. None of the delinquent taxes are paid. She intended to 
wait for a full accounting from the state and the IRS. Applicant’s conduct is recent and 
there is insufficient evidence to conclude it occurred under unique circumstances. Her 
repeated failure to comply with her civic duty of timely filing her tax returns casts doubt 
on her reliability, trustworthiness and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to her 2000 divorce. Presumably her 
stroke in 2012 impacted her ability to file her 2012 tax returns on time. Her medical 
problems were beyond her control. Her divorce was also beyond her control. However, 
its mitigation is minimized by the passage of time. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), 
Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. She offered insufficient 
evidence to explain why she failed to timely file her state income tax returns from 2006 
to 2012 and her federal income tax returns for 2011 and 2012. Although, her 2012 
stroke impacted her ability to file her 2011 tax return on time, she did not provide a 
credible explanation for why it took two years after the due date to file her federal 
income tax returns for 2011 and 2012. No explanation was offered regarding the other 
delinquent taxes. Applicant did file the delinquent returns after she received the SOR. 
She has not begun to make payments to resolve her tax debts. AG ¶ 20(b) marginally 
applies.  
 
Applicant provided copies of her filed tax returns. She has not provided any other 
correspondence or documents to show actions she has taken to set up payment plans 
with each entity. There is no evidence she participated in financial counseling. There is 
some evidence, through the recent filing of her delinquent tax returns, to show she is 
attempting to resolve her tax debts, but the evidence is insufficient to conclude her 
financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) marginally applies.  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 54 years old. She has a history of failing to timely file her state and 
federal income tax returns. She also has a history of not paying her taxes when due, as 
shown by her wages being garnished for her 2005 federal income taxes and other 
delinquent tax debts. She has other delinquent debts that remain unresolved. Applicant 
failed to provide a credible and reasonable explanation for her actions. Her subsequent 
filing of the tax returns is insufficient to overcome her burden of persuasion and the 
security concerns. She has not paid the state and federal taxes owed, except for one 
year through garnishment. Applicant’s disregard for her legal and civic responsibilities is 
a concern. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
  Subparagraph   1.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.i:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.m:  For Applicant  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
