 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00437 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to submit sufficient documentary evidence to mitigate Guideline F 
security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On March 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. Applicant received the SOR on 
September 9, 2014. 
 
In a December 26, 2014, response, Applicant admitted three of the six 
allegations raised in the SOR and requested a determination based on the written 
record. On May 28, 2015, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) 
that contained six attachments. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on August 11, 2015. Based on my review of the case file and 
submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns.    
 
 
 
 
2 
          Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old who recently has worked in the computer information 
area, including positions such as desktop support. He served on active duty in the 
United States military from 1997 until 2011, when he was honorably discharged. He has 
earned a high school diploma and is attending college. He is married. At issue are six 
delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant admits three of the obligations set forth in the SOR:  
 
1) An Internal Revenue Service (IRS) debt for the tax years 2011 and 2012 – 
Allegation 1.a. The SOR alleges that the amount owed is $4,000, but 
Applicant reports that it is for $5,000. (FORM, Item 2 at 3) He writes that a 
repayment program has been negotiated with the IRS, on which he claims to 
have been in timely repayment since April 2012. No corroborating 
documentary evidence of either the plan or timely payments was introduced. 
2) A $209 delinquent debt owed to a power company – Allegation 1.b. Applicant 
writes this was paid in full and provides a confirmation number, presumably 
for the transaction. No documentary evidence, however, was introduced 
evidencing that this debt has been paid. 
3) A $4,608 debt to a credit card – Allegation 1.d. Applicant reports he has been 
in repayment on this debt for approximately six months. He writes he makes 
monthly payments of $100. No documentary evidence, however, was 
presented to corroborate this assertion. 
 
Applicant also denies three of the delinquent debts cited in the SOR. These debts are 
for a credit card ($7,432) – Allegation 1.c, credit card ($5,648) – Allegation 1.e, and a 
local collection effort ($633) – Allegation 1.f. Applicant urges that these debts are not on 
his credit report, but they are on the credit report for his father. A letter from his parent’s 
states that Applicant’s father takes responsibility for these three accounts. A letter from 
Applicant’s counselor states that the counselor’s research corroborates these claims. 
Docket sheets for judgments against Applicant’s parents for entities and sums similar to 
those at issue in SOR allegations 1.c and 1.e were provided. No documents are offered 
corroborating claims regarding SOR allegation 1.f. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
 
 
 
 
3 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant was 
delinquent on six obligations for a total debt balance of over $20,000. This is sufficient 
to invoke two of the financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
Multiple delinquent debts remain unpaid. As a threshold issue, however, it 
appears the two credit card debts noted in allegations 1.c and 1.e are reasonably 
disputed. Court records and a letter from Applicant’s father tend to show that the father, 
not Applicant, is responsible for these debts. Consequently, I find that AG ¶ (e) applies 
to these accounts. 
 
The remaining debts amount to nearly $10,000. No nexus was drawn between 
these debts and any particular set of causes, although a period of unemployment in 
2011 was shown. Applicant failed, however, to show that he acted responsibly 
regarding his debts at the time. Moreover, it is unknown whether Applicant has received 
financial counseling. Although he writes that three of these debts are in repayment 
under established plans, there is no documentary evidence of such payment or any 
underlying repayment plans. Consequently, Applicant’s admitted delinquent debts still 
represent security concerns.  
 
 
 
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a mature, educated man with significant military experience. He 
experienced a period of unemployment around the time of, or shortly after, his 
honorable discharge from the military in 2011. Applicant provides scant details about 
this period. While sufficient evidence was provided to demonstrate two of the debts at 
issue are rightly disputed, he provided no documentary evidence of his purported 
progress and efforts toward the rest of the debts at issue.  
 
This process does not require an applicant to address all debts at issue. It does, 
however, demand that an applicant articulate a workable plan to address his delinquent 
debts, and demonstrate that his plan has been successfully implemented. Here, 
Applicant failed to meet his burden on his admitted delinquent debts. Given the 
delinquent sum yet outstanding, the limited facts presented, and the lack of 
documentation, financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
