 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-04092 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 21, 2014, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On December 8, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 23, 2014. He 
answered the SOR in writing the same day, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 23, 
2015, and I received the case assignment on February 24, 2015. DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on April 13, 2015, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 6, 2015. 
 
2 
 
 
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without objection. 
Applicant testified and did not submit any exhibits at the hearing. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 14, 2015. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the 
record open until May 22, 2015, to submit additional matters.  On May 21, 2015, he 
submitted Exhibits A to D, without objection. The record closed on May 22, 2015. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 
and 1.e of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d 
and 1.f of the SOR. He neither admitted nor denied the allegations in Paragraph 2, but 
stated he misread Section 26 of the e-QIP and will work to resolve his debts. He also 
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance.   
 
Applicant is 48 years old and married. He has two children, both of whom have 
graduated from college and do not live at home. He is the prime wage earner in his 
family. He works as a security guard for a defense contractor. (Tr. 13-15, 28, 44; Exhibit 
1) 
 
Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in June 2003 with liabilities of $214,032.62 
(Subparagraph 1.a). The debts listed in the bankruptcy include two car loans, credit 
card purchases, and utility bills. Some of the same creditors he owed then are owed 
now as listed in the SOR. His Schedule F shows a deficiency mortgage in 2003 of 
$98,000 and is listed along with the residence mortgage of $91,000 on his home. His 
debts were discharged by the court on October 1, 2003. (Tr. 15, 16; Exhibits 1-5) 
 
The SOR lists five delinquent debts owed by Applicant. The amount of the debts 
totals $14,878. (SOR; Exhibits 2-4)  
 
Applicant owes a creditor for a repossessed automobile $7,964 (Subparagraph 
1.b). He stopped paying on this debt in 2009. It is unresolved. (Tr. 17-19; Exhibits 1-5) 
 
Applicant owes a bank $5,169 for a van that was repossessed when he stopped 
paying the debt (Subparagraph 1.c). This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 20, 21; Exhibits 1-5) 
 
Applicant owes a cellular telephone company $933 (Subparagraph 1.d). He paid 
$695 in two payments using his debit card. He was supposed to send in proof from his 
checking account that he paid the debt, but instead submitted an email from the 
collection agency showing the debt was paid. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 21; Exhibits 1-
5, A) 
 
Applicant owes a credit card company $612 (Subparagraph 1.e). He was paying 
on this account but stopped when his wife wanted to return to school for a degree. He 
 
3 
 
 
paid her tuition from his income instead of the debt. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 22; 
Exhibits 1-5) 
 
Applicant owes a local municipality for a traffic violation in the amount of $200 
(Subparagraph 1.f). Applicant stated he had not received a letter from the municipality 
seeking payment for the debt so he was unaware of it until the Government investigator 
spoke to him in May 2014. This debt is not paid and is unresolved. (Tr. 23, 33; Exhibits 
1-5) 
 
Applicant had $2,840 of unpaid parking tickets in the city where he works. This 
debt was not listed in the SOR. Applicant testified he paid all of them using an 
installment payment plan with that municipality. These debts are resolved. (Tr. 32) 
 
In 2012 Applicant purchased a new automobile for $24,000 for use by his wife. 
He takes public transit to work. She uses the car. He pays $617 monthly on the car 
loan, which is current. (Tr. 33-35; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
Applicant filed his federal and state income tax returns. The Internal Revenue 
Service claims he owes about $3,000 more taxes on his 2013 tax return. Applicant 
contests that debt and has his tax preparer working on the issue. This debt is not listed 
in the SOR and is unresolved because Applicant did not submit any documents to show 
it was resolved. (Tr. 23; Exhibits 1-5) 
 
Applicant earns $21.40 an hour. That amount would make his weekly gross 
income $856. His monthly income would be $3,424, and his annual income $41,088. 
His wife graduated from college with a Masters’ degree in Business Administration and 
is looking for a job at the present time. He stated it would be easier for him to resolve 
his debts with his wife out of college and with him moving from a house to an apartment. 
(Tr. 26, 27, 30; Exhibit 1; Answer) 
 
Applicant did not disclose on his e-QIP in Section 26 (“Financial Record”) that he 
had a vehicle repossessed in the past seven years, as the question was asked. He also 
did not disclose his delinquent debts in Section 26 that are listed in Subparagraphs 1.b 
to 1.f. Applicant stated in his Answer that he misread the question, not thinking it 
pertained to the present time, and that he would speak with a lawyer about resolving his 
debts. He also testified that he thought his Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2003 resolved all his 
debts. He stated he thought he disclosed his 2009 and 2012 vehicle repossessions on 
the e-QIP. (Tr. 29, 30; Exhibits 1-5; Answer) 
 
Applicant submitted three character statements as exhibits. One letter was from 
his supervisor who has known him since 2002. He vouches for Applicant’s integrity and 
honesty. The second letter was from his pastor at church, writing of Applicant’s charity 
and character while handling the church collection and other sensitive matters. The third 
letter is from a co-worker of 13 years who has observed Applicant’s professional 
demeanor and handling of security issues at the business location where they work. 
(Exhibits B-D) 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant discharged his debts in 2003 in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Subsequently, 
he accumulated $14,878 in additional delinquent debt from 2004 to the present time 
Applicant has five delinquent debts listed in the SOR. Both these disqualifying 
conditions are established.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. One condition may be applicable:   
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
Applicant paid one debt listed in the SOR, the cellular telephone bill for $933. He 
has not paid any of the other four listed delinquent debts. He also owes about $3,000 on 
his 2013 federal income tax. Despite his second vehicle repossession in 2012, he went 
to a dealership and purchased a new car for $24,000. These actions, coupled with his 
history of delinquencies beginning with the 2003 Chapter 7 bankruptcy and continuing 
through the present time show no other mitigating conditions are established. AG ¶ 
20(d) has partial application on one small debt.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. One condition applies: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant deliberately did not disclose his vehicle repossessions from 2009 or 
2012. He intentionally did not disclose his five delinquent debts on his e-QIP in Section 
26. AG ¶ 16(a) is established.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. After 
considering each one as it might relate to the facts in this case, I find that none are 
established. 
 
Applicant did not make any prompt or good-faith efforts to correct his failure to 
disclose his repossession or delinquent debt. No one gave him incorrect advice on 
completing the e-QIP. He has not taken any actions to reduce any vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s explanations for failing to disclose his financial history since 2007 are 
not credible or persuasive. He thought a 2003 bankruptcy resolved his debts even 
though he incurred many after that date. He thought he disclosed his debts while 
answering “no” to Section 26 of the e-QIP. Applicant testified he had nothing to hide, but 
he did hide his debts. He did not make any additional disclosures on the e-QIP which 
would have lead the government to investigate his financial history. Therefore, none of 
the mitigating conditions are established to counter his deliberate failure to list his debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The character statements for 
Applicant are glowing about his honesty and integrity. They do not address his financial 
status and why non-disclosure of debt on a government questionnaire for a security 
clearance is proper conduct. His explanations are not persuasive or credible.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. He did not mitigate his personal conduct security concerns. I conclude 
the whole-person concept against Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b and 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e and 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
