 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-06359 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 7, 2014. On 
February 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 25, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 6, 
2015, and the case was assigned to me on May 8, 2015. On the same day, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for June 4, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
 
2 
 
(GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through C, which were admitted without objection. 
I kept the record open until June 19, 2015, to enable him to submit additional evidence. 
He timely submitted AX D and E, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on June 15, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f-1.h, 1.m, 
1.o, 1.r, and 1.t. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.i-1.l, 1.n, 1.p, 1.q, 1.s, and 1.u. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old security guard employed by a defense contractor since 
April 2014. He previously worked as a corrections officer for a state government. He has 
never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant was unemployed for about four months before beginning his current 
job. His job with the state government was about 70 miles from his residence. His 
normal shift was 12 hours, and sometimes he was required to work 16 hours. The 
combination of a long commute, long hours, and the pressure of working around 
dangerous prisoners was difficult and exhausting. (Tr. 36-37.) He applied for his current 
job while he was still employed by the state, but it took about four months to process his 
job application and hire him. He withdrew money from his state retirement fund to pay 
living expenses while he was unemployed. (Tr. 36-38.)  
 
 One of Applicant’s fellow corrections officers submitted a letter on his behalf. He 
described Applicant as devoted to his job, placing his family and his job first, and willing 
to work extra shifts to pay for family expenses. He states that Applicant worked with 
death-row inmates and demonstrated that he could be trusted with sensitive 
information. (AX A.) 
 
 Applicant has never married, but he has cohabited since April 2008 with his 
fiancée. They have has a four-year-old daughter and a four-month-old son, and his 
fiancée has two children from a previous relationship. (Tr. 15.) 
 
 The SOR alleges 21 delinquent debts totaling about $15,500. Applicant admitted 
ten debts totaling about $8,900. He denied the remaining debts. All the debts alleged in 
the SOR are reflected on Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) dated May 16, 2014 
and November 13, 2014. (GX 3; GX 4.)  
 
 Applicant denied the telecommunications debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.p, 
claiming he never had an account with that service provider. (Answer to SOR; GX 2 at 
7.) He later learned that his mother had opened the accounts, using his name and 
social security number. (Tr. 64.) He received offers to settle the two accounts for 50% of 
the amount due, but he was financially unable to accept the offers. (AX B; AX C.) Both 
accounts were with the same service provider and referred to the same collection 
 
3 
 
agency. He later made one $71 payment to the collection agency. (AX D.) He testified 
that he contacted the original creditor, who told him that he needed a police report to 
dispute the debts. (Tr. 65-66.) He has not filed disputes with the creditor, the collection 
agency, or the credit reporting agencies. The debts are unresolved.  
 
 The past-due debt in SOR ¶ 1.e and the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.m are based on 
the same car loan. Applicant encountered expensive repairs on the car, could not afford 
to pay for repairs and make his loan payments, and surrendered the car to the dealer. 
His employer, the state department of corrections, began garnishing his pay in 
December 2011 to satisfy the judgment, at the rate of $230 twice a month for three 
months and then $230 per month. The garnishment stopped when Applicant began his 
current job with a defense contractor. The debt is unresolved. (GX 2 at 4.) 
 
 The collection account in SOR ¶ 1.q and the judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 
1.l, and 1.n arose from the same rental contract. Applicant rented an apartment, where 
he lived with his mother and grandmother. The contract was solely in his name. He 
moved out of the apartment, but his mother and grandmother remained there. His 
mother promised to pay the rent, but did not. The judgments are unsatisfied, and the 
collection accounts opened after the judgments were filed are unpaid. (GX 2 at 4.) 
 
 On a date not reflected in the record, Applicant made one payment of $40 on the 
credit card account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. (AX D.) The debt is unresolved. 
 
 Applicant testified that he contracted the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c about a 
month before the hearing, but they had not responded. (Tr. 27, 46, 47.) He contacted 
the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.d, who refused to accept a payment plan. (Tr. 48). He testified 
that he contacted the creditor in SOR 1.h and arranged to pay the debt on the day 
following the hearing. (Tr. 51.) However, he did not include any documentation of 
payment in his post-hearing submission. He has not contacted the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 
1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.t. (Tr. 48-52, 62.) At the hearing, he testified that he had paid the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.o and was making payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.r, but he 
submitted no documentation of payments. (Tr. 59-61.) As of the date the record closed, 
Applicant had not resolved any of the debts alleged in the SOR. Some of the debts are 
duplicates. 
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement (PFS) reflecting that he earns 
$16.19 per hour. His income for a 40-hour week is $647.60, or about $2,590 per month. 
His monthly expenses are about $2,456, leaving him a net remainder of about $134. 
(AX E.) He has depleted his retirement funds, has about $30 in the bank, and has no 
funds set aside for emergencies. (Tr. 72.) Applicant’s fiancée works full time as a 
security officer at a hospital. Her take-home pay is about $1,300 per month. (Tr. 43-44.) 
His PFS does not accurately reflect his family’s monthly net remainder, because it does 
not reflect his fiancée’s income. 
  
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
5 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The evidence reflects that the delinquent car payment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is 
included in the unsatisfied judgment in SOR ¶ 1.m. The medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g 
and 1.t have the same account numbers and are for the same amount. When the same 
conduct is alleged more than once in the SOR under the same guideline, the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I will resolve SOR ¶ 1.e 
and 1.g in Applicant’s favor.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his CBRs, establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s debts are recent, numerous, and were 
not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant incurred some debts through 
circumstances beyond his control: his mother’s fraudulent opening of a 
telecommunications account in his name, his mother’s failure to keep her agreement to 
pay the rent for an apartment rented by Applicant, and unexpected medical expenses 
for himself and his children. However, he has not acted responsibly. Although he 
contacted the creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d, he has not contracted the 
creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.g, 1.i, and 1.t. He did not follow through on his promise to pay 
the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.h. He has not resolved any of the smaller medical debts, 
such as SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($40) and 1.t ($85) 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. There is no evidence of financial counseling, and 
Applicant’s debts are not under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Good faith means acting in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case 
No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant’s pay was 
garnished to satisfy the judgments against him while he was a state employee. 
However, payment by involuntary garnishment, “is not the same as, or similar to, a 
good-faith initiation of repayment by the debtor.” ISCR Case No. 09-05700 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 24, 2011), citing ISCR Case No. 08-06058 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2009). Applicant 
claimed that he had paid the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.f, but he submitted no 
documentation to support his claim. None of the debts are resolved; nor have any debts 
been significantly reduced by partial payments. Applicant has promised to pay his 
debts, but a promise to pay a delinquent debt in the future is not a substitute for a track 
record of paying debts in a timely manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 
19, 2008). 
 
7 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish resolution of every 
debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to resolve financial 
problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The adjudicative guidelines 
do not require that an individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, 
nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 
07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant has no plan and has not taken any 
significant actions to resolve his debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Although Applicant believes that the 
telecommunication debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.p were fraudulently incurred by his 
mother, he has not filed disputes with the original creditor, the collection agency, or the 
credit reporting bureaus. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has a reputation for hard work and dedication to his family. He was 
candid and sincere at the hearing. However, he is overwhelmed by his debts and 
appears to lack the financial and organizational skills required to gain financial stability. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial problems. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.u:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
