 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-05624 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 27, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86). On February 17, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that 
 
2 
 
 
his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be granted or denied.  
 
On March 9, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On May 20, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On June 1, 2015, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On June 11, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for July 8, 2015. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received into evidence 
without objection.  
 
Applicant did not call any witnesses, testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A through P, which were received into evidence without objection.  I held the 
record open until July 24, 2015 to afford the Applicant an opportunity to submit 
additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE Q through AE U, which were 
received into evidence without objection. On July 17, 2015, DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., and 1.e.; and 
denied SOR ¶ 1.c.; with explanations. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make 
the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old independent agent employed by a defense contractor 
since January 2008. He seeks a security clearance as a condition of his continued 
employment. (GE 1; Tr. 14-15, 41-42)  
 
Applicant served in the Army National Guard from May 1990 to July 1992, was 
honorably discharged as a private first class (pay grade E-3). He was awarded an 
associate of arts degree in criminal justice in September 2010. (GE 1; AE K - AE L; 
Tr.15, 42-43)  
 
Applicant was married from October 26, 1991 to July 1, 2007, and that 
marriage ended by divorce. He remarried on July 26, 2007. His current wife is 
employed full time as a registered nurse. (GE 1; Tr. 41) Applicant has an adult son 
who is working with him in the trucking business and an 11-year-old stepdaughter. 
(GE 1; Tr. 17, 19, 42) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges five allegations under this concern: a Chapter 7 
Bankruptcy, a 2009 judgment, two charged-off accounts, and one collection account. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e)  Details regarding those five allegations and their status follow. 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – Chapter 7 Bankruptcy filed in 2005 and discharged in 2006. 
Applicant experienced a substantial income reduction as a result of his employer 
reducing his work hours in 2005, and he fell behind on his debts. He took a job in a 
different location to repay creditors. His absence from home led to his separation in 
2006 and divorce in 2007. Applicant filed bankruptcy to recover from the debts he had 
at the time. (SOR answer; Tr. 24) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – Judgment filed in 2009 in the amount of $23,387 in favor or a 
vehicle lender. Applicant was unable to make his monthly payments and voluntarily 
returned the vehicle to the dealer. In 2012, he made payment arrangements with the 
creditor and has been making timely payments since then. ACCOUNT BEING 
RESOLVED. (SOR answer; Tr. 24-25, 29-32; AE E, AE Q) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – Charged-off credit card account in the amount of $600. This 
account was paid in full in March 2015.  ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (SOR answer; Tr. 
25; AE D) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – Charged-off loan in the amount $6,500. Applicant challenged the 
validity of this account and provided documentation substantiating his challenge.  
ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (SOR answer; Tr. 25-27, 32-35; GE 2; AE F) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – Collection account for second mortgage in the amount of $30,340. 
The property was sold at foreclosure in 2008 and proceeds from that sale satisfied 
debts owed and the lender provided Applicant with a Form 1099-C that he reported on 
his income tax return. Applicant’s current credit report reflects a zero balance on this 
account. Additionally, a class action lawsuit was filed against Applicant’s mortgage 
lender for engaging in deceptive mortgage lending practices. ACCOUNT RESOLVED. 
(SOR answer; Tr. 35-36, 40-41; AE I, AE P) 
 
During cross-examination, Applicant testified that he filed his 2014 federal 
income tax return, but owed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) “approximately 
$10,000 to $12,000.” (Tr. 37) Applicant made payment arrangements with the IRS and 
provided documentation that he is current on his payments. (Tr. 37-39; AE Q – AE U) 
 
Applicant submitted a current budget that reflects that he leads a modest 
lifestyle, is living within his means, and has a net monthly remainder of $1,987. (Tr. 
39-40; AE O) He also participated in formal financial counseling completing courses in 
“Setting Your Financial Goals and Creating a Budget,” “Your Banking Relationship,” 
“Understanding Credit and Credit Reports,” “Introduction to Borrowing,” “Introduction 
to Investing,” “Identity Theft and Predatory Lending,” and “Your Financial Life For 
Young Adults.” (AE A) 
 
Applicant had been the owner-operator of an independent trucking company 
since 1998. He sought to expand his company by adding a second set of equipment in 
2001 and subsequently experienced costly mechanical breakdowns and driver-related 
issues. Applicant was unable to recover and in 2004, he sold his equipment and 
 
4 
 
 
closed his business. Shortly after he closed his business, he began working for a 
trucking company at about the same time the nation experienced a major economic 
downturn. During the timeframe from 2004 to 2007, he periodically had no work or 
income. Additionally and as noted, he separated from his wife in 2006, and divorced 
her in 2007. (Tr. 17, 43-44; AE N) Since Applicant began working for his current 
employer in January 2008, he has regained financial responsibility. (AE N) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 The Director of Government Operations for Applicant’s employer submitted a 
reference letter on his behalf. Since 2008, Applicant has been employed by the same 
company as a driver and more recently as an independent agent. Applicant is “an 
absolute asset” to their company and is an individual with the “highest standards of 
integrity.” Applicant accumulated numerous accolades from customers as well as 
being the recipient of “awards from motorists for his selfless acts of heroism performed 
on the highways.” (AE M) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
 
5 
 
 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                                     Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented by the evidence establishing 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
6 
 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a), because his 10-year-old bankruptcy and debts occurred under circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur and his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant’s trucking company 
sustained significant losses following mechanical breakdowns and employee-related 
problems. After Applicant sold his company, he went for period of time with no income 
from 2004 to 2007. He also separated in 2006 and divorced in 2007. None of these 
mitigating factors could have been anticipated. During this time, Applicant remained in 
contact with creditors. 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) is fully applicable. Applicant received financial counseling and his 
financial problems are resolved and under control. AG ¶ 20(d) is also fully applicable. 
 
7 
 
 
As noted above, all of Applicant’s debts are resolved or being resolved.1 AG ¶ 20(e) is 
applicable to the charged-off debt alleged in SOR 1.d. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG 
¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
    
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s financial conduct. Credit 
reports submitted by the Government document his SOR delinquent accounts. This 
process has no doubt made an impression on Applicant and demonstrates the need to 
exercise diligence when monitoring one’s credit. 
 
The mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. There is no evidence of any security violations. Applicant 
is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. His current financial 
problems were caused by factors beyond his control. Applicant’s employment in the 
defense industry weighs heavily in his favor. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, 
lives within his means, and his SOR debts have been resolved or are being resolved. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside [his or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether [he or she] maintained contact with [his or her] creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep [his or her] debts current. 
 
8 
 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.’) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted).  
 
Applicant has achieved some important educational and employment goals, 
demonstrating his self-discipline, responsibility and dedication. He holds an associate 
of arts degree that he earned later in life. Applicant is making a significant contribution 
to the defense industry and is highly regarded by his employer and customers. I 
specifically considered Applicant’s years of financial responsibility before falling into 
debt, the circumstances that led to his financial difficulties, his financial recovery, the 
steps he has taken to resolve his financial situation, his potential for future service as 
a defense contractor, his reference letter, and his testimony and demeanor.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
