 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-040881  
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or personal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The DOD acted under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 4, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 27, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 4, 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel informed me that this case was erroneously styled as an ISCR security 
clearance case when it should have been styled as an ADP trustworthiness determination. See Tr. at 12. 
 
2 
 
2015, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 19, 2015. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, but offered no exhibits at the hearing. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information and she submitted one exhibit (AE A), which 
was admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 28, 
2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer (Ans.) to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the Guideline F 
allegations, explaining that she filed for bankruptcy. She denied the Guideline E 
allegation (SOR ¶ 2.a). The admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a government contractor. She works as a 
customer service representative and has held that position since April 2013. She has a 
bachelor’s degree. She is divorced and has four children. She receives monthly child 
support of $500 for one child. She experienced unemployment from January to April 
2013. She has no military background.2  
 
 The SOR alleges 27 delinquent debts for a total of approximately $82,810. (The 
debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.h – 1.j are from the same underlying debt. Two of those debts 
are resolved in favor of Applicant). The debts were listed in credit reports from March 
2013 and April 2014. Applicant also discussed the listed delinquent debts in her 
trustworthiness determination interview with an investigator in April 2013.3  
 
 Applicant claims her financial difficulties arose because of her medical issues 
and because she is a single mother raising four children. Other than the period of 
unemployment described above, she has been steadily employed since August 2009. 
She filed a pro se Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition and her debts were discharged by 
order dated September 2014. She provided a copy of the “Certificate of Notice” showing 
which creditors were notified either electronically or through the mail. Not all the 
creditors associated with the SOR debts were listed in the notice. She did not provide 
any schedules of debtors from the bankruptcy pleadings. As a general rule, as stated by 
the Chapter 7 bankruptcy explanation page, student loan debts are not dischargeable. 
She could not provide the total amount of discharged debt, but believed it was 
approximately $40,000. She received credit counseling through the bankruptcy 
process.4  
 
 Applicant stated that her monthly disposable income and all deductions and 
expenses is about $300. This does not account for her student loan payments which 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 5-6, 26-28; GE 1.  
 
3 GE 2-4. 
 
4 Tr. at 28-29; Ans. 
 
 
3 
 
begin in July 2015. She does not know the monthly amount of her student loan 
payments. The total student loan debt is approximately $40,000 to $50,000. She 
acknowledged that she currently does not have sufficient funds to make those 
payments. Her plan is to seek forgiveness under a federal forgiveness program. She 
provided information from a student loan servicing company, but it did not contain 
specific information about a loan forgiveness program or whether she would qualify for 
it.5  
 
 Applicant answered “no” to two questions on her trustworthiness application 
concerning whether in the last seven years she had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency and whether she had been over 120 days delinquent on any debt. 
The answer to both questions should have been “yes.” In her answer, she responded 
that she believed she already answered these questions. At the hearing, she 
maintained the same position even though it was pointed out that there was no earlier 
question related to debt. She denied that she was trying to deliberately mislead the 
Government about her debt situation. I do not find Applicant’s testimony credible.6 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 31; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. at 24-25; GE 1; Ans. 
 
 
4 
 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant had numerous delinquent debts. She filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
and had some of the debts discharged. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
5 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s short period of unemployment, her medical expenses, and her single 
mother status could be considered beyond her control. She resolved those debts by 
filing for bankruptcy and having the debts discharged. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 The only evidence of financial counseling is what Applicant received as required 
by her bankruptcy filing. However, seeking bankruptcy relief is not a good-faith effort to 
repay her debts.7 Although AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies, ¶ 20(d) does not. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
                                                          
7 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the predecessor mitigating condition to AG ¶ 20(d)], 
an Applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the Applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an Applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [AG ¶ 20(d)].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
6 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the trustworthiness process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the trustworthiness process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire. . . . 
I find her explanation for not providing the required information on her application 
implausible. After evaluating all the evidence, I find Applicant deliberately provided false 
information concerning her collection accounts and delinquent debts. AG ¶ 16(a) 
applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and considered the following as potentially applicable: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 Falsification of material information on a trustworthiness application is a serious 
offense and calls into question Applicant’s trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 
17(c) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information by considering the 
totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative 
judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of 
the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant’s financial situation was 
affected by her unemployment, her medical expenses, and single mother status. 
However, I also considered that despite these factors, the debts were not paid, but were 
discharged through bankruptcy. Under her current financial circumstances, she cannot 
afford to make her student loan payments beginning in July 2015. She intends to seek 
forgiveness of those loans, but she did not provide sufficient information about how she 
qualifies for such a program. Her troublesome financial history causes me to question 
her ability to maintain financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations and 
personal conduct trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.h:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.i – 1.j:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.k – 1.aa: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph:   2.a:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
