 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06937 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 30, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 15, 2015, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 16, 2015. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 19, 2015. I 
 
2 
 
 
convened the hearing as scheduled on July 30, 2015. The Government offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through K, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The record was held open until August 17, 2015, to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documents, which he did, and they were marked as AE L 
through T. Department Counsel had no objections, and they were admitted into 
evidence.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 7, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in SOR except ¶¶ 1.c and 1.k. His 
admissions were incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2014. He married in 
2003 and divorced in 2005. He has two children, ages four and two. His eldest is from a 
prior relationship and he pays child support. He cohabitates with the mother of his 
younger child. She has a 12-year-old daughter that lives with them. He served in the 
Marine Corps from 2001 to 2005 and was honorably discharged in the paygrade E-4. 
He was unemployed in 2010. He began working for his current employer in January 
2011 and resigned in February 2014 to work for another company. He worked for that 
employer from February 2014 until June 2014 when he was laid off. He was 
unemployed from June 2014 to September 2014. He worked for a new company from 
September 2014 until he was rehired by his current employer in November 2014. These 
periods of unemployment impacted Applicant’s ability to pay his bills.2 
 
 Applicant believed his medical bills were all paid for through the Department of 
Veteran’s Affairs. He provided information about what emergency and non-emergency 
coverage he may be entitled to.3 He now understands his obligations regarding his 
medical bills. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($929) is a medical debt. Applicant has settled and 
paid the debt.4 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($370) is a medical debt. He has an agreement to 
make three payments to resolve it. He has made the first payment.5 The debts in SOR 
¶¶1.f ($2,955) and 1.g ($216) are also medical debts to the same creditor. Applicant has 
a settlement agreement to make four monthly payments of $300. He has made the first 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibits I and II are Department Counsel’s email memoranda noting he did not object to the 
additional exhibits. 
 
2 Tr. 15-23. 
 
3 AE P. 
 
4 AE L and T.  
 
5 AE M. 
 
 
3 
 
 
payment.6 The medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($265) was paid in full.7 Applicant provided 
documentation for these debts.8 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶ 1.c and 1.k ($205 and $391) were mistakes on his account. 
Applicant provided a letter from the creditor confirming the mistake and a copy of a 
refund check he received. The debts are resolved.9 
  
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($1,927) was for a dispute over a charge made by a 
landlord after Applicant vacated an apartment. Applicant testified he did a walk-through 
of the apartment when he left and there was no damage noted. Several months later he 
received a bill for the cost of replacing the carpet. He attempted to dispute it but no 
longer had the paperwork. He has a payment agreement with the creditor and has 
made two payments of $170. He provided documentation. He intends to continue 
payments until the debt is resolved.10 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($2,696) is for a private student loan. Applicant arranged 
an installment agreement to pay $50 a month to satisfy the debt. He has started the 
payments and provided documentation. He has other student loans that are deferred.11 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($665) and 1.i ($34,018) are for the same account, 
which is an equity loan for a home that Applicant purchased from his parents in 2005. 
His parents continued to live in the house. Applicant used the loan to make repairs on 
the house. In 2010 Applicant was unemployed and could not pay the loan. He stated the 
first mortgage is current, but the loans are greater than what the house is currently 
worth. He has not made payments on the equity loan since 2010. The home is listed for 
sale, and he is currently attempting a short sale. He is waiting for the bank to approve 
the sale. He understands he may be responsible for any deficiency and for any tax 
consequences if the debt is forgiven. He provided the contract and other documents 
that explain his obligations.12 
 
 Applicant provided a detailed spreadsheet that he uses as his budget. He files 
his tax returns timely each year. He and his cohabitant share living expenses. He does 
not have health insurance, but she carries the child on her insurance plan. He has no 
other delinquent debts. He attributed his medical debts to a misunderstanding of what 
                                                          
6 AE N. 
 
7 AE O. 
 
8 Tr. 44-53; AE D. The debts alleged are supported by the credit report in GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. 40-44; Answer to SOR; AE C and R. 
 
10 Tr. 28-30; AE A. 
 
11 Tr. 31-40; AE B, H. 
 
12 Tr. 53-67; AE E, F, G, Q. 
 
 
4 
 
 
expenses were covered by the VA. He attributes his financial issues to periods of 
unemployment.13  
 
 Character letters describe Applicant as a trustworthy and professional individual 
who has always protected sensitive information and is respectful of privacy concerns. 
He has a good moral compass. He is an honest and upstanding citizen.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
13 Tr. 68-76; AE S. 
 
14 Tr. 67; AE I, J, K. 
 
5 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable to pay for several years. The 
above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute and provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he recently resolved. He still has an equity 
loan that he is addressing. Because that debt is still being resolved the debt is recent. 
He has paid or is resolving the other debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s past conduct 
does not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
partially applies.  
 
 Applicant misunderstood his VA entitlements regarding his medical expenses. 
After he learned what was not covered he resolved or is resolving those that were not 
covered. He experienced periods of unemployment that impacted his finances. These 
were conditions beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant 
must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. When Applicant learned he was 
responsible for some of his medical expenses, he paid them or arranged payment 
plans. He is actively attempting to sell his house and understands his financial 
responsibilities. Applicant did not ignore his financial obligations. I find he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances and AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling, but there are 
significant indications that his financial problems are being resolved and are under 
control. He has paid or is resolving all of the alleged debts. He provided a detailed 
budget that shows his and his cohabitant’s income and where it is being spent. Although 
the equity loan is not yet resolved, he has not ignored his obligation and understands 
his responsibility when the sale of the house is competed. He has initiated good-faith 
efforts to pay the creditors. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply. 
 
 Applicant disputed the debts in SOR ¶ 1.c and ¶ 1.k. He provided documented 
proof to show there was a mistake made regarding the debts. AG ¶ 20(e) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 32 years old. He served in the Marine Corps and was honorably 
discharged. He had periods of unemployment that impacted his finances. He 
misunderstood his medical benefits through the VA. He has paid or resolved all of the 
SOR debts except the equity loan. He understands his responsibilities regarding that 
debt once his house is sold and is not ignoring his financial obligations. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
