 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06516 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns, and he mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 31, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 4, 2015, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on May 11, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
 
2 
 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on May 27, 2015. He responded with a letter that I have marked 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. The case was assigned to me on June 23, 2015. The 
Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE A are admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2007. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 2003 
until he was honorably discharged in 2007. He attended community college for a period, 
but he did not earn a degree. He is married with three children and a stepchild.1   
 
Applicant served two tours in Iraq. He saw a significant amount of combat, and 
he was in a vehicle that was hit by an improvised explosive device (IED). He has had 
difficulties resolving his disability claims for his injuries with the Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA).2 
 
Applicant was unemployed for about five months after he was discharged from 
the military in 2007. His wife was also not working, and they struggled to pay their bills. 
Applicant injured himself at work, and he required surgery in January 2014. He received 
workers’ compensation, but he was unable to work the overtime hours that he had come 
to rely on.3   
 
The SOR alleges an unpaid $223 judgment, eight delinquent medical debts with 
balances totaling about $3,443, and ten miscellaneous delinquent debts with balances 
totaling about $5,416. Applicant admitted owing the majority of the debts. Each debt is 
listed on at least one credit report, although several of the debts appear to be 
duplicates.4   
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a $96 debt for the balance due on an auto loan after the 
vehicle was repossessed. Applicant denied owing the debt. The credit reports list a 
$3,313 judgment to the same creditor that was filed in September 2011 and paid in 
October 2012. Applicant’s statement that the debt was paid through the judgment is 
logical and accepted.5   
 
Applicant was unaware of the extent of his financial issues until he was 
questioned for his background investigation in April 2014. He paid a number of debts 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4; AE A.  
 
2 Items 3, 4; AE A.  
 
3 Items 3, 4.  
 
4 Items 2, 4-6.  
 
5 Items 2, 4-6.  
 
 
3 
 
that were not alleged in the SOR. His repayment efforts were hindered by the loss of 
overtime. He knows it will take time, but he intends to pay his delinquent debts.6 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
December 2013. He did not list any delinquent debts under the financial questions. He 
denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86. He was unaware of the extent of his financial 
problems. He stated that he “may not be as smart as some people in this world,” and 
that he was unsure how to answer certain questions.7 Having considered all the 
evidence, I find that he did not intentionally falsify the SF 86.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
6 Items 4-6; AE A. 
 
7 Items 2-4; AE A.  
 
4 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  Applicant did not intentionally provide false information on his SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) 
is not applicable. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
5 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable to pay. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant was unemployed for about five months after his discharge from the 
military. He injured himself at work, and he was unable to work the overtime hours that 
he had come to rely on. He paid a $3,313 judgment and a number of other debts that 
were not alleged in the SOR. His finances are still far from perfect, but he is committed 
to paying his delinquent debts.  
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
  I find that much of Applicant’s financial problems were caused or exacerbated by 
conditions that were beyond his control. They occurred under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. The above mitigating conditions are partially, but not completely, 
applicable because Applicant is still in the process of resolving his debts.  
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service, particularly his combat tours 
in Iraq. He still has steps he needs to take to remedy his financial problems. He has 
earned the additional time required to complete those steps. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns, and he mitigated the financial considerations 
security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.s:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
