 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01472 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concern. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 3, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 25, 2014. He elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
 
2 
 
 
Relevant Material (FORM) on May 19, 2015. The FORM was mailed to Applicant who 
received it on June 11, 2015. As evidence, the Government offered Items 1 through 7, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted 
Item 8.1 through 8.11, which was admitted into the record without objection. The case 
was assigned to me on July 15, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted both allegations. His admissions 
are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He has been married since January 1997, but has no 
children. He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since December 
2008. He received an associate’s degree in 1990.1  
  
 The SOR lists two collection debts in the amounts of $12,334 and $8,800 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). These debts are supported by credit reports from August 2012, 
November 2013, and February 2015.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began in approximately 2007 when he and his 
wife helped out his brother-in-law financially when he was experiencing some problems. 
They provided the brother-in-law with approximately $1,000 per month for rent for about 
one year. Additionally, his wife lost her fulltime job in 2008, reducing their income by 
about $40,000 per year. In 2010, Applicant experienced a work-related transfer to 
another state. He owned a home in the old state and could not sell it because he owed 
more than it was worth. Consequently, he rented an apartment in the new state while 
still paying the mortgage on his home. Eventually, he was able to rent his home, but the 
amount of rent did not cover his mortgage. The status of the debts is as follows:3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a (Consumer debt $12,334): 
 
 Applicant established a settlement payment plan with the creditor. He has 
consistently made his monthly payments ($538) starting in October 2014 through May 
2015 and provided documentation of the same. This debt is being resolved.4 
 
  
 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 5-7. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Item 8.1, 8.2, 8.4 through 8.11.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d (Consumer debt $8,800): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that a settlement was reached on this 
account and that he has completed all required payments. The account was resolved in 
December 2014.5 
 
 Applicant’s personal financial statement shows that he has monthly disposable 
income of approximately $1,638. Currently, there is no evidence of other delinquent 
debts.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
5 Items 2, 8.1, 8.3.  
 
6 Item 4.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent debts over an extended period of time. I find 
both disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has resolved one collection debt and is resolving the other by making 
regular monthly payments. His efforts to repair his financial position make it reasonable 
to conclude that these types of debts will not recur, nor do they cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies.  
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent debt when he gave financial assistance to a 
family member, his wife lost her job, and he incurred additional expenses resulting from 
a job relocation. These were conditions beyond his control. He eventually sought out the 
creditors and negotiated settlements for the two SOR debts. His actions, although 
delayed, were responsible. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 There are clear indications that both debts are resolved or under control. 
Applicant made good-faith efforts to resolve the debts listed on the SOR. He supplied 
documentary evidence showing the payments were made and the debts were either 
paid or are being paid. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) apply.  
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). There 
is also no requirement that an applicant pay every debt listed in the SOR, only that he 
remove concerns about his reliability and trustworthiness raised by those debts. See 
ISCR Case No. 14-00504 at 3 (App. Bd. August 4, 2014). Applicant has taken 
significant action to resolve his debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s personal 
circumstances. The evidence supports his showing that he is again financially stable 
and that he resolved or is resolving the debts. The record contains sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
