 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04430 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 27, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On January 21, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and he elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.1 He did not submit any 
                                                          
1 The notarized date on the Answer to the SOR is January 21, 2014. However this predates the date of 
the SOR and is an obvious typographical error.  
 
2 
 
 
documents. On January 27, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file 
of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on May 28, 2015. Applicant was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. He did not provide a response to the FORM or object to any of the 
documents submitted by the Government, and they are admitted as Items 1 through 7. 
The case was assigned to me on July 31, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied SOR allegation ¶ 1.a and admitted the remaining allegations. I 
have incorporated his admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He served in the military from 1982 to 2002, when he 
honorably retired. He married in 1983 and divorced in 1986. He remarried in 1987 and 
has an adult stepchild. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2010. He has been employed 
by a federal contractor since 2003.  
 
 In 1998 Applicant and his wife purchased a home (H-1) and financed it with a first 
and second mortgage. The first mortgage was later sold to a new mortgage company. 
This was Applicant’s primary residence until 2007, when he purchased another house 
(H-2). Applicant eventually was unable to pay the mortgages on both houses. The taxes 
on H-1 increased because it no longer qualified for a homestead exemption once it was 
no longer his primary residence. Despite Applicant’s efforts the mortgage lender was 
unresponsive to his attempts to address his financial difficulties. He received papers in 
early 2010 that the house (H-1) would be foreclosed. The mortgage lender foreclosed 
and obtained a Summary Final Judgment in February 2010 in the amount of $122,058 
(SOR ¶ 1.a).2 Applicant’s answer to the SOR states: “The debt was redeemed by 
collateral. Home has been sold to cover debt as also reflect[ed] in credit report.”3 The 
credit report reflects a zero balance past due to the mortgage company. This debt is 
resolved.  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($37,529) is the second mortgage on H-1. In his answer 
to the SOR, Applicant stated: “True according to credit report. This was also in 
reference to SOR [1].a.” Applicant did not provide any information as to the status of this 
debt or explain what he meant in his answer. The debt is listed on a credit report from 
March 2014.4  
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($12,518) and 1.d ($5,659) are credit card accounts. In 
his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated for each debt: “This has been paid on 
consistently each month for the last year plus months to [creditor] in the amount of 
                                                          
2 Item 7, pages 4-7 is the Summary Final Judgment in Foreclosure from the Circuit Court. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Item 6 is a credit report noting the delinquent debt.  
 
3 
 
 
$250. Final payment will be 11-2015.” He indicated on his security clearance application 
(SCA) that he was making payments through automatic withdrawals, and the debts 
were “in good standing.” Applicant did not provide any documentary proof of payments 
or the current status regarding these debts. These debts are listed on a credit report 
from March 2014 noting both accounts are in collection and also the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c 
is in dispute.5  
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to the real estate market and economic 
downturn at the time. He also attributes it to a change in policy regarding tuition 
assistance by his employer. In 2009 this change resulted in Applicant having an 
unexpected $600 deduction from his pay per month to cover taxes associated with 
educational benefits provided by his employer.6  
 
Applicant listed on his SCA that he traveled for vacation on cruises to various 
foreign ports in 2010, 2012, and 2013.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
5 Item 6  
 
6 Item 5. 
 
7 Item 4.  
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had four delinquent debts that he was unwilling or unable to pay. Three 
of the debts are unresolved. I find the above disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s mortgage on H-1 was resolved through foreclosure and the credit 
report shows a zero balance owed. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is resolved. Applicant failed 
to provide evidence to conclude that the remaining debts alleged have been resolved or 
paid. These debts are recent. His finances cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to when he purchased a second 
house; lost his homestead exemption; had his employer unexpectedly change its tuition 
assistance program; and a downturn in the economy and housing market. All of these 
conditions were beyond Applicant’s control, except the homestead exemption, which he 
should have been aware of when purchasing a second home. For the full application of 
AG ¶ 20(b), there must be evidence that Applicant acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant did not provide evidence regarding the current status or 
resolution of any of the remaining alleged debts. AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies. 
 
There is no evidence to conclude Applicant has received financial counseling. 
There is no documentary evidence to conclude Applicant is making good-faith efforts to 
repay or otherwise resolve the debts. I cannot find there are clear indications that his 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do 
not apply.  
 
6 
 
 
It is unclear if Applicant is actually disputing the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.b. 
The credit report notes that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is being disputed, but no additional 
evidence regarding the basis or resolution of the dispute was provided. If Applicant is 
disputing the other debts, he has not provided an identifiable basis for the disputes. He 
failed to address the current status of these debts. He failed to provide evidence of 
actions he has taken to resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 51 years old. He purchased a second house during a period of 
economic downturn. He had difficulty maintaining the mortgages. The primary mortgage 
debt is resolved. The second mortgage debt is not resolved. The other two consumer 
debts Applicant claimed he was paying, but failed to provide documented proof of his 
actions. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant has met his burden of 
persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude he 
failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
