 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04515 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleges she is delinquent on 4 judgment and 14 collection accounts 
totaling approximately $40,000. Applicant has failed to mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on October 10, 
2014, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons detailing security concerns. On February 
3, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided without a 
hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated May 20, 
2015. The FORM contained four attachments (Items). On June 10, 2015, Applicant 
received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of her opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. 
Applicant’s response was due July 10, 2015. No material was received. On August 3, 
2015, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she denied owing an $18,294 collection 
account (SOR 1.k) and asserted other collection accounts had been paid. She neither 
admitted nor denied two collection accounts. She admits owing the remaining 
delinquent SOR accounts, including the four unpaid judgments. I incorporate Applicant’s 
admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
submissions, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old data administrator who has worked for a defense 
contractor since October 2013 and seeks to obtain a security clearance. From August 
1992 through June 1996, she served honorably in the U.S. Army and then in the U.S. 
Army Reserve from January 2000 through September 2001. Applicant provided no 
information about her current duty performance nor did she provide any character 
reference letters.  
 
 In May 2007, Applicant and her husband separated and, in October 2008, they 
divorced. They have three children ages 17, 19, and 21. (Item 3) Between the dates of 
their separation and divorce, Applicant was not receiving child support. During this 
period, she used credit cards “to keep afloat.” (Item 2) Child support started in October 
2008, the same month she became unemployed. Her e-QIP lists five periods of 
unemployment: March 2004 through May 2007; October 2008 through April 2009; 
October 2011 through June 2012; October 2012 through March 2013; and, August 2013 
through October 2013.  
 
 Applicant asserted six collection accounts were paid in January and February 
2014. These delinquent accounts totaled $1,657. In February 2015, she asserts she 
paid two collection accounts totaling $244 and made arrangements to pay one 
collection account (SOR 1.l, $1,195). That account was to be paid by March 2015. (Item 
2) She provided no documentation as to payment of any debt or repayment agreement. 
She asserts the collection account in SOR 1.g ($6,427) and the judgment in SOR 1.c 
($6,452) are the same obligation. The FORM informed Applicant that she could submit 
documentation in rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, but no documentation 
was received.  
 
 Applicant asserts the $18,294 collection account (SOR 1.k) is not her debt. (Item 
2) She stated after talking to the collection agency, she was informed the original 
creditor is not the creditor listed on the credit report. She never had an account with the 
creditor provided by the collection agency over the telephone. It was recommended by 
 
3 
the collection agency that Applicant file a police report and send a copy of the report to 
the collection agency. (Item 2) Applicant has provided no documentation showing she 
did this.  
 
 Applicant considered filing for bankruptcy protection, but chose not to. She 
indicates the majority of the SOR debts are her obligations, which she intends to pay. In 
Applicant’s January 2014 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), she listed the majority of the SOR debts. Her January 2014 e-QIP, indicates that 
in addition to the unpaid judgments and numerous unpaid collection accounts, she had 
numerous accounts that were in good standing and listed as “paid as agreed” (Item 4) 
Those paid-as-agreed accounts included numerous student loan accounts, payments at 
various times for three cars, and other consumer accounts. It also indicates a $262 
judgment was satisfied in November 2010. The credit report also indicates a February 
2009 foreclosure on her home. (Item 4)  
 
 Applicant’s four judgments totaling in excess of $17,000 were entered against 
her between September 2008 and January 2011. She provided information about 
problems with the apartment that resulted in the $3,900 judgment (SOR 1.a) The 
problems included her landlord failing to provide parking permits that resulted in her 
vehicle being towed on numerous occasions and his failing to provide a working 
refrigerator for a number of months. She also indicates the $1,300 security deposit 
should have been applied to any amount she owed. It was incumbent on Applicant to 
bring these matters to the court’s attention at the time of the court proceeding that 
resulted in the judgment. At this time, the judgment has been rendered and she is 
obliged to pay it.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
4 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
 
5 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant owes more than $17,000 on four unpaid judgments and has more than 
$27,000 in delinquent consumer debt. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the mitigating factors for financial considerations are established. 
Applicant’s financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. She has been employed 
with her current employer since October 2013. In October 2014, she was made aware 
of the Government’s concerns about her delinquent debt when she received the SOR. 
She acknowledged the majority of her debts, but indicated some had been paid, and 
that two debts were the same obligation. She denied one large debt, and neither 
admitted nor denied two other collection accounts totaling approximately $800. She 
provided no documentation showing payment on any of her debts or payment 
arrangement. 
 
 
6 
Applicant asserted she paid $1,657 on six delinquent accounts in 2014 and paid 
$244 on two delinquent accounts in 2015. Accepting that the payments were made, this 
indicates approximately $1,900 has been paid in the past year and a half. She has not 
made significant progress in reducing her delinquent debts since her employment in 
October 2013. Applicant provided no evidence she has received credit or financial 
counseling or that she is meeting her current financial obligations. She has not 
demonstrated that her financial problems are under control or that she has a plan to 
bring them under control.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies, but does not mitigate the financial concern. Her 
numerous delinquent debts remain unpaid and are therefore considered recent. There 
is nothing in the record supporting that the debts were incurred under unusual 
circumstances, other than her assertion that between May 2007 and October 2008 she 
needed to use credit cards for living expenses because she was not receiving child 
support for her three children. Her lack of child support ended more than six years ago. 
She has been employed since October 2013. The four judgments entered against her 
between September 2008 and January 2011 remain unpaid. Failing to pay the debts 
casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) has application, but does not mitigate the security concern. In 2007 
she separated from her husband and was divorced in 2008. Between March 2004 and 
October 2013, she had five periods of unemployment. These are events beyond her 
control. However, for AG & 20(b) to mitigate the financial security concern there must be 
events beyond one’s control and the person must have acted responsibly. Applicant 
asserted she paid $244 in 2015 and intended to pay approximately $1,200 more before 
March 2015, but did never proved it. With such small amounts being applied to her 
delinquent accounts she fails to show she has acted responsibly.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There has been no 
evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. Additionally, there is no clear 
showing that the majority of her delinquent financial obligations are being addressed. 
Even though Applicant failed to provide documentation, I will apply the mitigating 
condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) to the six debts she paid in January and February 2014 
and the two debts paid in February 2015. I do not apply it to the $1,195 collection 
account (SOR 1.l) because payment was to occur after her SOR answer and it is 
uncertain that payment was actually made. She provided no documentation that 
payment was actually made.  
 
Although Applicant disputes the debt in SOR 1.k ($18,294), AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply. For the mitigating condition to apply Applicant must not only deny the obligation, 
but must also provide documentation supporting her claim. She asserts she was told the 
original debt was not the obligation listed on her credit report, but was a creditor for 
which she asserted she never had an account. She was informed to file a police report 
and send a copy to the collection agency. There is no evidence this was ever done.  
 
 
 
7 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant honorably served in the 
U.S. Army and U.S. Army Reserve. Her credit report lists numerous accounts that she 
“paid as agreed” including her student loans, car payments, and numerous consumer 
accounts. However, she failed to document any payment on the SOR delinquent 
accounts. She has been aware of the Government’s concern about her delinquent debts 
since her October 2014 SOR. Since receiving the SOR, she paid $244 on two 
delinquent collection accounts and asserted she made arrangement to pay another 
collection account. There is no documentation indicating that Applicant has had recent 
contact her creditors.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, she failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her circumstances and 
facts that would mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. She failed to 
offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding her past 
efforts to address her delinquent debt. By relying solely on her paragraphs of 
explanation in her response to the SOR, she failed to mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
An individual is not required to be debt free, or required to have resolved all past-
due debts simultaneously or even resolve the delinquent debts in the SOR first. 
Individuals seeking a security clearance must establish that they are managing their 
finances in a manner expected of those granted access to the nation’s secrets. 
Notwithstanding the presence of some favorable evidence, Applicant failed to meet her 
burden of persuasion. Consequently, the record evidence leaves doubts about 
 
8 
Applicant’s present eligibility for access to classified information. Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
warranted. In the future, if Applicant has paid her delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed her past-due 
obligations, she may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security worthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:  Against Applicant   
  Subparagraphs 1.h – 1.j:  For Applicant   
  Subparagraphs 1.k – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n – 1.q:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n – 1.q:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
