 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-04002 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Greg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised by his illegal drug 
involvement. He used marijuana from 2001 to 2012, and failed to establish that he will 
not engage in similar conduct in the future. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On October 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging that Applicant’s conduct and circumstances raised security 
concerns under the drug involvement guideline.1 On November 24, 2014, Applicant 
answered the SOR, waived his right to a hearing, and requested a decision on the 
written record (Answer). 
 
 On April 20, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains four exhibits that are admitted into 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
evidence, without objection, as Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 4. Applicant did not 
submit a response to the FORM within the allotted 30-day period. See Hearing Exhibit 1 
(acknowledgment of receipt of FORM and cover letter advising Applicant of 30-day 
period to submit a response). On August 4, 2015, I was assigned Applicant’s case.  
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 The SOR is amended to conform to Applicant’s Answer. Specifically, SOR 1.a is 
amended to reflect that Applicant used marijuana from 2001 to at least December 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, a college graduate, is single with no children. He has been working for 
his current employer since late 2012. In April 2013, he submitted a security clearance 
application, disclosing his past drug involvement. He disclosed that he had been 
arrested in 2003, while in college, for possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia. 
He received a suspended imposition of sentence and was ordered to complete 
community service. He also disclosed that he had used marijuana from 2001 to 2012. 
During the ensuing security clearance background interview, Applicant stated that his 
marijuana use was infrequent and sporadic, and usually occurred at social events with 
friends. He told the background investigator that if he did use marijuana in the future, he 
would do so infrequently and such use would not place anyone in “harm’s way.”2  
 
 Applicant stated the following in his Answer: 
 
My infrequent, recreational use of marijuana has in no way impaired my 
reliability and trustworthiness. I do not believe that use of the drug has any 
more impact to an individual than recreational alcohol consumption. 
Frequent use of any drug, including alcohol, can certainly call into 
question one’s motivation and reliability and should be addressed, 
whether that’s on an individual’s own or through a treatment program. 
That does not, however, in any way apply to me. Furthermore, as a 
resident of [State X], I live in a city where marijuana is a legal drug. While 
from a federal perspective, marijuana continues to be illegal, the United 
States government has not shown significant interest in reversing the state 
law or prosecuting anyone for marijuana consumption in [State X]. I have 
and will continue to be a hardworking, productive and well-respected 
member of society and do not believe that infrequent, recreational 
marijuana use has any impact on my ability to act in that manner.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
                                                          
2 Gx. 4, Personal Subject Interview at 4. 
 
3 
 
 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the paramount importance of protecting national security in all 
suitability determinations, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.3  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
3 See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”). 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Illegal Drug Involvement & Whole-Person Concept 
 
The security concern regarding illegal drug involvement is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s past illegal drug involvement raises the above security concern. 
Applicant’s 11-year history of illegal drug involvement and statements during the course 
of the security clearance process establish the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
 AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse;4  
 
 AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, . . . or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
 AG ¶ 25(h): expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
 Applicant continued to use marijuana for years following his drug-related arrest in 
2003. He failed to demonstrate that he will not engage in similar security significant 
conduct in the future. I have considered all the applicable mitigating conditions, and find 
that none apply. After taking into account the favorable and extenuating factors raised 
by the evidence, to include Applicant’s honesty and candor, as well as considering the 
whole-person factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a), I further find that Applicant failed to mitigate 
the security concerns raised by his illegal drug involvement. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with doubts about his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
4 The Directive defines “drugs” as “mood and behavior altering substances, and include . . . [d]rugs . . . 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act . . . (e.g., marijuana . . .),” and “drug abuse” includes 
the “illegal use of a drug . . .” See AG ¶¶ 24(a), 24(b). See also, Memorandum from the Director of 
National Intelligence, dated October 25, 2014 (recent state law changes decriminalizing marijuana use 
does not alter federal law regarding marijuana, which remains a Schedule I controlled drug; nor do these 
recent changes alter the adjudicative guidelines, as an individual’s disregard of federal law pertaining to 
the use of marijuana remains relevant in security clearance determinations) 
 
5 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
