1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )       ISCR Case No. 14-06525
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tara Karoian,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On January 27, 2015, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2015. A notice of
hearing was issued on June 1, 2015, scheduling the hearing for July 30, 2015. On that
date, it was rescheduled for good cause.  The hearing took place on August 4, 2015.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-5 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant
testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-H, which were admitted without
objection. I held the record open for additional submissions until August 21, 2015.
Applicant timely submitted a packet of documents, which was admitted as AX I-M,
without objection. The transcript was received on August 12, 2015.  Based on a review
2
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under
Guideline F, with the exception of 1.h through 1.l . He provided explanations for each
alleged debt.
 
Applicant is 35 years old. He graduated from high school and attended college
until 2007, but did not obtain a degree. He served in the United States military from
1997 until 2004, receiving an Honorable discharge.  Applicant is single and has one
child. Applicant has been with his current employer since 2014. He attends college
courses at night.  He completed a security clearance application in 2012. (GX 1)
The SOR alleges approximately $33,000 in delinquent debt, which includes
outstanding child support payments, automobile repossessions, and student loans.(GX
2 and 3)
Applicant was candid at the hearing by saying that he had no excuses for his
behavior and the “lackluster” attention he gave to managing his finances in the past. He
had some hardships, but he does not use that as an excuse. (Tr. 10) He disputes the
accuracy of the amount of delinquent debt. He believes he has about $5,000 in
delinquent debt. (Tr. 11) He has been on notice since his 2012 investigative interview.
He pays $1,400 a month for child support, which is directly deducted from his wages.
(AX A) He at times has taken a second job to help with his expenses. 
As to SOR allegation 1.a, Applicant provided documentation that he had an
agreement with the child’s mother (AX I) to forgive the amount of the arrearage, if he
paid her $4,000. He also presented documentation that shows he is current with his
child support. (AX A) The arrearage occurred due to unemployment. 
Applicant disputes the debt in allegation 1.b for $4,570. This collection account is
for an auto loan. He states that this was a voluntary repossession and that the vehicle
was sold and the account is closed. Applicant explained that he has been disputing this
account since 2008. (Tr. 21) He claims that he paid $4,500 after the car was sold. (Tr.
23)
As to the debt in 1.c for $4,516 for a student loan in collection, Applicant
presented a letter from the school that noted the debt would be forgiven if he registers,
completes the program and graduates. (AX B). However, he then presented a post-
hearing document to show that in August 2015, he requested the student loans be
rehabilitated. The first payment is due September 5, 2015. (AX L) 
As to the debt in 1.d for an account that is 120 days or more past due in an
amount of approximately $2,211, Applicant purchased furniture, which he claimed was
3
defective. He disputes the account but stated that he had made several payments.
Applicant submitted information that on July 30, 2015, he arranged a payment of
$945.06 to bring his account to a current status. (AX C) 
Applicant presented documentation that he settled the debt in 1.e for a phone
account in the amount of $306. (AX D) He purchased the phone for his sister, but she
did not pay the bill. (Tr. 27 )
As to the 2008 judgment in 1.f for $4,333, Applicant started a payment plan in
February 2015. He agreed to pay $2,800. Applicant claimed that he has made
payments. (AX E, Tr. 32) He provided a post-hearing submission that shows he is
current on this account and pays as agreed. (AX J).
Applicant claimed that the debt in 1.g was a medical account that went to
judgment in 2007 for $917. He states that it does not appear on his credit report. (AX F)
He believes that he paid the account many years ago.
Applicant denies the debts in 1.h, through 1.l. He claims they are not accurate
and he has disputed them. He emphasized that they have been removed from his credit
report. (Tr. 35) He stated in a post-hearing narrative that he does not have the
documentation regarding the dispute history because the credit reporters will not send
the information to him electronically.  
Applicant testified that the debt in 1.m is the same as the debt in 1.f. (Tr. 35) He
also stated that 1.n is a duplicate account.
Applicant explained that he has had bad credit for about eight years and he has
finally been approved for a car loan.  He has not missed a payment on the car loan. (Tr.
37) He also has a credit card and submitted documentation after the hearing that it is
paid in full. (AX M)
Applicant was unemployed in 2012 for about three months and received
unemployment wages in the amount of $300 a week. (Tr. 42) He was also unemployed
in March 2013 until October 2013, and  for about five months in 2014. (Tr. 54). 
Applicant’s yearly salary is about $96,000 a year. He provides financial support
to his mother who is ill. He works in a consultant status at this time. He believes he has
a monthly net remainder of $2,000, which included money from a second job.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
5
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant admitted that he incurred delinquent debt and his credit reports confirm
the debts. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC)
AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to
Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant still has unresolved
debt. He also paid several debts after his hearing was postponed in July 2015. He has
been on notice since the 2012 interview with the security investigator. He recently
started a payment plan with one debt. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)
does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. Applicant was employed for many years. He was unemployed on
several occasions when contracts ended. However, he did not provide a nexus between
the unemployment and the debts. He stated that he was immature and had too much
on his plate.  I cannot find that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has some application. Applicant as noted above
recently took steps to pay some debts and arrange payments with one. He has disputed
some debts, but has no documentation to substantiate his claim. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c)
6
(the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are
clear indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control) does not apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 38 years old.  He has been with his current employer since 2013. He is
single and pays child support. He has served in the military. He stated that he is very
sorry for the situation and mistakes that he made. He stated that this would never occur
again. 
Applicant  provided  information concerning his current status with child support
and the fact that he has paid several debts. However, he paid them after the SOR was
issued, but he knew of the Government’s concern about his finances since the 2012
investigative interview. He has made payment arrangements with one account. He
disputes many accounts but he does not have documentation to substantiate the
claims. He is beginning to address his debts, but he has not shown a meaningful track
record to mitigate the security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
Applicant did not persuade me that he refuted or mitigated the Government’s
case concerning the financial considerations security concerns. Any doubts must be
resolved in the Government’s favor. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline : AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.g-1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.m-1.n: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
