KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant’s concern regarding Department Counsel’s characterization of a document
(which was neither put in evidence nor served on Applicant) is not frivolous.  However, there is
no reason to believe that it factored into the Judge’s decision.   Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-02403.a1
DATE: 08/18/2015
DATE: August 18, 2015
In Re:
-------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02403
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 22, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 28, 2015, after the close of the record, Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Martin H. Mogul denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.1  
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision.
The Judge made the following findings: Applicant is 51 years old.  He has an overdue debt
for a second mortgage that is more then 120 days past due in the amount of $58,916, with a balance
in the approximate amount of $130,000.  Credit reports admitted into evidence establish the debt and
the fact that it has not been resolved.  Applicant also has an overdue mortgage account that is more
than 120 days past due in the amount of $204,273, with a balance in the approximate amount of
$640,626.  The credit reports in evidence also establish this debt and the fact that it has not been
resolved.
Applicant purchased a home in 2003 or 2004.  In 2008 he experienced financial difficulties 
because of a pending divorce and his inability to pay all his bills.  He was unable to make payments
on his mortgage.  Attempts to resolve matters through a short sale of the house failed, in part
because of the poor economy.  He stopped making payments on the house in 2009, at which time
he moved out of the premises.  When he left the home, he understood that he still owed money on
the two mortgages.  At some point after he left the home, he sold his interest in the home to another
individual (Purchaser), and to a representative of the purchaser (Purchaser).  Applicant never
received any money for the sale from Purchaser, and got just the promise that he would receive some
payment from Purchaser if she was able to resolve the mortgage with the mortgage holder. 
Applicant has received no notice, either in written or oral form, informing him that he does not owe
the mortgage holders on the mortgages.  Applicant concedes that he never received approval from
the mortgage holder for the transfer of the home to the Purchaser, and no evidence of same appears
in the record.  There is also no evidence that Purchaser has made any payments on either mortgage
to the mortgage holder.
                                                                                 
 The Judge reached the following conclusions: Applicant’s overdue finances occurred as a
result of his divorce and the downturn in the economy.  However, Applicant has not acted
responsibly because he failed to contact the mortgage holder to seek approval for the transfer of his
property, and he has never ascertained the status of his home and the two mortgages.  Applicant has
not initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  No evidence
1The Judge made a favorable formal finding under the one allegation brought under Guideline E.  That finding
is not at issue on appeal.  
2
was introduced to establish that his current financial situation is stable.  Applicant has not mitigated
the Government’s security concerns.  
Applicant argues that the credit reports relied upon by the Government were inaccurate and
failed to establish that the mortgage accounts were still active, failed to establish that a balance
remains due, and failed to establish that he owed the balance.  He references a more recent credit
report that supports his appeal position that he no longer owes on the mortgages.  He then asserts
that the arrangement he entered into with the Purchaser was a reasonable one as he was aided by a
real estate expert who would maximize the chances that he and the Purchaser had toward reaching
an agreement with the creditor.  Applicant has failed to establish error on the part of the Judge.2   
Applicant’s arguments rely largely on a credit report that post-dated the hearing.  The Board
cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive, ¶ E3.1.29. 
In this case, the Judge made sustainable findings that Applicant entered into an agreement
with Purchaser to take title to his house and assume the mortgage payments without consulting the
mortgage holders beforehand, and without subsequently taking any steps to ensure that the Purchaser
was satisfying the obligations.  There is absolutely no record evidence that contradicts the listing
of the debts as delinquent on the credit reports in evidence.3  Regardless of the precise status of the
debts, the gravamen of the Judge’s decision was that Applicant, in essence, simply walked away
from his obligations.  Regarding Applicant’s arrangements with Purchaser and a third party to
transfer ownership of his house, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s actions were not mitigating
is sustainable.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes
that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision,
“including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle
Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting
2Applicant began his brief with a due process argument.  At the hearing, Department Counsel discussed an
updated credit report on Applicant that he had obtained the night before.  He did not serve it on Applicant.  He stated
for the record that it contained no updated information on Applicant’s finances.  This report was never offered for
inclusion in the record.  Applicant asserts that the Government “relied” on the contents of the report, did not allow him
to compare the report with those being offered into evidence, and he was therefore unfairly prejudiced.  Applicant’s
arguments are not frivolous given the fact that Department Counsel never provided the report to his party-opponent. 
Department Counsel’s characterization of the report was made verbally, on the record, and in front of the Judge, wherein
it had the potential to influence.  However, there is nothing in the record or the Judge’s decision to show that the report
factored into the resolution of the case.  The Board will not presume error below.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-10644
at 2 (App. Bd. May 28, 2010).  Applicant has failed to demonstrate how Department Counsel’s mentioning of the
updated report had a deleterious effect upon his ability to present his case.  Also, Applicant’s reliance on purported
requirements of the Fair Credit Reporting Act is misplaced.    
3It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally meet the substantial evidence
standard and the Government’s obligations under E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-20327
at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006).  In this case, the credit reports were detailed and straightforward enough to establish the
Government’s case regarding Applicant’s mortgage indebtedness.   
3
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is
that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s
ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett          
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
