 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 14-04480 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant completed payments on a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2013. His 2010 
foreclosure is resolved. He has been making payments on a 2012 tax liability since 
2013. Financial security concerns are sufficiently mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On December 15, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 31, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 4, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing. On April 27, 2015, the Department of Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On June 5, 2015, DOHA issued a hearing 
notice, setting the case for July 1, 2015. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence. Applicant offered exhibits (AE) A 
through F into evidence. All exhibits were admitted. Applicant testified, as did his wife. 
The record remained open until July 21, 2015, to give Applicant time to submit 
additional information. Applicant timely submitted three exhibits, which I marked as AE 
G, H, and I, and admitted into the record without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on July 9, 2015.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the four allegations contained in the Statement of Reasons 
and provided explanations. His admissions are accepted as factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor since 2013. He is 
married and has two adult children. He served on active duty in the U.S. Army from 
1979 until 1983. In 1990 he enlisted in the Army National Guard. He was deployed to 
the Middle East in 2006 for six weeks. He retired from the National Guard in 2008. He 
was a master sergeant, E-8, at the time of his retirement. He received an honorable 
discharge. During his service he received his state’s Distinguished Service Cross and 
Good Conduct Medals, along with academic awards. He held a security clearance while 
in the military. He completed two years of college.  Prior to his current position, he 
worked for another defense contractor, and in private industry, including his own 
business from 2011 to 2013. (Tr. 20-24.)  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began in 2008 after he left one state (State-1) to 
move to his home state (State-2) in order to help sick family members and assist other 
members. After he moved, he was unable to sell the home in State-1, resulting in 
having two mortgages to pay that totaled $3,000 to $4,000 each month. (Tr. 27-28, 30, 
32.) Applicant secured two short sales for the property, but the bank would not authorize 
the sales. (Tr. 58.) The bank foreclosed on the property in State-1 in 2010. The day 
before this hearing, Applicant sold his residence in State-2 for $19,000 less that what he 
owed. His father-in-law gifted him and his wife that amount of money. (AE E.) 
 
 The SOR contained four allegations. The status of each allegation is as follows: 
 
1. Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in January 2010. The case was 
converted to a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in January 2011. In the summer of 
2013, he paid the $26,000 balance owed on the bankruptcy. His father-in-law 
gave Applicant and his wife the money as a part of his wife’s future 
inheritance. The case was closed in November 2013. (SOR ¶ 1.a; Tr. 32-36, 
49; Answer.)  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
2. The allegation contained in SOR ¶ 1.b references the above Chapter 13 
bankruptcy.1 (Tr. 32-6; Answer.)  
 
3. In July 2013 Applicant established a monthly payment plan with the Internal 
Revenue Service to pay a 2012 tax liability of $21,660. The taxes owed 
accrued while Applicant owned a business with a partner in 2012. Applicant 
and his partner lost a large contract that they anticipated would help pay 
taxes. He trusted his partner to manage their taxes, but he failed to do so. 
The current balance of the debt is $18,173. (SOR ¶ 1.c; Tr. 36-38; AE F, G; 
Answer; GE 2.) He also testified that he owes about $9,000 for federal 
income taxes for 2013. He is making payments on those taxes.2 (Tr. 40-41, 
53.)  
 
4. Applicant testified that the mortgage loan mentioned in SOR ¶ 1.d, pertained 
to the foreclosure on the home he owned in State-1. Any deficiency was 
resolved through the Chapter 13 bankruptcy, mentioned above. He received a 
$3,000 check from the bank as an overpayment. (Tr. 48-49, 56; Answer.) 
   
 Applicant submitted a budget that his accountant reviewed. Applicant’s net 
monthly income is $8,800 and his expenses are $4,885, including a $450 payment to 
the IRS. He has about $4,000 remaining at the end of the month. (AE H.) He does not 
have a mortgage or rental payment because he and his wife recently moved in with his 
elderly father-in-law and mother-in-law to help care for them. His wife started working 
and is earning $500 a month. (Tr. 44-46; AE B.) Applicant’s accountant assisted him in 
resolving credit issues. The accountant provided a statement that noted that Applicant 
and his wife “are current with all of their accounts or outstanding debts or mortgages.” 
(AE C.) 
 
  Applicant submitted letters of recommendation from friends, co-workers, church 
members, a pastor, and his father-in-law. The authors speak of Applicant’s 
trustworthiness, dedication to his family and country, dependability, and honesty. (AE B, 
I.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
                                                 
1 The allegation in this paragraph cites a different docket number. Applicant stated he never filed a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy, only the Chapter 7 that was converted into the Chapter 13. This appears to be a 
clerical or filing issue with the clerk’s office. (Tr. 35; GE 2.) 
2 The SOR did not allege unpaid federal taxes for 2013. That fact will not be considered in an analysis of 
the disqualifying conditions, but may be considered in analyzing mitigating conditions and in the whole-
person analysis.  
 
 
4 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides: 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads:       
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant began experiencing financial difficulties after he moved to State-2 in 
2008 to help family members. He has been unable to resolve all of his delinquent debt. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise both disqualifications, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s delinquent debts: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Because Applicant continues to make payments on his federal tax debts, AG ¶ 
20(a) does not provide mitigation. Applicant’s inability to sell his prior residence in State-
1 contributed to his financial problems and resulted in a foreclosure. Those 
circumstances are unlikely to recur, and were possibly beyond his control. His business 
decisions were within his control. He started a repayment plan for his unpaid 2012 
federal taxes in July 2013, soon after they were due, indicating his intention to take 
responsible steps to resolve them. He tried to prevent a foreclosure on his home in 
State-1 through short sales, but the bank refused his efforts. There is sufficient evidence 
to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant did not document participation in 
credit or other financial counseling. However, he presented evidence that he consulted 
with his accountant about his budget and credit issues. He completed payments on the 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy in November 2013. The foreclosure was completed in 2010. His 
finances appear to be under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. He made payments on his tax 
debt since July 2013, demonstrating a good-faith effort to resolve his unpaid taxes. He 
said he is also paying his 2013 taxes. AG ¶ 20(d) applies. Applicant did not dispute the 
tax liability. Hence, AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment, based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 55-year-old 
employee of a defense contractor since 2013. He retired from the Army National Guard 
after serving for 20 years. People that know him attest to his patriotism, honesty, and 
strong character. He acknowledges his past financial problems, including tax issues. He 
has made payments to the IRS since July 2013 and will continue to do so until his 
liability is resolved. Other than the alleged financial issues, there is no other adverse 
evidence in the record. After observing his demeanor and evaluating his testimony, 
 
 
7 
 
 
which was credible and forthright, I am confident that he will continue to pay his legal 
obligations. There is no evidence indicating that the outstanding tax debts create a 
potential for pressure, exploitation or duress.   
  
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt or concerns as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Given his 
awareness of the potential negative effect additional delinquent debts could have on his 
employment, the likelihood that similar issues will occur is minimal. Applicant sufficiently 
met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                  
    
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
