 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-05143 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 19, 2013. On 
November 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 21, 2015, denied the allegations in the 
SOR, and requested a decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on February 24, 2015. On May 4, 2015, a 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 through 6, 
 2
was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the 
FORM on May 18, 2015, and she submitted a seven-page letter (Response to FORM) 
and Exhibits A through O, which were added to the record, without objection from 
Department Counsel. She objected to the admission of Item 4, an unauthenticated 
summary of a personal subject interview. I have sustained her objection and will not 
consider Item 4. The case was assigned to me on August 4, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old material expeditor employed by a defense contractor 
since January 2012. She is currently deployed overseas. She was previously employed 
by defense contractors and deployed overseas from June 2009 to March 2010 and 
March to November 2011. She was unemployed from February to June 2009, March to 
September 2010, and November 2011 until she began her current job. She has held a 
security clearance since February 2011.  
 
 In July 2003, Applicant purchased a home and lived in it with her mother and two 
daughters. In May 2005, she decided to move to a better neighborhood. She purchased 
another home and rented her former home. On the advice of a friend, she purchased a 
second rental property in July 2005. In December 2005, she began having financial 
problems because one tenant failed to pay the rent and the other tenant moved out on 
short notice and left the house infested with roaches and in need of expensive 
rehabilitation. Applicant was unable to make the mortgage payments on her two rental 
properties and her family home, and she lost both rental houses to foreclosure. The 
lenders did not claim any deficiencies on the first mortgages. She was able to obtain a 
loan modification on the family home and keep her loan payments current.  
 
A September 2013 credit bureau report (CBR) reflects that a second mortgage 
on one of the rental properties was charged off in October 2007. (Item 5 at 3) An April 
2014 CBR reflects that the charged-off debt was referred for collection. (Item 6 at 5.) 
However, the CBRs do not reflect a transfer of this debt to a debt collection agency. In 
June 2015, while home on leave from her overseas place of duty, Applicant obtained a 
Verification of Mortgage document from the original mortgage lender, reflecting that the 
second mortgage was foreclosed in November 2014, and that there was a zero balance 
on the account. (Exhibit A.)  
 
 Applicant used a credit card for new appliances and improvements when she 
converted her personal residence to a rental property. The credit card account became 
delinquent when she encountered problems with her tenants, and it was referred for 
collection. As is common practice, the debt was transferred or sold several times and 
assigned new account numbers. The debt appears on her CBRs and is alleged in the 
SOR under the name of one of the first collection agencies in the chain. In June 2012, 
the collection agency then holding the debt obtained a consent judgment, settling the 
debt for $4,500, with Applicant agreeing to pay it at the rate of $100 per month. (Answer 
to SOR at 6.) The debt was paid in full in June 2015. (Exhibit B.) Based on the 
 3
transaction dates in the CBRs, the similarity of the amount reflected as in collection, and 
the absence of any other collection accounts for similar amounts in Applicant’s CBRs, I 
am satisfied that the plaintiff who obtained the consent judgment and received 
Applicant’s payments was the successor of the collection agency alleged in the SOR.  
 
 In January 2015, Applicant hired a law firm to work with the credit bureaus to 
audit and verify the two entries on which the SOR was based. As of the date the record 
closed, her dispute of the two entries had not been resolved. 
 
 Applicant’s monthly income is $5,556, and her living expenses are about $1,362. 
Her only debt payment is $1,343 for her home mortgage loan. She has a net monthly 
remainder of about $2,581. (Exhibit J.) As an employee working outside the United 
States, only her wages in excess of $90,000 are taxable, and she is exempt from her 
state income tax.  
 
 Two of Applicant’s friends, who have known her for many years, describe her as 
“respected and loved in our community,” organized, efficient, and dependable. (Exhibits 
M and N.) Her supervisor considers her dedicated, reliable, punctual, and trustworthy. 
(Exhibit O.) Her most recent annual performance appraisals have rated her as “5” on a 
5-point scale for job knowledge, quality of work, promptness, and “4” for reliability, 
initiative, and values. (Exhibit K.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 4
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges a delinquent second mortgage placed for collection for $34,548 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) and a delinquent credit card account placed for collection for $8,163 (SOR 
¶ 1.b). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 5
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The documents in the FORM, Applicant’s answer to the SOR, and her response 
to the FORM establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) 
(“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are 
potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is established. Applicant’s debts were recent, but only two debts are 
at issue, and they occurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur, 
because Applicant is no longer involved with rental properties.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Applicant’s irresponsible tenants and her periods of 
unemployment were conditions beyond her control. She acted responsibly by 
maintaining contact with her creditors, reaching a payment agreement on the credit card 
debt, and successfully resolving both debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is partially established. Applicant has not obtained financial 
counseling in the traditional sense, but her financial problems are under control. 
 6
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the credit card debt, because Applicant made all 
payments as agreed and the debt is resolved. It is not established for the delinquent 
second mortgage, because it was resolved by foreclosure. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established. Applicant contacted the original creditor for the second 
mortgage and determined that the debt was resolved. She has provided documentary 
evidence that she has retained a law firm to correct the adverse entries on her CBRs 
and she has documented the basis for her dispute. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has worked for various defense contractors since June 2009, and she 
enjoys a reputation for dedication, reliability, and trustworthiness. She has held a 
security clearance since February 2011, apparently without incident. In spite of being 
overseas, she diligently obtained the necessary documentation to support her 
responses to the SOR and the FORM.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 7
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
