 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 14-03854 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a 12-year history of drug abuse, which he began in 2000. He failed 
to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns raised by this conduct. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
In February 2014 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (Item 3). 
On November 6, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline H, (Drug Involvement). 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 9, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 20, 2015, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing four Items, and mailed 
Applicant a complete copy the same day. Applicant received the FORM on May 19, 
2015, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. He timely submitted additional documents, which I marked as Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A, and entered into the record without an objection from Department 
Counsel. On July 14, 2015, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all three allegations contained in the SOR. His admissions are 
accepted as factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old and unmarried. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2009. 
He began working for his current employer in December 2012. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant admitted that he has a history of illegally using marijuana beginning in 
May 2000, when he was 14 years old. He continued using it until July 2012, when he 
was 26 years old and out of college. He used it approximately 50 times. He admitted 
that he used illegal cocaine approximately five times, between April 2008 and July 2012. 
He illegally used ecstasy on at least one occasion in July 2011, when he was 25 years 
old. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant stated that he used marijuana to relieve stress due to “hardships 
relating to personal relationships and employment.” (Item 2; AE A at 1.) He said that 
individuals close to him died; he broke up with his girlfriend; his father was incarcerated; 
and his good friend became addicted to substances. He tried and used cocaine and 
ecstasy out of his curiosity and desire for experimentation. (Item 2.) He takes full 
responsibility for his illegal use and did not offer any excuses for his misconduct. He 
said the last time he used an illegal substance was three years ago. (AE A at 1, 2.)  
 
 Applicant said that he no longer associates with people who use illegal 
substances. (Item 2.) He submitted copies of his resume; a letter of admission to 
graduate school; a copy of his college transcript; and letters of recommendation. Two 
coworkers recommended him to the graduate school program. (AE A at 10, 11.) He also 
submitted a 2014 performance review on which he received a “consistently exceeds 
expectations” rating. (AE A at 12.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
3 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides: 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concerns pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
 
 
4 
 
 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition). 
 
Applicant has a 12-year history of using illegal drugs that began in 2000 while he 
was attending junior high school. The evidence raises disqualifying security concerns 
under AG ¶ 25(a), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised in 
this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
 
 
5 
 
 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Due to the length and frequency of Applicant’s history of illegal drug use, and the 
relatively short period of abstinence (three years) in comparison, AG ¶ 26(a) does not 
provide evidence of mitigation. Applicant provided some evidence of his disassociation 
from drug-using associates. Thus, AG ¶ 26(b)(1) has limited application. There is no 
evidence to establish mitigation through a drug treatment program under  AG ¶ 26(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment, based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 31-year-old 
man, who has successfully worked for a defense contractor since December 2012. He 
stated that he has not used illegal drugs since July 2012, but provided insufficient 
credible evidence to corroborate that assertion or to assure the Government that he will 
not to use them in the future. For example, the record does not contain a solid and 
favorable prognosis from a health care provider that he is unlikely to use them again, 
random drug screenings, or other independent documentation to verify his non-usage 
and mitigate the security concerns. While he appears to be performing well at his job 
and in school, that information is not sufficient to find that he no longer poses a security 
risk. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with concerns as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising from his drug involvement. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:         Against Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                  
    
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
