KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline C
DIGEST: Applicant was on notice of the burden on him to provide information to support his
case in mitigation.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-02632.a1
DATE: 08/28/2015
DATE: August 28, 2015
In Re:
--------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02632
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On   
August 4, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign
Influence) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On June 25, 2015, after considering the
record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ 
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied due process and
whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with
the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Government contractor.  Born in Taiwan to Taiwanese parents, he
came to the U.S. in the early 1980s and became a naturalized citizen ten years later.  He received
a security clearance in 2004.  Applicant possesses a U.S. passport.  He also obtained a Taiwanese
passport in the mid-2000s.  He used it to travel to Taiwan three times since 2007.  He claimed that
he used both his U.S. and Taiwanese passports and that customs officials stamped both of them.  He
also stated that he had destroyed his Taiwanese passport, although he provided no corroboration.
Applicant submitted no information about any financial or property interests in Taiwan.  He
has relatives living in that country, including a grandmother and other family members.  He provided
no information about them, for example whether they had any connections with the military, worked
for the Taiwanese government, etc.  He also provided little information about the extent of his
contacts with them.
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy and has the 21st largest economy in the world.  It is also
one of the most active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary information.  Since 2000, the
country has been repeatedly involved in criminal espionage and export control violations of U.S.
technology with military applications.  Private sector acquisitions have resulted in foreign
governments obtaining U.S. technology.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge relied in large part upon a paucity of mitigating evidence.  He stated that
Applicant had provided nothing regarding the nature and extent of his contacts with his foreign
relatives or the extent of any property holdings he may have in Taiwan.  He also noted evidence that
Applicant had exercised a prerogative of Taiwanese citizenship by obtaining and using a passport
from that country.  He concluded that Applicant had not succeeded in mitigating the security
concerns in his case.
Discussion
Applicant stated that he had not been told that he needed to provide corroboration for his
claims to have destroyed his Taiwanese passport and to have used his U.S. passport.  The Directive
states that an applicant who chooses a decision on the written record has 30 days in which to submit
2
written objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanations of the evidence included in the
File of Relevant Material (FORM).  Directive ¶ E3.1.7.  It also describes various conditions that
could mitigate security concerns, including those raised in this case.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶¶ 8 and
11.  Applicant was provided a copy of the Directive.  Both the FORM and the cover letter
accompanying it clearly explained Applicant’s right to provide evidence.   Moreover,  the FORM
explicitly stated that Applicant had provided no evidence in mitigation or extenuation, including no
evidence corroborating his claim to have destroyed his passport.  Applicant received notice
sufficient to have apprised him of the kind of things that can mitigate security concerns, as well of
his right to present evidence in his own behalf.  Despite this notice, Applicant did not respond to the
FORM.  We find no reason to conclude that Applicant was denied his due process rights.
Applicant’s brief cites to matters not contained in the record, which we cannot consider. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant cites to some Hearing Office decisions that, he contends, are similar
to his and in which the applicants received clearances.  We give these cases due consideration as
persuasive authority.  However, each case must be decided upon its own merits.  Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  Hearing Office decisions are binding neither on other Hearing Office Judges
nor on the Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-14723 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 3, 2014).  In none of the
decisions that Applicant has cited do the Judges reference a paucity of mitigating evidence, as is the
case here.  These decisions do not demonstrate that the Judge’s overall decision was erroneous.  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed; Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields               
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
