1
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 14-01889
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Since 2008, Applicant has incurred approximately $32,000 of delinquent debt.
He failed to disclose information about his delinquencies and a prior felony on his
security clearance appellation, as required. He has provided neither documented
evidence that he is satisfying the delinquencies, nor any explanation for the security
clearance application omissions. Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns.
Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case
On July 8, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
 
 On August 20, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the
allegations and requesting a decision on the record rather than a hearing. On February
25, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) consisting
of documents supporting the Government’s allegations. Applicant received the file on
March 10, 2015, and was informed that he had until April 9, 2015 to submit a response.
Applicant submit a response, consisting of a one-page letter, within the time allotted,
and the case was subsequently assigned to me on April 27, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 40-year-old married man with two children, ages 15 and 20. He
has been married for 20 years. Shortly after finishing high school in 1992, he joined the
U.S. Army, serving for six years until his honorable discharge in 1998. (Item 2 at 17) 
Applicant enrolled in college in 2003, earning an associate’s degree, two years
later, in 2005. (Item 2 at 9) He has been attending apprentice school since 2012. (Item
at 9) For the past two and a half years, he has worked for a shipbuilding company. (Item
2 at 2)
Since 2008, Appellant has incurred multiple delinquent accounts, totalling
approximately $32,000. Approximately $29,000 of these accounts consist of student
loan debt. (Item 1) In his response to the FORM, Appellant contends that he entered a
student loan rehabilitation program in October 2014, and has been making monthly
payments since then. He provided no documentation indicating that he had either paid,
or was making payments toward the satisfaction of the other SOR debts.
Applicant admits falsifying his security clearance application by failing to provide
information about his delinquent finances and his prior arrests, as required. He provided
no explanation for these falsifications.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
3
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”
(AG ¶ 18) Since 2008, Applicant has incurred approximately $32,000 of delinquent debt.
AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” apply.
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable.
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s contention that he has been making payments on his student loans
through a payment plan developed in October 2014 was unsupported by any
documentary evidence. Similarly, he provided no insight into the circumstances
surrounding how he incurred the debts. Under these circumstances, none of the
mitigating conditions apply, and Applicant has failed to mitigate the financial
considerations security concern.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information (AG ¶ 15) Applicant falsified his security clearance application. AG ¶ 16(a),
“deliberate omission concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
4
 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities, “ applies.
Applicant provided no explanation for his responses, therefore, no mitigating
conditions are applicable. I conclude that he has failed to mitigate the personal conduct
security concerns.
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are as follows:
1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written
record. In doing so, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to
supplement the record with relevant and material facts articulating his position regarding
the circumstances surrounding the accrual of delinquent debt and the circumstances
surrounding his completion of the security clearance application. In addition, he failed to
offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding past efforts to
address delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, security concerns
remain. 
Formal Findings
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c: Against Applicant
5
 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
