 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01853 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 22, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 23, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 12, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 19, 
 
2 
 
 
2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 30, 2015. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. GE 1, 3, and 4 were admitted into evidence without objection. 
GE 2 was withdrawn. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through 
K, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on August 7, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR. His admissions were 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He is a college graduate. He did not serve in the 
military. He married in 1979 and divorced in 2009. He has two grown children.1  
 
Applicant worked for the federal government from 1979 to 2007, when he was 
terminated. He challenged the termination through the appropriate procedural and legal 
processes, including appealing the case in the circuit court. His termination was upheld. 
The loss of employment and legal fees severely impacted his finances. During this four 
year process, he supported himself with his savings, unemployment benefits, financial 
assistance from family and friends, and some contract work he obtained. He also 
became a personal trainer and earned some income to pay his monthly expenses. He 
indicated that because he did not have military service and therefore a Veteran’s 
Preference, he had difficulty competing for certain employment opportunities. In 
addition, he indicated he surpassed age requirements in his field of expertise. He was 
unable to qualify for educational loans. In 2012, he moved to a new state because he 
believed there were more opportunities, but he was unable to find consistent work. He 
has held his current job for about five months, but essentially has been unemployed 
since 2007, except for sporadic part-time employment from 2012 to 2015. He does not 
have medical insurance.2 
 
The judgment in SOR ¶ 1.b ($5,233) was paid in August 2007 and is resolved. 
Applicant paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m ($865) for unpaid 2008 state taxes. Applicant 
provided documents showing the debts are resolved. He testified the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h 
($27) owed to a communications company was paid telephonically, but he was unable 
to retrieve a receipt.3  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($9,378) is for a mortgage loan on property Applicant 
owns. He purchased the property in 2006. At some point, he contacted the mortgage 
creditor and advised it he could not make the monthly payment. He negotiated a 
modification to the loan to prevent foreclosure. He was able to transfer the delinquent 
                                                          
1 Tr. 26-28. 
 
2 Tr. 28, 74-83; Answer to SOR. 
 
3 Tr. 40-42, 44; Answer to SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
amount into the modified loan. His current monthly payments are $160. His current 
credit report shows the account is being paid as agreed. Applicant does not want to sell 
the property because he wants to leave it to his children. He estimated it is worth about 
$18,000 to $19,000.4 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.k ($99,845) is for a condominium Applicant owned. SOR ¶ 
1.l ($6,053) is the second mortgage on it. He admitted he was unable to pay the loans, 
and it was foreclosed. At some point, the city where the property is located condemned 
it. Applicant contacted the mortgage lender about a year ago and was advised his loans 
were in collection. He has not resolved the debts or provided current information 
regarding the status of the property.5 
 
The remaining seven debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($838), 1.c ($720), 1.d 
($3,127), 1.e ($1,015), 1.g ($11,962), 1.i ($675), and 1.j ($125) are not paid or resolved. 
Many of them have been delinquent for several years.6  
 
Applicant explained money has been tight since 2007. He has lived in his car or 
slept on someone’s couch. He has been on food stamps. He does not have enough 
money to file bankruptcy. He does not want to sell the real property he owns. He wants 
to work, but cannot find a job. He wants to pay his debts, but does not have the money.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 54-60, 88-92; GE 4, AE D, E.  
 
5 Tr. 46, 63-74; AE K. 
 
6 Tr. 44, 46, 50-51, 53, 60-62; Answer to SOR; GE 3 and 4 confirm Applicant’s debts. 
 
7 Tr. 81-88. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 
5 
 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant has nine delinquent debts totaling approximately $124,360 that he has 
been unable or unwilling to pay or resolve for several years. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant was terminated from his job in 2007. He challenged the termination and 
lost. He used his financial resources for attorney’s fees and living expenses for the 
years following the termination. He has been unable to find steady employment. His 
delinquent debts are numerous and unpaid. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s job loss, subsequent legal challenges, and lengthy unemployment or 
underemployment history severely affected his finances and ability to pay his delinquent 
debts. These are conditions that were beyond his control. For the full application of AG 
¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
owns land that is worth approximately $18,000 to $19,000 that he does not want to sell. 
He has this financial resource that would permit him to pay some of his delinquent debts 
and perhaps help him to become more financially stable, but has chosen not to pursue 
it. I find AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude Applicant’s financial problems are resolved or under control. AG ¶ 
 
6 
 
 
20(c) does not apply. He resolved the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.m. AG ¶ 
20(d) applies to these debts. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 58 years old. He was terminated from his job in 2007 and challenged 
the termination for years, exhausting his financial resources. He has been unable to find 
a job. He has accumulated numerous delinquent debts that are unpaid and unresolved. 
Applicant owns real property that despite his dire financial situation he is unwilling to sell 
to resolve some of his delinquent debts. His financial problems are likely to continue. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
  Subparagraph   1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.l:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.m:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
