 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-02377 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. DOD acted under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on January 7, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 22, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 
4, 2015, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 20, 2015. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence 
 
2 
 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through D, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to 
submit additional information. Applicant submitted AE E, which was admitted into 
evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 28, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the following SOR allegations: ¶¶ 1.a - 1.b, 1.d - 1.m, 1.o – 
1.t, and 1.v – 1.x. She denied ¶¶ 1.c, 1.n, and 1.u. The admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She has worked for 
this employer since September 2013. She is a high school graduate. She is married and 
has no children. She has no military service and this is her first time seeking a 
trustworthiness determination.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 23 delinquent debts and failure to file her 2012 state income 
tax return for a total amount of debt in excess of $16,213. The debts were listed in credit 
reports from September 2013, May 2014, and April 2015.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose because of periods of unemployment, the 
most recent was more than a month in 2010. Additionally, her husband suffered some 
mental health issues which caused him periods of unemployment, which affected their 
overall finances. Her husband is currently employed with the same contractor for whom 
she works. Applicant has looked into filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition, but could not 
afford the attorney’s fee. She provided a personal financial statement from April 2014 
showing that she has $20 left over every month after paying all expenses (not 
accounting for any debt payments). During her November 2013 trustworthiness 
interview, she acknowledged the debts and indicated that she would “take care” of the 
debts by 2014. The status of the SOR-related debts is as follows:3    
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1. c (past rent debt- $1,921; $1,000): 
 
 Applicant was evicted from this property because of nonpayment of rent. She 
claims that both debts result from the same transaction. The most recent credit report 
shows that each debt has a different account number. She did not produce evidence 
indicating they are the same debt. These debts are unresolved.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 6, 19, 28, 29; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 3-5. 
 
3 Tr. at 26-27; GE 2; Ans. 
 
4 Tr. at 60-61; GE 2; Ans. 
 
 
3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b (past rent debt- $1,120): 
 
 The date of last activity for this rent collection debt was January 2008. This debt 
has not been resolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d (credit card debt- $948): 
 
 The date of last activity for this credit card collection debt was October 2007. This 
debt has not been resolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e (car debt- $854): 
 
 The date of last activity for this collection debt was May 2012. Applicant 
explained that she was working toward paying this debt, but produced no evidence of 
results. This debt has not been resolved.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f (telecommunications debt- $552): 
 
 The date of last activity for this collection debt was December 2007. Applicant 
indicated this debt was not a priority for her to pay. This debt has not been resolved.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g (credit card debt- $470): 
 
 The date of last activity for this collection debt was January 2008. This debt has 
not been resolved.9 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h – 1k and 1.p – 1.t (medical accounts $294; $282; $100; $95; $56; 442; 
$139; $659; $579; $117): 
 
 Applicant admitted these delinquent medical accounts. She stated in her 
background interview they would be paid by January 2015, but provided no proof of 
payment. These debts are unresolved.10 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 60-61; GE 2, 4; Ans. 
 
6 Tr. at 61-62; GE 4; Ans. 
 
7 Tr. at 62; GE 4; Ans. 
 
8 Tr. at 63; GE 4; Ans. 
 
9 Tr. at 63; GE 4; Ans. 
 
10 Tr. at 63-64, 66-67; GE 4; Ans. 
 
 
4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l (utility debt- $56): 
 
 The date of last activity for this collection debt was January 2013. Applicant 
indicated the debt would be paid a few weeks from April 2014. She failed to supply 
proof of payment. This debt has not been resolved.11 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m (past rent debt- $748): 
 
 A judgment against Applicant was entered April 2003. This debt has not been 
resolved.12 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.n, 1.u (court-related debts $739; $331): 
 
 Applicant provided documentary support showing she paid these two delinquent 
debts that resulted from traffic offenses. These debts are resolved.13 
 
SOR ¶ 1.o (telecommunications account $1,132): 
 
 The date of first delinquency for this account was February 2012. Applicant plans 
on seeking a settlement, but provided no details. This debt is unresolved.14 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.v – 1.w (failure to file state income tax return for 2012 and state tax 
debt- $1,635): 
 
 Applicant admitted to failing to file her 2012 state income tax return. She stated 
that she now has filed that return. Evidence shows that she filed her 2012 federal tax 
return, and that she made three $100 payments toward her state tax debt bringing the 
balance down to $256. This debt is being resolved and the failure to file issue is 
resolved.15 
 
SOR ¶ 1.x (delinquent federal taxes $2,000): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that her paycheck is garnished $80 
every two weeks to pay this federal tax debt. This debt is resolved.16 
 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 64; GE 4; Ans. 
 
12 Tr. at 65; GE 5; Ans. 
 
13 Tr. at 65, 68; AE A; Ans. 
 
14 Tr. at 66; GE 5; Ans. 
 
15 Tr. at 68; GE 2; AE B, C; Ans. 
 
16 Tr. at 68; GE 2; AE E; Ans. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s mother wrote a letter of support indicating that Applicant was a strong 
and responsible person who is trying to get her financial house back in order. She has 
seen growth and maturity in her daughter and asks that she be allowed to continue in 
her job.17 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
17 AE D. 
 
 
6 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
  
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts and she failed to file her 2012 state tax 
return. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
7 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Although two debts were paid, one is being paid 
through involuntary garnishment actions, and she is making payments on her state tax 
debt, the remaining debts are unpaid. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
She was unemployed for periods of time, most recently for over a month in 2010 
and her husband had medical problems that prevented his employment. This is a 
condition beyond her control. She has made minimal effort to resolve the debts. She 
paid two, is paying her federal tax debt through wage garnishment, and her state debt 
through payments. Overall, the record evidence does not support that Applicant’s 
actions were responsible under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Other than inquiring into the possibility of filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition, 
there is no evidence of financial counselling. Given the unpaid status of the SOR debts, 
there are not clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. 
Although she paid two debts, is paying one through garnishment, and her state tax debt 
through a payment plan, evidence of good-faith efforts to pay or resolve the remaining 
debts is lacking. The debts that were paid are found in favor of Applicant. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply and ¶ 20(d) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant failed to supply documentary evidence to support her dispute of SOR ¶ 
1.c being duplicative with SOR ¶ 1.a. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
8 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense assessment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant became indebted and the 
character letter from her mother. However, I also considered that she has taken very 
little action to resolve her financial situation. She has not established a meaningful track 
record of financial responsibility, which causes me to question her ability to resolve her 
debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a– 1.m:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.n:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs: 1.o – 1.t:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs: 1.u – 1.x:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                
 
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
