 
1 
 
 
                                                                 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-03336 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jon D. Levin, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines J (criminal 
conduct) and G (alcohol consumption). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 5, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86). On November 18, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant. The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
  
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines J (criminal conduct) and G 
(alcohol consumption). The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with national security to continue a security clearance for 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for 
a determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked. 
 
On December 11, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. On January 30, 2015, 
Department Counsel indicated he was ready to proceed. On April 8, 2015, the case was 
assigned to me. On April 22, 2015, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing 
for May 29, 2015. On May 20, 2015, DOHA issued an amended hearing notice, setting 
the case for May 27, 2015. The hearing was convened as rescheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified and called two witnesses. I held the 
record open until June 5, 2015 to afford the Applicant an opportunity to submit 
additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE B and AE C, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 3, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations with explanations. After a thorough 
review of the record, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old senior principal engineer employed by a defense 
contractor since March 2009. He seeks to retain his secret security clearance as a 
requirement for his continued employment. (GE 1; Tr. 34-35, 44)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1982. He was awarded an 
associate of arts degree in engineering in May 1985, and a bachelor of science degree 
in electrical engineering in December 1987. (GE 1; Tr. 35-36, 40) Since college, 
Applicant has primarily worked in the defense industry and was initially granted a 
security clearance in 1988. (GE 1; Tr. 41-44) 
 
Applicant was married to his first wife from December 1989 to July 2004, and 
was married to his second wife from August 2004 to August 2010. Both marriages 
ended by divorce. However, Applicant listed his second wife as a cohabitant stating, 
“[w]e live like we’re married.” (GE 1; Tr. 36-37) Applicant has no children. He views his 
second wife’s two adult children, who are independent, as stepchildren. (Tr. 37-38) 
Applicant did not serve in the armed forces. (GE; Tr. 38) 
 
Criminal Conduct/Alcohol Consumption 
 
Applicant admits the sole SOR allegations alleged under the criminal conduct 
and alcohol consumption guidelines. The allegation under the criminal conduct guideline 
states that Applicant was convicted in July 2012 of driving under the influence (DUI), 
and sentenced to 11 months and 29 days in jail, of which anything beyond 48 hours was 
 
3 
 
 
suspended. He was also fined, ordered to pay court costs, ordered to complete DUI 
school, ordered to complete an alcohol assessment, and placed on probation for one 
year. Applicant’s DUI occurred after he drank too much and was involved in a single car 
accident. He successfully completed probation in July 2013. (SOR ¶ 1.a; SOR answer; 
Tr. 44-48, 52-57, 68; GE 2 – GE 4) The allegation under the alcohol consumption 
guideline stated that after being diagnosed as alcohol dependent during treatment and 
counseling in October and November 2011, Applicant continued to use alcohol. (SOR ¶ 
1.b; SOR answer; Tr. 46-47, 69; GE 4) 
 
Applicant testified that he has not had a drink in “over a year” by following the 
“zero, one, two, three” rule, a sobriety program. He has not had an alcohol-related 
incident since his 2012 DUI. Since Applicant quit drinking, he regularly goes to the gym 
and follows a strict diet adding that he is, “probably in the best shape of [his] life.” (Tr. 
48-51) Applicant testified that he was unaware that he had been diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent in 2011, but has since been made aware of that diagnosis as a result of 
these proceedings. (Tr. 57-64, 67, 69-72)  
 
Applicant submitted an alcohol assessment completed by a licensed professional 
counselor (LPC)1 in May 2015. The counselor administered the Substance Abuse 
Subtle Screen Inventory-3 (SASSI-3), and conducted a clinical interview to include a 
mental status examination. The test results ruled out the presence of any type of alcohol 
dependency disorder, past or present. The counselor added that based on his 
assessment, Applicant would not need any type of follow-up counseling or program 
because no alcohol-related problem was identified. Applicant is at low risk to repeat any 
past behavior related to questionable judgment such as drinking and driving. (Tr. 64-67, 
70-72; AE A) 
 
Post-hearing, the LPC reviewed Applicant’s records from his 2011 treatment and 
counseling that diagnosed him as alcohol dependent. The LPC stated in reviewing the 
records from the treatment program, there was a lack of any objective evaluation or 
assessment which would justify such a diagnosis. He added there was no stated criteria 
per the Diagnostic Manual IV of the American Psychiatric Association. Based on his 
clinical impressions and testing, the LPC concluded and was able to rule out the 
presence of an alcohol dependence disorder. He added that labeling Applicant in 2011 
as alcohol dependent may have been premature and possibly inaccurate. (AE B, AE C) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s engineering manager supervisor (EM) testified. EM met Applicant 
approximately 25 years ago when they were working for another defense contractor. He 
has had an opportunity to observe Applicant on and off the job. EM recruited Applicant 
                                                          
1
 The LPC’s resume provides extensive information about his education, background, and 
experience. The LPC has completed doctorate level education, has professional experience spanning 45 
years, was an adjunct faculty member, has provided consulting services, and conducted or held 
numerous presentations and training during his professional career. The LPC holds professional 
certificates, is a member of professional organizations, and has awards too numerous to mention. (AE C)  
 
4 
 
 
to work for their company approximately six years ago. Applicant has “some very unique 
skills” that are “critical to the performance of [defense contractor’s] contracts.” Applicant 
would not be able to perform his duties without a security clearance. Applicant is well 
respected inside and outside the company and is trustworthy and reliable. EM has held 
a secret security clearance for approximately 20 years. EM has no reservations or 
concerns recommending Applicant for a security clearance. (Tr. 18-34) 
 
 Applicant’s security manager and facility security officer (FSO) testified. The FSO 
has known the Applicant since 2009. The FSO stated that there were no security lapses 
as a result of Applicant’s 2012 DUI, and that Applicant has never been involved in a 
security violation. (Tr. 74-79) 
 
 Applicant spends his discretionary free time with his former wife and cohabitant. 
They enjoy camping, spending time with their three miniature Yorkies, and are involved 
with the local animal shelter. (Tr. 40) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
 
5 
 
 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
  
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline J, the Government’s concern is criminal activity creates doubt 
about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two potentially Disqualifying Conditions that could raise a 
security concern: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant’s criminal conduct is solely based on his 2012 DUI conviction. The 
Government established its case under Guideline J through Applicant’s admissions and 
evidence presented warranting application of AGs ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c). 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four potential Mitigating Conditions: 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (d) are fully applicable. Applicant presented credible evidence of 
actions taken to overcome his 2012 DUI conviction. He has established that he is not 
alcohol dependent, and during the infrequent times he consumes alcohol, he does so 
responsibly. As of his hearing date, Applicant had not consumed alcohol for one year. 
He is remorseful for his behavior and has initiated positive changes in his lifestyle. 
Applicant’s work behavior has not been indicative of having an alcohol problem. He is a 
valuable employee, who is reliable, dependable, and professional. His responsible use 
of alcohol is supported by his testimony and evidence presented. At his hearing, 
Applicant acknowledged the problems the misuse of alcohol caused him. He 
demonstrated remorse and a steadfast commitment to continue lifestyle changes 
consistent with responsible alcohol use. AG ¶¶ 31(b) and (c) are not relevant. 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G (alcohol consumption), the Government’s concern is that 
excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
At the onset of the case, the Government established its case under Guideline G 
through Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. Applicant continued to drink 
after he had purportedly been diagnosed as alcohol dependent in 2011. A discharge 
evaluation was prepared stating same and Applicant does not deny that such a 
diagnosis was made. However, he does dispute that the treatment center informed him 
of the alcohol dependent diagnosis, adding that he only became aware of that diagnosis 
as a result of these proceedings. 
 
Applicant produced substantial evidence rebutting his 2011 diagnosis. Having 
carefully reviewed the 2011 and 2015 evaluations, as well as the qualifications of the 
respective counselors, I find the 2015 diagnosis and evaluation to be more persuasive. 
Accordingly, I accept the conclusions and diagnosis of Applicant’s 2015 evaluation that 
 
7 
 
 
he is not alcohol dependent and labeling Applicant in 2011 as alcohol dependent may 
have been premature and possibly inaccurate. Furthermore, Applicant was not aware of 
a diagnosis that was later determined to be unsubstantiated. Having reached this 
conclusion, no further discussion under this concern is necessary.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The discussion in the 
Analysis section under Guideline J is incorporated in this whole-person section. 
However further comments are warranted. 
 
I was particularly impressed with Applicant’s demeanor during his hearing and 
the apparent effect this process has had on him. Applicant has been willing to do 
whatever is necessary to recover from his 2012 DUI conviction. The process has been 
costly for him, not only financially, but also personally and professionally. Applicant has 
dedicated the majority of his adult working life to the defense industry. He attained a 
high level of trust and support within his company. He demonstrated the correct attitude 
and commitment to responsible alcohol consumption.  
 
Also noteworthy is Applicant’s past behavior, which serves as a reliable indicator 
of future behavior. In particular, he has successfully held a security clearance 
intermittently since 1988. He has been cooperative throughout this process and 
recognizes the gravity of these proceedings. He made significant and improved lifestyle 
changes, is a responsible and contributing member of society, and is a valued and 
trusted employee. In sum, I find Applicant has presented sufficient evidence of 
rehabilitation.  
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set forth 
 
8 
 
 
in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole-person factors” and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
