 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02983 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
J, criminal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 10, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 On May 18, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 19, 2015. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 24, 2015. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on July 28, 2015. The Government offered exhibits 
 
2 
 
 
(GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and did not offer any exhibits. The record was held open to allow Applicant to 
submit documents. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection.1 The record closed on August 4, 2015. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 5, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant provided explanations for all of the allegations in the SOR but did not 
affirmatively admit or deny each one. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 44 years old. He married in 2005 and has a stepson who is in 
college. He served in the Army from 2002 to 2009 and received an honorable 
discharge. While in the Army he deployed twice to Iraq and was in Kuwait for a year.2 
He has worked for a federal contactor since 2011.3  
 
Applicant was arrested in October 1992, and charged with fraud-insufficient 
funds worthless check, a 3rd degree felony. He pled guilty in January 1993 to a lesser 
offense and was sentenced to a day in jail and a fine. 
 
In September 1999, Applicant was arrested and charged with failure to appear 
for a misdemeanor offense and habitual driving with a suspended license with 
knowledge. In October 1999, he pled nolo contender on both counts He was found 
guilty and fined. 
 
In May 2000, Applicant was arrested and charged with failure to appear for a 
misdemeanor charge and contempt of court. This was a result of his failure to pay a fine 
for a traffic offense and then subsequently driving on a suspended license. The 
disposition is unknown.4 
 
In September 2000, Applicant was charged with traffic violator failure to appear 
and contempt of court. In November 2000, he pled nolo contender to both counts and 
was sentenced to one day in jail. This charge was a result of his failure to pay for traffic 
violation fines and driving on a suspended license.5  
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s email memorandum noting he did not object to the Applicant’s 
exhibits. 
 
2 AE B. 
 
3 Tr. 37-40. 
 
4 Answer to the SOR. 
 
5 GE 2 and Applicant’s explanations in his Answer to the SOR provide sufficient evidence of the SOR 
allegations. 
 
3 
 
 
With regards to the above charges and convictions, Applicant stated they 
occurred 15 to 20 years ago, and he has changed since then. He no longer drives the 
way he used to. He did not have a lot of money then when he wrote the checks without 
funds. He did not recall some of the charges.6  
 
In July 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged with felony grand theft retail. In 
November 2014, he appeared in circuit court and pled guilty to grand theft. He was 
sentenced to unsupervised probation for two days and sentenced to two days in jail, 
with two days credit.  
 
The police report details that Applicant purchased a camera online from a retail 
store. Approximately ten days later, Applicant went to the store to return it and received 
a full refund of $4,279. Applicant went back to the store weeks later to return another 
item he purchased online. At that point, the store security recognized Applicant and 
contacted the police to report that the expensive camera purchased by Applicant was 
not the item that he returned, but rather Applicant returned an inexpensive camera. It 
was alleged that Applicant replaced the expensive camera with the inexpensive camera 
to obtain the large cash refund. Applicant denied the charges at the time he was 
arrested.7  
 
Applicant testified he purchased a camera online that he then returned to the 
retail store. He stated the clerk checked the camera and verified it before providing him 
with the refund. He believes someone in the store replaced the camera after he 
returned it. Applicant hired an attorney. He stated his security manager told him he 
should “fight it.” He pled not guilty to the charge when he was arraigned. The attorney 
initially cost him $5,000, and he was concerned that he faced a trial that would cost him 
more, and he did not know how long the trial would take and it would “drag on.” He 
explained he had a friend who spent $23,000 for attorney’s fees and his attorney did not 
know how much her fees would be. He stated he agreed to plead guilty to the charge to 
save the cost and time, but he still maintained his innocence. He stated: “So, I just didn’t 
want to spend all that money, you know, to clear my name and have it drag on forever.”8 
He believed he was not really pleading guilty, but was only doing it because it was 
convenient to do so. He did not know it would affect his clearance.9 
 
Applicant provided a document that states “plea of guilty and negotiated 
sentence.” Handwritten on the document and inserted after the word guilty it states “by 
convenience.” Throughout the document, prior to the word “guilty” the handwritten term 
“by convenience” is inserted.” The terms of the plea agreement are: 1. “Withheld 
adjudication; 2. Payment in full of $4,279.99 in restitution to [retail store and location] (it 
                                                          
6 Tr. 35-37. 
 
7 Tr. 22-32; GE 3.  
 
8 Tr. 34. 
  
9 Tr. 22-33. 
 
4 
 
 
is noted it was paid on the date of the agreement); 3. Fines and costs in the amount of 
$721 plus $50 (and an illegible note.)” The document was signed on November 13, 
2014, by all of the parties, including the circuit judge.10  
 
An official court document dated December 9, 2014, regarding the disposition of 
Applicant’s charge states:  
 
Offense: Grand Theft 
Plea: Guilty 
Adjudication: Withheld 
Disposition Date: November 13, 2014 
Disposition: On 11/13/2014, Defendant permitted to withdraw plea of not 
guilty and plead guilty. Adjudication of guilt withheld, Defendant placed on 
unsupervised probation for 2 days, serve 2 days in [local] county jail with 2 
days credit.  
 
Court costs and fees of $771.00 imposed.11 
 
Applicant testified he pled guilty to the felony charge of grand theft so he could 
resolve the case. He did not believe it would go on his record. He did not know what the 
status was of the “withheld adjudication” but he indicated he was not currently on 
probation. When asked why he purchased the expensive camera, he stated 
photography is a hobby, but he did not know why he purchased it.12  
 
Applicant’s supervisor provided a character letter. He indicated Applicant has 
never received any disciplinary actions or warnings since working for him beginning in 
2011. Applicant is diligent and punctual and has a positive attitude. He manages 
professional relationships with class and patience.13 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
10 AE A. 
 
11 GE 4. 
 
12 Tr. 49-53. 
 
13 AE C. 
 
5 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 
6 
 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under criminal conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant was arrested and convicted of charges four times from 1992 to 2000. 
The offenses he was charged with included a felony fraud for insufficient funds 
worthless check that he pled to a reduced charge; repeated failure to appear charges; 
habitual driving with a suspended license with knowledge; and repeated contempt of 
court charges. Applicant pled guilty to felony grand theft in 2014. I find the above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and the following two are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
  
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant repeatedly violated the law when he was a younger man from 1992 to 
2000. It appears he did not have any other criminal arrests or charges until 2014 when 
he was arrested and charged with felony grand theft. Applicant pled guilty to the felony 
charge. Although he has maintained his innocence, I do not have credible evidence to 
conclude he did not commit the offense. Due to the seriousness of the offense, and that 
it has been less than a year since the disposition, insufficient time has elapsed since the 
criminal behavior occurred. Insufficient evidence was produced to conclude the offense 
happened under unique circumstances such that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgement. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 
32(c) do not apply. There is some evidence of rehabilitation provided by Applicant’s 
supervisor. AG ¶ 32(d) has some application. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old married man who is a military veteran. He honorably 
served from 2002 to 2009, including two tours in Iraq and Kuwait for one year. He had a 
series of arrests and convictions when he was younger. In 2014, he pled guilty to felony 
grand theft. Despite his assertions that he did not commit the offense, he nevertheless 
pled guilty to save the expense and time of going to trial. He did not provide any further 
evidence to show the status of the “adjudication withheld.” He has not met his burden of 
persuasion. Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the criminal 
conduct guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
