1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-05053
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on August 29, 2011. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 13, 2014, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
2
Applicant received the SOR on March 18, 2014, and he answered it on April 5,
2014. Department Counsel requested a hearing before an administrative judge with the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). Department Counsel was prepared to
proceed on May 9, 2014, and I received the case assignment on May 15, 2014. DOHA
issued a Notice of Hearing on June 2, 2014, and I convened the hearing as scheduled
on June 10, 2014. The Government requested that a letter of rights and obligations,
dated May 9, 2014 and mailed to Applicant, be received as hearing exhibit (HE) 1.
Applicant did not object, and HE 1 was received in the record. In its case in chief, the
Government offered exhibits (GE) marked as 1 through 6, which were received and
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. He submitted exhibits (AE)
A through R, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 27, 2014. 
I held the record open until June 20, 2014, for Applicant to submit additional
matters. Applicant timely requested additional time to obtain the requested
documentation. On June 20, 2014, I issued an order granting Applicant until July 8,
2014 to submit the requested documentation. On July 8, 2014, Applicant advised that
he had not received the information requested and asked for more time. He was given
until July 16, 2014 to submit the requested documentation. On July 16, 2014, Applicant
advised that he had not received the requested information and said it was time to move
forward. Applicant did provide two documents which are marked, received, and
admitted into evidence as AE S and AE T. The Government did not object to these
documents. The email communication among Department Counsel, Applicant, and the
undersigned from June 20, 2014 through July 16, 2014 has been marked as AE U. The
record closed on July 16 , 2014.
Procedural Ruling
Notice
  
Applicant received the notice of the date, time and place of the hearing less than
15 days before the hearing. I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8. of the
Directive to receive the notice at least 15 days before the hearing. Applicant
affirmatively waived this right. (Tr. 9.)
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and
1.b of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied
the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1 and 2.a of the SOR. He neither admitted or denied the
allegation in SOR ¶ 2.b, which is deemed denied.  He also provided additional1
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 29-31.2
GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 35.3
GE 5; GE 6. The record also contains a credit report dated September 19, 2006. This credit report shows one4
bad debt, which is the debt shown as paid on the August 2011 credit report. Two other debts indicated that
he had been past due on his payments, but that his payments were current. At this time, his wife had problems
with past-due bills. All his other accounts were in good standing. GE 4.
3
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 59 years old, works as an engineering project manager for a
DOD contractor. He began his current employment in February 1999, after retiring from
the U.S. Army. Applicant served in the Army from October 1977 until his honorable
discharge in January 1998. He retired at the rank of major, pay grade O-4. While in the
Army, Applicant completed a bachelor’s degree in business administration in May 1988.
He worked in the private sector at another company for one year after his retirement.2
Applicant and his wife married in November 1979. They have two sons, ages 32
and 26. His oldest son now serves in the Army. Applicant moved from State X to State
Y in August 2010. He continues to live in State Y.3
The August 23, 2011 and the November 5, 2013 credit reports reflect that
Applicant pays his monthly bills and that all his credit accounts are or were current,
except one charged-off debt, which has been paid. The August 23, 2011 credit report
indicates that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed a tax lien against Applicant in
May 2011. The November 5, 2013 credit report indicates that the IRS released its tax
lien.4
In 2000, Applicant prepared his federal and state income tax returns for the tax
year 1999. Between his earnings and military retirement income, he owed
approximately $10,000 in federal income taxes. He acknowledged that he did not
contact the IRS to discuss a possible payment plan as he did not think the IRS allowed
payment plans. He did not seek help from any source to resolve this problem. He simply
did not file his income tax returns for that year. He also did not file his federal or state
income tax returns for the tax years 2000 through 2011 because he was concerned that
he would be in trouble with his employer or the IRS. During this time period, he
increased the amount of money being withheld from his paycheck for his yearly taxes.
He believed that the increase in money withheld to pay his yearly taxes covered the
GE 3; Tr. 31-33, 37.5
GE 3; GE 6; Tr. 33, 34, 41-42.6
GE 3; GE 6; AE A-AE M; AE O; AE Q; AE S; Tr. 31-34, 42-44, 47.7
Attachments to Response to SOR; AE N; AE P; AE R; Tr. 35-37, 49, 51.8
4
income taxes he owed. He explained that he made his decision because of ignorance
and stupidity.5
The IRS filed a tax lien against Applicant in May 2011 for $126,512 in past-due
income taxes plus interest and penalties. The IRS notified his employer of its intent to
garnish his pay for the income taxes owed. The IRS instituted a garnishment of his
wages in May 2011, initially at the rate of $2,650 a paycheck. By July 2012, Applicant
was garnished about $2,983 a paycheck. This amount declined to approximately $2,704
a paycheck beginning August 20, 2012. Between May 2011 and December 2012,
Applicant paid the IRS approximately $107,000 on his past-due income taxes, as well
as interest and penalties. He paid his federal tax debt in full.6
When he received the notice of garnishment in 2011, Applicant retained the
services of a tax professional. With the assistance of the tax professional, Applicant
prepared his federal income tax returns for the tax years 1999, 2000, and 2003 through
2011. His income tax returns were filed with the IRS on September 9, 2011. Applicant
provided a copy of the income tax returns for these years, which reflect that Applicant
owed approximately $61,250 in back income taxes plus penalties and interest. Applicant
also provided a copy of a summary of his last 13 payments to the IRS (July 9, 2012 to
December 13, 2012). This document indicates that in this time period, he paid the IRS
$39,195 and that his past-due income tax balance for each of the years 2005 through
2011 was zero. The IRS released its lien after Applicant paid his past-due income taxes.
Applicant timely filed his 2012 and 2013 federal income taxes. At the recommendation
of the IRS, Applicant now has his income taxes withheld from his pay as a single person
with no exemptions. He also has federal income taxes withheld from his retirement pay.7
Since moving to State Y, Applicant has filed his state income tax returns and paid
any income taxes owed. Applicant did not file income tax returns in State X for the same
years he did not file his income tax returns with the IRS. After moving to State Y, he
continued to have money withheld from his pay to pay income taxes in State X. On an
unknown date, he filed income tax returns with State X as a non-resident for the years
2011, 2012 and 2013. He received a small tax refund for each year. He no longer has
income tax money withheld from his pay for State Y.8
Applicant has not filed his federal income tax returns for the tax years 2001 and
2002. His tax professional advised him that the IRS informed the tax professional that
Applicant did not have to file his income tax returns for these years. Applicant does not
know why the IRS is not requesting his income tax returns for these years. After the
hearing, Applicant spoke with his tax professional and the IRS. He requested a letter
AE U, p. 1 and 4; Tr. 31, 48.9
AE T; AE U, p. 1 and 4; Tr.  35-36, 49.10
Response to SOR; GE 2; Tr. 38-39, 52.11
SOR; GE 2.12
SOR; GE 1.13
5
from the IRS to verify that he did not need to file these income tax returns. Prior to June
20, 2014, the IRS told him he would received a letter in 7 to 10 days. He has not
received the letter.9
Applicant has not filed his past-due income tax returns for State X because his
tax professional told him that State X would not accept income tax returns beyond the
last three years. State X has not filed a lien against him. His tax professional also told
him that he would not have received a refund from State X if he owed back income
taxes. After the hearing, Applicant contacted State X, which advised him that he did not
have a tax liability.  At the instruction of State X, Applicant wrote a letter requesting a
Statement of Account. He has not yet received a response to his letter.10
When he completed his e-QIP on August 14, 2006, Applicant answered “no” to
the following questions under Section 28: Your Financial Delinquencies:
a. In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any
debt(s)?
b. Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?
The Government alleges that he intentionally falsified his answer to these
questions because he did not acknowledge his failure to file his federal and state
income tax returns, and he did not admit that he owed federal and state income taxes.
Applicant denies he intentionally falsified his answers. He explained that at the time he
completed his e-QIP, he considered as debts only his recurring monthly expenses, such
as rent or utilities, and consumer debt, such as credit cards or loans. He did not
consider his income taxes as a debt to acknowledge in answering this question.11
On the same e-QIP, Applicant also answered “no” to questions in section 27
which asked if he had filed bankruptcy, had his wages garnished, had judgments
against him, or had a lien for failing to file his taxes. These answers were truthful in
2006 and not at issue in this case.12
Applicant completed a new e-QIP on August 26, 2011. In section 26, he
answered “no” to the following questions: “m. Have you been over 180 days delinquent
on any debts(s)?” and “n. Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?”
The SOR does not allege that he falsified these answers.13
GE 1. Page 26 of GE 1 is missing from the record.14
6
On the same e-QIP, Applicant acknowledged that he failed to file his federal and
state income tax returns and that his wages had been garnished. Applicant explained
that his wages were being garnished by the IRS for income taxes owed.14
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
7
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;    
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.
Applicant developed significant financial problems when he failed to file his
federal and state income tax returns from 2000 until 2011. Initially he did not file these
income tax returns because he lacked funds to pay the taxes owed. His actions show a
history of not meeting his financial obligations. These three disqualifying conditions
apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
¶ 20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; and
8
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control.
Three years ago, Applicant took control of his income tax debt after the IRS
garnished his pay. He hired a tax professional, who prepared his 1999, 2000, and 2003
through 2011 federal income tax returns and filed the returns on Applicant’s behalf.
After filing his past-due income tax returns, Applicant and the IRS agreed to his
continuing to pay his substantial income tax debt through his wage garnishment.
Applicant fully paid his past-due income taxes by December 2012, and the IRS released
its lien.
Applicant understands that he exercised poor judgment when he did not file his
income taxes in 1999 and decided not to file his federal and state income taxes for
many more years. Based on this conduct, he knows the negative financial problems
which he can create for himself by not filing his taxes timely, and the negative impact
such conduct could have on his eligibility to maintain a security clearance and possibly
his job. He finally took responsibility for this conduct. In all other aspects of his life, he
has acted responsibly and shown good judgment. Applicant has corrected his federal
tax problem. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) apply as it is unlikely that he will fail to file future
income tax returns, and he has paid his tax debt to the IRS.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov.17, 2004)(explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-2313315
at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).
9
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group. 
The Government alleges two incidents of falsification by Applicant when he
completed his 2006 SF-86 and answered “no” to the questions about delinquent debts.
For AG ¶ 16(a) to apply, Applicant’s omissions must be deliberate. The Government
established that Applicant omitted material facts from his 2006 security clearance
application when he failed to provide information about his unpaid federal and state
income taxes. This information is material to the evaluation of Applicant’s
trustworthiness and honesty. He denied intentionally falsifying his answers to the 2006
e-QIP, and he denied an intent to hide information about his unpaid income taxes. At
the hearing, he again denied intentionally withholding information from the Government
about his unpaid income taxes in 2006. 
When the allegation of falsification is controverted, the Government has the
burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative
judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is
direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or state of mind at the
time the omission occurred.15
Applicant credibly explained that he thought the question was asking for
information about unpaid credit card debts or expenses related to his usual monthly
living expenses, such as rent, phones, or utilities. He indicated that he did not think
about his income taxes as a debt in this sense, rather he focused on bills, particularly
since his wife had fallen behind in some credit card debt. His thoughts are bolstered by
the 2006 credit report, which does show some late payments and one charged-off debt.
Based on his credible testimony and the record evidence, I find that Applicant did not
intentionally falsify his 2006 e-QIP. Even if I did conclude he falsified his answers
intentionally, I would find that he mitigated any security concerns under AG ¶ 17(a) as
the Government first learned about his tax problem when he provided this information
on his 2011 e-QIP. SOR allegation 2.a is found in favor of the Applicant.
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s failure to file his income tax returns for so many
years raises a concern about his personal conduct and judgment which could create a
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Applicant’s decision to ignore his
income tax issues shows poor judgment and a lack of responsibility which could make
him vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation or duress. A security concern has been
established under AG ¶ 16(e).
10
The Personal Conduct guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶¶ 17(a) through ¶
17(g), and the following are potentially applicable:
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
Applicant acknowledged his failure to file his taxes in his 2011 e-QIP after the
IRS garnished his pay. In September 2011, he filed federal income tax returns for 11 of
the 13 previous years. In just over 18 months, he paid his substantial income tax debt
as well as interest and penalties assessed by the IRS. He has timely filed his federal
income tax returns for the tax years 2012 and 2013. He has followed the IRS
recommendation to have his income taxes deducted from his pay as a single person
with no exemptions and is having federal income taxes withheld from his military
retirement benefit to assure that he will be able to pay his income taxes in the future. He
has taken the necessary steps to change his behavior and to prevent a reoccurrence of
this problem. By taking affirmative action to correct his past income tax issues,
Applicant eliminated his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. He has
mitigated the security concerns raised under AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e). Guideline E is
found in Applicant’s favor.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
11
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. When he
prepared his 1999 federal income tax returns, Applicant learned that he owed
substantial additional income taxes to the IRS. Instead of seeking immediate help with
this problem, he ignored it. He not only did not file his income tax return or pay his
income taxes in 2000, but he chose not to file his income tax returns for many years.
While he did not file his income taxes, he did increase the amount of taxes being
withheld from his pay, believing that he had resolved his problem. Applicant
acknowledged that he exercised poor judgment and acted stupidly in handling his
income tax situation.
When the IRS started garnishing his pay, Applicant took action. He hired a tax
professional and filed all his past due federal income tax returns and three years of
state income tax returns. He contacted the IRS thereafter and reached an agreement to
continue garnishing his pay at more than $5,000 a month. Within 19 months, Applicant
paid more than $100,000 to eliminate his federal income tax debt. He followed the
recommendation of the IRS to have taxes withheld from his pay as a single person with
no deductions, and he now has taxes withheld from his military retirement. These
actions assure him that he will have sufficient money to pay his future income taxes.
Applicant failure to file income tax returns raised serious questions about his
judgement and trustworthiness. He ignored his problem for many years, but he has now
resolved the problem and taken steps to make sure he will not find himself in this
situation in the future. He has changed his behavior and has demonstrated that he will
file his taxes in future years. He cannot be coerced, pressured, or exploited because of
this conduct. He pays his monthly expenses and did so while his pay was being heavily
garnished without a negative impact on his finances.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal conduct
and finances under Guidelines E and F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
12
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
