 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03122 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns and the 
Government did not prove deliberate falsification by Applicant, therefore personal 
conduct disqualifying conditions were not established. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 30, 2014, and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on March 28, 2015 (the Government evidence is 
referred to in the FORM as “Evidence”, but in this decision the evidence will be referred 
to as Items). The FORM was mailed to Applicant who received it on July 14, 2015. 
Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. She submitted a response to the FORM on August 19, 2015, 
containing Applicant’s exhibits (AE) A-F, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on September 21, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR she essentially admits the allegations with 
explanations. Those admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. She is single and has two children. She has worked for 
her current employer, a federal contractor, since June 2013. She has a master’s 
degree. She did not serve in the military and has never held a security clearance.1  
 
 The SOR lists 13 delinquent debts in the total amount of $94,098, of which 
$85,000 is for student loan debt. The SOR also alleged that she falsified her security 
clearance application by failing to affirmatively disclose her debts turned over to 
collection agencies, charged-off accounts, and debts which have been or are currently 
120 days delinquent. She did not list the debts in her application because at the time 
she completed it she was unaware of the debts and had not checked her credit report 
before completing the application.2  
 
 The status of Applicant’s SOR debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: 
 
 This is Applicant’s mortgage debt. Her mortgage became delinquent when she 
experienced a period of unemployment before 2013. Since September 2014 she 
received a mortgage modification and has documented payments from September 2013 
through the present. Her most recent credit report shows no past-due amount. This debt 
is being resolved.3 
 
 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 1-2. 
 
3 Items 2, 4; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: 
 
 Applicant provided written documentation showing that she is making monthly 
payments of $75 toward this debt. She has made these payments since April 2014. This 
debt is being resolved.4 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e – 1.f: 
 
 Applicant stated that she established payment plans to settle these debts, but 
she provided no supporting documentation. The accounts do not appear on her most 
recent credit report. These accounts are being resolved.5 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g – 1.l: 
 
 Applicant provided written documentation showing that she paid or settled these 
debts. They do not appear on her most recent credit report. These accounts are 
resolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m: 
 
 Applicant stated that her student loans are currently in a deferred status and that 
she is not delinquent on them. Her most recent credit report supports her deferred-
student loan status. These debts are being resolved.7 
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from a supervisor who supports her request 
for a security clearance. He described Applicant as dedicated, reliable, honest, and 
someone with great integrity.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
4 Item 2; AE A, C. 
 
5 Items 2, 4. 
 
6 Items 2, 4; AE C-E. 
 
7 Items 2, 4. 
 
8 AE F. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 Applicant has resolved eight of her debts and has made reasonable efforts to 
resolve the remaining debts. She has her mortgage back in good standing, set up 
payment plans for two other debts, and her student loans are in a deferred status. There 
is sufficient evidence to indicate that Applicant’s debts are being resolved and that she 
has made good-faith efforts to resolve those that remain. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) 
apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the trustworthiness process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the trustworthiness process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially 
applicable: 
 
6 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire. . . . 
 
 Applicant’s statement during her personal subject interview and her SOR answer 
that she was unaware of the debts at the time she completed her security clearance 
application is sufficient to establish lack of intent to deceive when she incorrectly 
answered the financial-related questions. The Government failed to produce sufficient 
evidence of such intent. AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has stabilized her finances 
and has shown significant progress towards getting her finances back on track.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, and that 
the Government failed to establish the concern under Guideline E.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:    For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   2.a:     FOR Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
