 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02697 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations and refuted the personal conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 29, 2016, 
requesting a Department of Defense (DOD) security clearance. On January 27, 2017, the 
DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct). Applicant 
responded to the SOR on February 10, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.1  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were revised on June 8, 2017, 
and are applicable to all decisions issued thereafter. 
 
2 
 
The case was assigned to me on June 28, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 28, 2017, scheduling the hearing 
for July 12, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 10 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and, in post-
hearing submissions, several documents labeled as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A were 
admitted without objection. The Government submitted GE 11 in a post-hearing 
submission, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old military training specialist for a defense contractor. He 
received a bachelor’s degree in 2013 and a master’s degree in 2015. He has completed 
several combat-related military training courses during his honorable service in the U.S. 
Air Force from 2000 to 2006 as a joint special operations airman that supports Army 
combat units, and as a civilian defense contractor in 2006 and 2009. He twice deployed 
to Iraq while on active duty, and nine times to Iraq, Afghanistan and other countries as a 
civilian. His awards include the Army Commendation Medal, the Air Force Expeditionary 
Service Medal (with gold border), the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, the 
Combat Readiness Medal, and the Air Force Outstanding Unit Award with valor (two 
devices). He is a 90% disabled veteran who suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD) and traumatic brain injury (TBI) as a result of combat activity. He has been 
married since 2012, and was previously twice married and divorced. He has six children. 
Three of his youngest children live with him. Applicant has held a security clearance since 
he was on active duty. 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts totaling about $27,000, the majority from 
two repossessed vehicles. In addition, the SOR alleges under Guideline E, that Applicant 
falsified his 2016 SCA by not reporting financial delinquencies, that he provided false and 
contradictory information during security clearance investigative interviews concerning 
the circumstances of a 1996 arrest, and by not reporting a juvenile felony arrest in his 
2011 and 2016 SCAs. Applicant admitted to a small debt on the SOR, but denied the 
remaining allegations, with explanations. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b allege two vehicle repossessions resulting in charged-off debts 
totaling about $26,000. One debt was for a loan on a vehicle that belonged to Applicant’s 
ex-wife, who abandoned it and did not make loan payments while he was deployed 
overseas. The vehicle was repossessed in 2007. Applicant consulted an attorney, who 
advised him to discontinue payments on the loan since the car was repossessed. The 
lender issued an IRS form 1099-C, canceling the debt, and the amount was included in 
Applicant’s tax return. The second debt was for a motorcycle that was repossessed in 
2009. After deploying overseas as a civilian, Applicant was unable to continue payments 
on the loan because of reduced income. He voluntarily relinquished the motorcycle to the 
lender, who issued an IRS form 1099-C, canceling the debt. Both of these aged debts no 
longer appear on Applicant’s credit report. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c is a small delinquent debt for phone service. Although Applicant 
canceled the service when he deployed, and disputed the charge, he paid the debt to 
 
3 
 
ensure it was finally resolved. SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e result from a disputed apartment rental. 
Applicant moved from one apartment to another within the same complex, and departed 
the first apartment as instructed by the management company. The company later 
claimed he owed a small amount, which Applicant disputed as unjust. The debt was 
referred to a collection agent. Applicant’s attorney challenged the debt and the company 
stopped collection action. His attorney provided a letter regarding the apartment dispute. 
Applicant’s current credit report shows the debt was disputed and the account was closed. 
 
 Applicant did not report these debts on his SCA because he believed they were 
not reportable because they were outside the reporting period, settled, or disputed as 
invalid. He acknowledged his error in not fully reading and understanding the SCA 
questions, and stated that he did not intentionally falsify his security clearance application. 
Likewise, when he was interviewed by investigators during security clearance processing, 
he noted that he had prior criminal involvement while a juvenile, and attempted to explain 
the circumstances to the investigator. He noted that he was never charged or convicted 
of a felony, and that the investigator confused the circumstances of his criminal 
involvement while in high school. Applicant denied any felony arrest, and believed that a 
1996 juvenile misdemeanor arrest was not reportable on his SCAs because it was sealed 
and removed from his record as a juvenile. He noted he did not intentionally or 
unintentionally mislead the investigator. He stated that the investigator did not confront 
him before he had a chance to discuss the incident, but that his explanation of the arrest 
was confused by him and the investigator. In the 2016 interview, Applicant said the 
investigator raised an issue regarding a switchblade or knuckles, and he assumed she 
was referring to the misdemeanor arrest for possession of a firearm without a license. 
Applicant asserted that he would never try to deny his debts or criminal charge to the 
government, and that he has always been open and honest. 
 
 Applicant provided significant evidence of professional training, letters of 
recommendation, and his certificate of release or discharge from active duty. His 
colleagues and former supervisor strongly support him and extol his honesty, loyalty, and 
work ethic. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, on June 8, 2017. The revised guidelines are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
 
4 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems and incurred delinquent debts that have since 
been resolved. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a period of insufficient income and 
marital problems while he was deployed overseas. These situations undoubtedly 
contributed to his financial delinquencies. He addressed them, and I believe he now has 
his finances under control.  
 
 The majority of Appellant’s financial delinquencies involve two dated 
repossessions. These have been canceled through issuance of IRS form 1099-Cs, and 
are resolved. Over time, Applicant addressed his debts, and they were resolved, paid or 
legitimately disputed. He sought advice from an attorney where necessary. His current 
credit report no longer reports the repossessions, and reports the small delinquencies as 
resolved. He is current on his mortgage and has had no additional delinquencies. 
 
6 
 
 Applicant responsibly addressed his debts and made good-faith efforts to resolve 
those that he could. His financial delinquencies are dated, he sought assistance from an 
attorney when necessary, and he has shown financial responsibility since he was 
remarried. Applicant’s past financial issues no longer cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b), (d), and (e) are applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . . 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative. 
 
  When falsification allegations are controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving the allegations. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.2 An applicant’s level 
of education and business experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to 
disclose relevant information on a security clearance application was deliberate.3 
 
  Appellant did not report delinquent financial accounts in his 2016 SCA because he 
believed the apartment delinquency that was reportable was resolved. In addition, he 
admitted that he did not take the time to fully read and understand the SCA questions, 
but that he did not intentionally falsify his SCAs. With regard to his 1996 juvenile arrest, 
                                                          
2 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
3 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 
7 
 
there is insufficient evidence of intentional falsification or misleading statements with 
regard to the event. He does not believe he was arrested or convicted of a felony while 
he was a juvenile, and that he was not clear in his explanation of the events during his 
interviews. 
 
  I am not convinced that Applicant intentionally falsified his SCAs or intentionally 
refused to provide truthful answers during his interviews. He provided plausible 
explanations for his omissions on his SCA and interview summary. The SOR allegations 
of intentional falsification are not supported by the evidence. AG ¶ 16(a) and (b) are not 
applicable. The personal conduct security concerns are concluded for Appellant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s testimony, his honorable military service in combat, and 
documents provided after the hearing. Applicant has shown current financial responsibility 
and appears to have control of his finances with his current spouse. I am convinced that 
he did not knowingly fail to provide truthful answers on his SCAs or interviews, and that 
he now understands the requirement for more precision in answering questions in the 
future. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the financial considerations and the personal conduct security concerns are 
resolved in his favor.  
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - e:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a - b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
