 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-11935 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence), C (foreign preference), and F (financial considerations). Department Counsel 
later withdrew the foreign preference and financial considerations allegations under 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 3.a. Applicant responded to the SOR on September 27, 2016, and 
elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On October 
14, 2016, Department Counsel requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on August 16, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 17, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for September 19, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 27, 2017.  
 
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, but he did not submit any documentary evidence. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Iran. Applicant did not object to the request, and it was approved. The request 
and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The facts are summarized in the written request and 
will not be repeated verbatim in this decision. Of particular note is that the U.S. 
Government has designated Iran as a state sponsor of terrorism. It conducts cyber 
espionage and attacks and more traditional espionage against U.S. interests and allies. 
It does not recognize Israel and has hindered the Middle East peace process, including 
in Syria. It has a dismal human rights record. Iran does not recognize dual nationality 
and will treat U.S.-Iranian dual nationals solely as Iranian citizens subject to Iranian 
laws. U.S.-Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter or depart Iran 
using their U.S. passport. U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed 
by the Iranian government. Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under 
surveillance. Hotel rooms, telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and 
personal possessions in hotel rooms may be searched. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2010. He has a bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in 
1992. He is married with three children.1 
 
 Applicant was born in Iran to Iranian parents. He was about 17 years old during 
the 1979 revolution. His hopes for positive change never materialized, and a number of 
his friends were victimized by the new regime. He came to the United States as a 
student in 1984. He completed college, remained, and became a U.S. citizen in 2004. 
His wife is a native-born U.S. citizen who works for the federal government as an 
engineer. His three children were born in the United States.2  
 
 Applicant’s parents are elderly. His father is a U.S. citizen. His mother has U.S. 
permanent residence status. They used to spend about half the year in the United 
States and half in Iran. Applicant’s father lives in the United States, but his mother is in 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 19-20; GE 1.  
 
2 Tr. at 17, 35-40; GE 1.  
 
 
3 
 
Iran. She is now too elderly to make the semi-annual trips. His father visits her in Iran. 
Applicant contacts his mother about once a month.3 
 
 Applicant has seven siblings. Four of his siblings are U.S. citizens living in the 
United States. Three of his siblings are citizens and residents of Iran. Applicant has 
contact with his siblings about four to six times a year. None of his siblings have any 
direct connection to the Iranian government.4 
 
 Applicant last visited Iran in 2015. His Iranian passport is expired, and he does 
not intend to renew it. He owns his home in the United States. He does not have 
property or other assets in Iran.5  
 
 Applicant professed his love for the United States. He appreciates the freedoms 
and opportunities available to him and his family here. He is a youth sports coach and 
referee. The big events for his family are the Fourth of July, Halloween, Thanksgiving, 
Christmas, and the Super Bowl. He proudly displays the U.S. flag, and his oldest child 
intends to join the U.S. military. He credibly testified that he would report any attempt to 
use his family in Iran against him.6 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 18, 26-28; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1.  
 
4 Tr. at 18, 29-34; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1.  
 
5 Tr. at 21, 25, 34-36, 41. 
 
6 Tr. at 17, 38-41. 
 
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant’s mother and three of his seven siblings are citizens and residents of 
Iran, a country that is clearly hostile to the United States.7 It is a leading state sponsor of 
terrorism; it conducts cyber espionage and attacks and more traditional espionage 
against U.S. interests and allies; and the government of Iran has committed numerous, 
serious human rights abuses against its people. Applicant’s foreign contacts create a 
potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the 
evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 Applicant has lived in this country since 1984. His wife is a native-born U.S. 
citizen who works for the federal government as an engineer. His three children were 
born in the United States. His father and four of his siblings are U.S. citizens living in the 
United States. He credibly professed his love for the United States and that he would 
report any attempt to use his family in Iran against him. I find that it is unlikely Applicant 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007). 
 
6 
 
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the United 
States and the interests of the Iranian government, a terrorist organization, or his 
Iranian family members. I further find there is no conflict of interest, because Applicant 
has such deep and long-standing relationships and loyalties in America, that he can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) is 
partially applicable. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
 
Analysis 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iran, a country that is clearly 
hostile to the United States, and the heavy burden an applicant carries when he or she 
has family members in a hostile country. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism. Iran is a leading state sponsor of terrorism, conducts espionage against the 
United States, and has a dismal human rights record.  
 
Applicant’s family members have no direct connection to the Iranian government 
and have no reason to raise Applicant’s profile with the Iranian government. Applicant 
 
7 
 
was sincere, open, and candid at the hearing. In the unlikely event that his family 
members were subjected to coercion or duress from the Iranian government or terrorist 
groups, I find that because of his deep and long-standing relationships and loyalties in 
the United States, including his uncompromising commitment to this country and his 
wife and children, that Applicant would resolve any attempt to exert pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress in favor of the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   Withdrawn 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Withdrawn 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline C:   Withdrawn 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
