 
1 
 
 
                                                                 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01481 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
   
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines G (alcohol 
consumption) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 1, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On December 4, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant. 
The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
  
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines G and E. The SOR 
detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
national security to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that 
his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be granted or denied. 
 
2 
 
 
On January 12, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. On February 1, 2017, 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On February 6, 2017, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On March 2, 2017, 
DOHA issued a notice of the hearing, setting the hearing on March 16, 2017. The 
hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibit (AE A), which was 
admitted without objection, and testified on his own behalf. I held the record open until 
April 28, 2017, to afford Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. 
Applicant timely submitted AE B through J, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 24, 2017. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all covered individuals 
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and 
are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs, as required.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.e, with explanations; and denied SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c, with explanations. After a thorough review of the record, I 
make the following findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old database administrator employed by a defense 
contractor since March 2014. He worked for another defense contractor in the same 
position and location beginning in September 2012. He seeks a secret security 
clearance as a condition of his continued employment. (Tr. 13-15, 69; GE 1) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in March 1979. He attended college and 
estimates that he has earned about 90 credit hours. Applicant married in May 1999, and 
has been separated since March 2004. He has a 15-year-old daughter and has an 
informal child support and visitation arrangement with his wife. Applicant did not serve in 
the U.S. armed forces. (Tr. 15-17; GE 1) 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
3 
 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Applicant has a history of consuming alcohol to excess and to the point of 
intoxication that goes back to when he was about 20 or 21, when he would periodically 
become intoxicated about “five percent of the times he drank.” He has decreased to 
“less than five percent of the times he (drank) since July 2009.” He provided this 
information during his July 24, 2014 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject 
Interview and confirmed it during his testimony. (OPM PSI). (Tr. 35-36; GE 3) 
 
Applicant was arrested two times for driving under the influence (DUI). The first 
DUI arrest occurred in July 2009. Applicant pled guilty to reckless driving with alcohol, 
and sentenced to six months of probation, 50 hours of community service, first offender 
DUI school, and $150 fine. He completed all sentencing requirements by October 2010. 
(SOR answer; Tr. 22; GE 2, GE 3, GE 6) The second DUI arrest occurred in October 
2014. Contrary to his plea of not guilty, he was convicted of DUI in a jury trial, and 
sentenced to 12 months of probation, revocation of his driver’s license for one year, 
vehicle immobilization for 10 days, ignition interlock device for 12 months, 50 hours of 
community service, first offender DUI school and victim impact panel, and a $1,300 fine. 
Applicant completed all of his sentencing requirements and his probation in May 2017. 
(See SOR and answer and transcript for further details regarding these arrests and 
disposition; Tr. 42-59, 62-63, 70-72; GE 2) As part of his DUI school, he attended a 12-
week group therapy session for substance abuse and was not diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent or abusing alcohol. (GE 2)  
 
Applicant was also cited for two traffic-related offenses. The first citation was in 
February 2013 for careless driving and failure to immediately report an accident. He 
was fined $270. The second citation was in November 2013 for failure to leave 
information at an accident. He pled no contest and was fined approximately $450. (SOR 
answer; Tr. 22-41; GE 5, GE 7) During his February 24, 2014 OPM PSI, he informed 
the investigator that he had consumed alcohol before each of these offenses. (Tr. 35-
36; GE 3) 
 
Applicant no longer associates with his drinking friends. He believes his 
association with them puts him in a “really bad position.” (Tr. 29-30) The last time he 
was intoxicated was the night of his second DUI arrest in October 2014. (GE 2) 
Applicant submitted a certificate of completion of a substance abuse treatment program 
dated August 10, 2015. (AE A) Post-hearing, Applicant submitted a favorable drug and 
alcohol assessment dated April 26, 2017. It was the opinion of the examining licensed 
mental health counselor that Applicant does not meet any of the criteria for alcohol 
addiction or dependence or abuse. (AE B) 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 All of the alcohol consumption allegations discussed above were cross-alleged in 
SOR ¶ 2.a under this concern. No new facts or evidence were presented with regard to 
SOR ¶ 2.a.  
 
4 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.b alleges that Applicant falsified his answer on his November 1, 2013 
SF-86 when asked if he had been issued a summons, citation, or ticket to appear in 
court in a criminal proceedings in the last seven years. The SF-86 instructions stated 
not to check if the citation involved traffic infractions where the fine was less than $300 
and did not include alcohol or drugs. With these instructions, Applicant listed his July 
2009 DUI, but did not list his February 2013 careless driving and failure to report 
immediately an accident. As noted, the fine for his citations was $270 and not the $300 
alleged, and the citation itself did not cite involvement with alcohol. (SOR answer; Tr. 
32-40) 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.c. alleges that Applicant falsified his answer on his November 1, 2013 
SF-86 when asked he had illegally used any drugs or controlled substances in the last 
seven years. Applicant answered “Yes” and listed a one-time marijuana use in April 
2009. During his February 24, 2014 OPM PSI, he “openly admitted” to the investigator 
that he had used marijuana at least six times, but no more than 12 times during the 
timeframe of 2006 to 2012. He explained that he listed April 2009 as “an arbitrary date.” 
In his SOR answer, he stated that he did not have an intent to falsify his SF-86 and did 
not know exactly how many times he used marijuana or the exact dates of use. 
Applicant credibly testified on this point when completing his SF-86 and listed a 
“placeholder” use and date. (Tr. 64-68) Applicant’s testimony is corroborated by his 
supervisor’s statement, a retired Air Force master sergeant with a security forces 
background. (SOR answer) 
 
Character Evidence 
  
 Applicant submitted eight character references, who vouched for his 
trustworthiness and good character. These individuals are familiar with Applicant’s 
alcohol-related arrests, are aware of his contribution to the national defense, know him 
well as a member of the community, and have no reservations in supporting him for a 
security clearance. These references include his community service supervisor, his 
probation officer, a career civil servant and father of one of his childhood friends and co-
worker, three neighbors, and two long-time friends. (AE B – J)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 
5 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G (alcohol consumption), the Government’s concern is that 
excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline G through Applicant’s 
admissions and evidence presented. A review of the evidence supports application of 
two alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions, AG ¶ 22(a) “alcohol-related incidents 
away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse 
abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency 
of the individual’s alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder;”  and AG ¶ 22(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder.”  
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of two 
alcohol consumption mitigating conditions is appropriate: 
AG ¶ 23(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 AG ¶ 23(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive 
alcohol use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
Applicant presented credible evidence of actions taken to overcome his alcohol-
related arrests, has established that he is not alcohol dependent, and during the 
infrequent times he consumes alcohol, he does so responsibly. His reference letters 
demonstrate that Applicant’s work behavior has not been indicative of his having an 
alcohol problem. He is a valued employee, who is reliable, dependable, professional, 
and is a respected member of the community. His responsible use of alcohol is 
supported by his own credible testimony and evidence presented. At his hearing, 
Applicant acknowledged the problems misuse of alcohol has caused him, demonstrated 
remorse, and a steadfast commitment to continue lifestyle changes consistent with 
responsible use of alcohol. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
        The conduct under alcohol consumption was cross-alleged under personal conduct 
without the addition of any additional facts or allegations. Given the fact these 
allegations were fully discussed and dealt with under alcohol consumption, it is 
unnecessary to discuss further under personal conduct. 
 
        With regard to the falsification allegations, the first allegation for failure to list his 
February 2013 citation for careless driving and failure to report immediately an accident 
proved to be incorrect. A review of the evidence indicates that Applicant’s fine for this 
traffic-related infraction was $270, not $300 as alleged. As noted, the SF-86 instructions 
directed applicants not to check if the citations involved a fine that was less than $300 
and did not include alcohol or drugs. Moreover, he clearly was not trying to hide his past 
alcohol-related arrests, as he disclosed his 2009 DUI arrest alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
        The second allegation alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his SF-86 by 
failing to list more than the one marijuana use in April 2009. Applicant credibly testified, 
testimony that was corroborated by his supervisor, that he was unsure of the number of 
times and dates he used marijuana when he listed the 2009 single use as a 
“placeholder.” When queried during his OPM PSI, he readily acknowledged his 
marijuana use, at least to the extent he could remember. I find that Applicant put the 
Government on notice of his past drug use, albeit later refined, and that there was no 
attempt on his part to deliberately falsify his SF-86. Further discussion of disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under this concern is not warranted. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The discussion in the 
Analysis section under Guidelines G and E is incorporated in this whole-person section. 
However further comments are warranted. 
 
8 
 
 
I was particularly impressed with Applicant’s demeanor during his hearing and 
the apparent effect this process has had on him. Applicant has been willing to do 
whatever is necessary to recover from his alcohol-related arrests. The process has 
been costly for him, not only financially, but also personally and professionally. 
Applicant is contributing to the defense industry and is well regarded by his supervisor. 
His reference letters provide insight regarding his role in the community and how his co-
workers, neighbors, and friends favorably view him. He demonstrated the correct 
attitude and commitment to responsible alcohol consumption.  
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set forth 
in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole-person factors” and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
