 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08534 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq. 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has 
submitted sufficient evidence to mitigate the foreign influence and financial 
considerations concerns alleged in the Statement of Reasons (SOR). Clearance is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case  
 
On October 15, 2016, the DOD issued a SOR detailing security concerns under 
the financial considerations and foreign influence guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke his security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On September 1, 
2017, I issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission 
                                                          
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
of discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses, and the parties 
complied.2 At the hearing, convened on September 19, 2017, I admitted Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through J, without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 27, 2017. After the hearing, Applicant 
timely submitted AE K through W, without objection. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Implementation of Amended Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about the Philippines. However, the information provided was not current at the time of 
the hearing.3 On my own, I take notice of relevant facts about the Philippines from U.S. 
State Department documents highlighted in the Findings of Fact section, below.4 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a pilot. He has worked as an independent contractor for federal 
contracting companies since March 2012. He previously served on active duty in the 
U.S. Navy from June 1987 to September 1990, and in the U.S. Navy Reserve from 
September 1990 to September 1997. Applicant also served on active duty in the U.S. 
Army from October 1997 to February 2005 and in the U.S. Army Reserve from April 
2005 to March 2014. He was initially granted a security clearance in 1987, and has 
maintained access to classified information for the last 30 years. Applicant completed 
his most recent security clearance application in November 2014. He disclosed his 
relationship with his parents-in-law and four sisters-in-law who are citizens and 
residents of the Philippines. He also disclosed his friendship with an officer in the 
Philippine Army. Applicant’s background investigation revealed derogatory financial 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order and the discovery letter are appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) I and II, respectively.  
 
3 The Government’s administrative notice summary and attached documents are admitted to the record 
as HE III-IV. 
  
4 The source documents cited are appended to the record as HE V- VII. 
 
 
3 
 
information including Applicant’s failure to file federal and state income tax returns for 
2013 and 2014, as well as $39,000 in delinquent debt.5  
 
 Applicant is a married father of three. Applicant’s wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen 
from the Philippines, a multiparty, constitutional republic with a bicameral legislature. 
U.S.-Philippine relations are based on strong historical and cultural links and a shared 
commitment to democracy and human rights. The United States has designated the 
Philippines as a Major Non-NATO Ally, and there are close and abiding security ties 
between the two nations. However, the U.S. State Department has observed significant 
human rights concerns in the country. Extrajudicial killings have been the chief human 
rights concern in the country for many years and they increased sharply during 2016 
after the election of Rodrigo Duterte in May 2016. Also, conflicts between the 
government and long-running Muslim separatist, communist insurgent, and terrorist 
groups continued to displace civilians and kill security force members and civilians. 
Currently, the State Department advises U.S. citizens against travel to Sulu 
Archipelago, including the southern Sulu Sea, Marawi City in Mindanao, and other 
areas of Mindanao due to crime, terrorism, and civil unrest. Terrorist and armed groups 
continue plotting possible kidnappings, bombings, and other attacks in the Philippines. 
Terrorist and armed groups may attack with little or no warning, targeting tourist 
locations, markets/shopping malls, and local government facilities. The Philippine 
government has declared a “State of National Emergency on Account of Lawless 
Violence in Mindanao.”6 
   
For the duration of their 22-year marriage, Applicant’s parents-in-law and his four 
sisters-in-law have lived in the Philippines. His parents-in-law, who are nearly 80 years 
old, and three of his sisters-in-law live together in his wife’s hometown, a small fishing 
village. Applicant’s father-in-law is a retired fisherman. Neither his mother-in-law nor his 
three sisters-in-law work outside the home. Applicant’s fourth sister-in-law lives in 
another city. She works for her husband’s solar energy company. While Applicant does 
not maintain independent contact with his in-laws in the Philippines, his wife maintains 
daily contact. Applicant’s family members live more than 1,500 km away from the areas 
of concerns identified by the U.S. State Department.7  
 
In August 2010, Applicant met a Philippine Army officer through his wife. At the 
time, Applicant was stationed at a U.S. Army base and his wife regularly had parties at 
their home for the local Filipino community. The Philippine Army officer was taking a 
class at the same base. Over the years, the two men maintained contact. Applicant 
described the relationship as causal and with infrequent contact. When Applicant and 
his family lived in the Philippines between 2013 and 2016, the relationship remained 
casual, but the frequency of their contact increased. Applicant ceased all 
                                                          
5 Tr. 26-27; GE 1. 
 
6 https://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/2794.htm;  https://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/;  
https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/traveladvisories/traveladvisories/philippines-travel-advisory.html 
  
7 Tr. 25, 28-36. 
 
 
4 
 
communication with the officer in 2014 in response to potential security concerns raised 
by the relationship during the present adjudication.8 
 
Applicant’s financial problems became acute in 2014. In 2013, Applicant and his 
wife decided to move their family to the Philippines. They wanted to experience living 
abroad and thought the cost of living would be lower than that in the United States. In 
January 2014, Applicant was scheduled to report for a mission in another country. He 
learned in December 2013 that his employer lost the contract and that the mission was 
cancelled. Applicant also learned that he would not be reimbursed for the one-way ticket 
he purchased to his duty location as had been the practice. Applicant, who works a 
cycle of 90 days on duty, followed by 90 days off, received his last paycheck in 
September 2013. He was at the end of a 90-days-off cycle, did not have a lot of money, 
and was depending on his January through March paychecks to support his family until 
July 2014 when his second duty cycle of the year was scheduled to begin.  
 
 Without any income, Applicant could not pay his bills and began experiencing 
financial problems immediately. Because of the unreliable nature of phone and internet 
service in the Philippines, Applicant had difficulty job searching. So, he returned to the 
United States to find employment, leaving his family in the Philippines. Applicant 
recalled, with emotion, having to borrow money from his father to help support his 
family. Applicant secured another job in March 2014 and began flying missions again 
immediately after completing his employer’s training. Applicant worked from April 2014 
to August 2014, in an effort to rehabilitate his finances. His wife, who had historically 
handled the household finances during Applicant’s absences without issue, struggled to 
keep up with everything due to of the difficulty of communicating with U.S.-based 
companies from the Philippines.9  
 
 At the time Applicant completed his 2014 security clearance application, he knew 
he was having financial problems. However, it was not until his subject interview in 
August 2015 that he felt the full impact of his financial situation. In September 2015, 
Applicant hired a U.S.-based attorney to help him resolve his delinquent accounts. To 
facilitate the payment of his debts, Applicant worked two extended missions, with only 
two months off, between February 2015 and July 2016. He earned $130,000 and 
$187,000 in 2015, and 2016 respectively. Between 2015 and 2016, the attorney 
negotiated settlements on five accounts, totaling $9,700.  Applicant resolved several 
other delinquent accounts on his own. Over the course of two years, Applicant believes 
that in paid over $60,000 toward delinquent accounts. In addition to helping Applicant 
resolve some of his delinquent accounts, the attorney referred Applicant to a tax 
accountant. Applicant did not file his federal and state income tax returns for 2013 
through 2015. The accountant filed the outstanding federal and state tax returns, and 
helped Applicant establish an installment plan to resolve his outstanding federal and 
state tax liabilities. Applicant satisfied a $1,062 state tax liability in August 2017.10  
                                                          
8 Tr. 36-46; GE 1-2. 
 
9 Tr. 52-60.  
 
10 Tr. 61-86; GE 3; AE O, U; Answer. 
 
5 
 
In 2017, Applicant retained a different tax preparer with expertise in the taxation 
issues related to independent contractors and U.S. citizens living abroad to file his 2016 
income tax return. Applicant owed $7,900 in federal taxes for the 2016 tax year. As a 
result, the IRS terminated the November 2016 installment agreement and established a 
new installment agreement with Applicant in June 2017 for the 2013, 2015, and 2016 
tax years. The new preparer also reviewed the federal and state income tax returns filed 
by the previous accountant and discovered material mistakes resulting in the 
overstatement of Applicant’s federal tax liability by over $17,600. The previous 
accountant also inexplicably filed state income tax returns for Applicant for the two 
years he lived outside the United States, resulting in Applicant paying over $4,900 in 
state taxes he did not owe. The preparer is also investigating the possibility that 
Applicant overpaid $12,000 in payroll taxes for a company Applicant owned and 
operated for less than 12 months between 2012 and 2013.11 
 
To date, Applicant has resolved SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.g – 1.i, and 1.k. The creditor 
holding SOR ¶ 1.c has cancelled the debt, relieving Applicant of any obligation to repay 
it. He has rehabilitated the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e12 and 1.f to current status. 
Applicant has no outstanding state or federal income tax returns. He does not have any 
unpaid state tax liability, warrants, or liens. Applicant is in compliance with his current 
federal tax installment plan. His current tax preparer has filed amended returns for 2013 
through 2015. He expects that his $17,000 overpayment of federal taxes will be applied 
to current outstanding balance, reducing it to approximately $33,000. He also plans to 
apply his expected $4,900 state tax refund to his federal tax liability.13 
 
Applicant and his family moved back to the United States in 2016. Although he is 
still paying off his debt, be believes that his finances are under control. Applicant 
believes he can pay off his tax debt by the end of 2018.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
                                                          
11 Tr. 47-50; 87-90, 100’ AE A, C-D. 
 
12 SOR ¶ 1.j is the same account. The creditor sold the account to the creditor identified in SOR ¶ 1.e. 
Accordingly, SOR ¶ 1.j is resolved in Applicant’s favor.  
 
13 Tr. 23-24; GE 4-6; AE B, F-N, P, Q, S-T, V; Answer. 
 
14 Tr. 90-92.  
 
6 
 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to meet one’s financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information.15 The record is sufficient to establish the government’s prima 
facie case that Applicant demonstrated an inability to satisfy his debts; a history of not 
meeting financial obligations; and a failure to timely file his federal income tax returns as 
required between 2013 and 2014 as alleged.16 However, Applicant has submitted 
sufficient evidence to mitigate the alleged security concerns.  
                                                          
15 AG ¶ 18. 
 
16 AG ¶¶ 19 (a), (c), and (f). 
 
7 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by three months of unemployment 
between January 2014 and March 2014. Although the length of Applicant’s 
unemployment was brief, the financial impact was exacerbated by the nature of 
Applicant’s pay schedule. By the time he returned to work in March 2014, Applicant had 
not received a paycheck in six months. Since returning to work, Applicant has made 
significant effort to resolve his delinquent accounts and rehabilitate his financial 
situation. All of the SOR debts are either resolved or in good standing. Applicant has 
demonstrated a good-faith effort to repay his creditors or otherwise resolve debts.17 
Applicant has also made a good-faith effort to resolve his tax problems. By the time the 
SOR was issued, Applicant’s outstanding income tax returns had been filed. He has 
demonstrated a track record of repayment of his federal tax liability and paid state taxes 
he did not owe. The record shows that Applicant has made arrangements with the 
appropriate tax authority to file or pay the amount of taxes owed, and he is in 
compliance with those arrangements.18 Applicant’s current finances are under control 
and the financial considerations concerns are mitigated.  
  
Foreign Influence 
 
“[F]oreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”19  Guideline B is not limited 
to countries hostile to the United States.  “Even friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security.”20  Key to heightened risk analysis is the nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record 
are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion, as well as any terrorist activity in the country at 
issue.21 Even though Applicant has maintained his foreign contacts for at least 22 of the 
30 years he has held a security clearance, political changes within the Philippines 
warrant an examination of Applicant’s contacts.  
 
 Although the Philippines is not known to engage in economic or military 
intelligence activity directed toward the United States, the human rights violations 
committed by the government against its citizens, the operation of terrorist groups in the 
country, and potential threats to U.S. citizens in certain areas of the country is enough 
to raise a heightened risk.22 However, the record contains sufficient evidence to mitigate 
                                                          
17 AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
18 AG ¶ 20(g). 
 
19 AG ¶ 6.  
 
20 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
21 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
 
22 AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
8 
 
the foreign influence concerns. Applicant’s in-laws do not reside in areas of concerns 
identified by the U.S. State Department’s travel warning. They are not engaged in any 
activities or hold any positions that could place Applicant in position of having to choose 
between U.S. and foreign interests.23 Applicant’s friendship with the Philippine Army 
officer is no longer a concern. In response to the potential security concerns raised 
during this investigation, Applicant voluntarily chose to end the relationship more than 
three years ago. Applicant’s actions show that his sense of obligation and loyalty to the 
Philippine Army officer were minimal and that he chose to resolve any potential conflict 
of interest in the favor of U.S. interests.24   
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s continued access 
to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant is a long-time clearance holder and served 
honorably in the military. He has properly managed his relationships with his foreign 
national relatives and friends. Although Applicant has experienced some financial 
problems, he has not engaged in any conduct that suggests an inability to properly 
handle and safeguard classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Foreign Influence   FOR APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
23 AG ¶ 8(a). 
 
24  AG ¶ 8(b). 
