 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08513 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Keith Williford, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol consumption, 
and Guideline J, criminal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
January 16, 2015. On May 6, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guidelines G and J.2 
                                                          
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD 
on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were revised on June 8, 2017, and are applicable to all decisions 
issued thereafter. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 23, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a 
notice of hearing on March 8, 2017, and the hearing was convened on April 4, 2017. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and Applicant’s exhibit (AE) A were admitted in 
evidence.3 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 13, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline G, that Applicant has a history of excessive 
alcohol consumption and had various alcohol-related arrests, including: 1990 for driving 
while intoxicated (DWI); 1994 DWI; 1997 DWI and felony child endangerment; and 2014 
DWI. The SOR cross-alleged these incidents under Guideline J, criminal conduct. In 
Applicant’s answer, he explained the allegations and provided supporting documents. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 74 years old. He has been married since 2014 and has six adult 
children. He was previously married in 1967 and divorced in 1991, and again married in 
1997 and divorced in 2012. He has worked for his current employer and other defense 
contractors since 1984. He earned an associate’s degree in 1967 and a bachelor’s degree 
in 1971. He currently holds a DOD security clearance. 
 
 Applicant admitted being arrested in 1990 for DWI, but the case was dismissed at 
trial. In 1994, Applicant was arrested for DWI as a result of a traffic stop and a failed field 
sobriety test. His blood alcohol level was tested at .15%. He was convicted of 
misdemeanor DWI and was sentenced to probation and community service.  
 
 In 1997, Applicant was arrested for child endangerment and DWI after drinking at 
a hotel bar while his children were left in his car after he picked them up from a sitter. 
Applicant was arrested for DWI and child endangerment, but prosecutors decided not to 
pursue criminal charges due to insufficient evidence. Applicant attributed his loss of 
judgment in this incident to his divorce and depression. 
 
 Applicant was again arrested for DWI, second offense, in November 2014. He 
pleaded guilty to misdemeanor DWI, and was sentenced to probation for 18 months in 
lieu of confinement and ordered to utilize an ignition-interlock device and attend 
substance abuse and victim impact programs. The device was placed on the vehicle in 
November 2014, and remained until April 2016. Applicant had no violations, and his 
probation ended in April 2016. 
 
 Applicant noted that he stopped drinking at the end of 2014, when his ignition 
device was installed, and has abstained from any alcohol use since. There is no evidence 
of resumption of drinking or additional alcohol-related offenses. He successfully 
                                                          
 
3 Applicant objected to GE 4, a 1997 sheriff’s office arrest report. The objection was overruled and the 
exhibit was admitted. 
 
3 
 
 
completed a 30-hour DWI intervention program, a victim-impact panel, and a substance-
abuse program. His counselor and psychotherapist indicated in a letter of support, that 
Applicant was an active client in group and individual counseling from November 2015 to 
April 2016. He noted Applicant never missed a group or individual session, and was a 
model client. He stated Applicant addressed his alcohol issues successfully, and his 
prognosis for abstaining from drinking and driving was “very good.” During this period, 
Applicant excelled at his employment and received multiple performance awards. His 
manager provided a letter in support, and Applicant’s neighbor, who previously drank at 
social gatherings with him, noted Applicant’s consistent abstention from drinking and 
attending social gatherings with alcohol. Since November 2016, Applicant voluntarily and 
regularly attends Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings. He was able to stop drinking 
without difficulty, and considers his drinking problems to be in the past. 
 
Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, on June 8, 2017. The revised guidelines are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern for alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 Applicant’s drinking history, which includes four alcohol-related arrests and two 
convictions, meets the conditions set forth in AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c). 
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for alcohol consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and especially considered the following: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
 
5 
 
 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment;  
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; and  
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 Applicant successfully complied with all court-mandated requirements after his 
2014 DUI arrest and his counselor diagnosed his prognosis to abstain from drinking and 
driving as “very good.” Since completing probation and formal counseling, he voluntarily 
and regularly participates in AA. He has abstained from alcohol since 2014, completed 
an ignition-interlock program for 18 months without a violation, and has not had any 
further alcohol-related incidents since 2014. His exceptional work performance has been 
recognized by his employer since he stopped drinking. He changed the circumstances of 
his life through counseling and dedicated abstinence, and has shown over the past 
several years that those changes have been effective. His previous alcohol-related 
arrests should have been a strong sign of a significant drinking problem, but no counseling 
ever ensued and he was able to avoid significant consequences for his actions. Since the 
2014 arrest, Applicant has awoken to the mounting consequences of his actions and 
finally received counseling that has aided him in controlling his behavior. I find that 
sufficient time has passed since his last alcohol-related incident, and as long as he 
continues to abstain from all alcohol use and attend counseling, his life changes serve to 
mitigate his past behavior. Applicant’s alcohol-related issues no longer cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment in view of his changed lifestyle. I find 
AG ¶¶ 23(a), (b), and (d) apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
 
6 
 
 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant’s alcohol-related arrests, regardless of convictions, constitute a pattern 
of criminal conduct. I find that both disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
   
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to, 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s history of arrests, all related to alcohol consumption, resulted in two 
convictions. Applicant’s last criminal incident occurred in November 2014. Since then, he 
has actively participated in group and individual counseling with a positive prognosis, 
completed an 18-month ignition-interlock device program without violation, successfully 
completed probation, and has completely abstained from alcohol use. He has used his 
last arrest as a wake-up call to change his behavior that led to criminal activity, and 
recognizes the impact that alcohol abuse has had on his life and his family. He continues 
to attend AA meetings, and believes his alcohol use and resultant criminal conduct is 
behind him. I conclude that Applicant has shown successful rehabilitation through the 
actions he has taken to regain control over his life, and as long as he continues to 
completely abstain from further alcohol use, additional criminal activity is unlikely to recur. 
His past criminal behavior no longer casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and (d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s stellar work 
performance since his last arrest, and his alcohol-abuse treatment and follow-on 
assistance through active participation in AA. Although Applicant should have been aware 
of the consequences of his alcohol abuse long ago, I believe his 2014 arrest and 
subsequent conviction with court-mandated counseling was the first opportunity to 
explore his behavior in a meaningful way, and he has shown a renewed understanding 
of the consequences of his behavior. Applicant’s complete abstinence has resulted in an 
improved lifestyle and no further alcohol-related issues. I am convinced that Applicant 
has sincerely changed his behavior, has learned from his last arrest and conviction, 
benefited from counseling and the prolonged use of the ignition-interlock device, and is 
committed to complete abstinence now and in the future. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption, and Guideline J, criminal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
  
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
