KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant argues that the Judge erred in evaluating his candor, character, and integrity,
which we construe as a challenge the Judge’s comments about the credibility of Applicant’s case
for mitigation.  Applicant contends that the Judge drew the wrong conclusions from his
interrogatory answer that his last use of drugs was in 2006, which Applicant admits is not true. 
Part of a Judge’s job is to make credibility determinations, and we give deference to them. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-05229.a1
DATE: 01/31/2018
DATE: January 31, 2018
In Re:
----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-05229
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 4, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On October 17, 2017, after considering the
record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Eric H. Borgstrom
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ 
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has been employed by a Defense contractor since 2008.  During that year, he was
investigated for a security clearance and disclosed prior use of illegal drugs.  He stated that he had
no intention for future drug use.  Applicant was granted a security clearance.  In 2013, Applicant
submitted an updated security clearance application in which he admitted to multiple uses of
marijuana from 1998 until 2012.  He confirmed his understanding of the consequences of illegal
drug use, including a negative impact to his professional standing.  However, in an answer to DOHA
interrogatories, Applicant stated that his last use of illegal drugs was in 2006.  
Applicant’s response to the SOR neither admitted nor denied the specific allegations.  He
did admit that he had exhibited poor judgement by using marijuana.  His SOR response included
numerous assertions about his work performance but he did not submit independent evidence on this
matter.  Applicant responded to the File of Relevant Material (FORM), in which he stated that he
had used marijuana on a few occasions during the five years that followed his December 2007
college graduation.  He stated that his last use was November 2012.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge acknowledged that there is no absolute rule as to whether drug was is recent.  That
determination must be made in regard to the totality of the evidence.  He stated that Applicant’s
admitted instances of drug use spanned fourteen years, continuing until late 2012.  Applicant
presented no evidence about the underlying circumstances or evidence that would show that he has
rehabilitated himself.  Accordingly, the Judge found that the five years that had intervened between
Applicant’s last use of marijuana and the close of the record were not sufficient to show that his
security-significant conduct was behind him.  The Judge noted that Applicant had submitted a signed
statement of intent not to use drugs in the future.  However, he concluded that Applicant’s failure
to keep a prior such promise made during his previous investigation vitiated the mitigating force of
this evidence.  He concluded that Applicant’s use of marijuana while holding a clearance
2
demonstrated poor judgment, and he found no evidence to show that Applicant disclosed his more
recent drug use to his employer.  He also stated that Applicant was not “forthright” in his
interrogatory answer.  Decision at 8.
  
Discussion
Applicant challenges some of the Judge’s findings.  For example, he states that he admitted
his drug use in his SOR response, contrary to the Judge’s finding that he had neither admitted nor
denied the allegations.  He also contends that he did not say that drug use would have a negative
impact on his career.  Rather, he argues that he stated that his few uses of marijuana should not
impair his clearance.  Regarding the first challenge, the Judge was merely acknowledging that 
Applicant had not explicitly admitted or denied each of the SOR allegations, which is correct.  See
Directive ¶ E3.1.4 (“The applicant must submit a detailed written answer to the SOR that shall admit
or deny each listed allegation”).  We find nothing to persuade us that the Judge held Applicant’s
apparent failure to comply with this procedural requirement against him.  The other finding is
consistent with Applicant’s answers during his clearance interview and his comments submitted in
response to the SOR and to the FORM.  The Judge’s findings of fact are based upon substantial
evidence or constitute reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the evidence.  Applicant has
cited to no harmful error in the Judge’s findings.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04724 at 3 (App.  Bd.
Aug. 18, 2017). 
Applicant argues that the Judge erred in evaluating his candor, character, and integrity, which
we construe as a challenge the Judge’s comments about the credibility of Applicant’s case for
mitigation.  Applicant contends that the Judge drew the wrong conclusions from his interrogatory
answer that his last use of drugs was in 2006, which Applicant admits is not true.  Part of a Judge’s
job is to make credibility determinations, and we give deference to them.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
In this case, given the relative paucity of mitigating evidence, we find no reason to disturb the
Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s false answer impugned his candor.  The balance of Applicant’s
brief is a challenge to the Judge’s weighing of the evidence.  Considering Applicant’s brief as a
whole, we note that an ability to argue for an alternative reading of the evidence is not enough to
show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.1   See, e.g., 15-07062 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 21, 2017).  
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  Illegal drug use while holding a clearance “raises significant questions about [an
applicant’s] willingness to abide by rules and regulations.”  ISCR Case No. 15-03924 at 3 (App. Bd.
Jun. 16, 2017).  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance
may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” 
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶
1Applicant also contends that Department Counsel’s arguments in the FORM are erroneous.  However,
arguments by parties are not evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02290 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 30, 2017).  We find
nothing in the Decision that would suggest that the Judge extended evidentiary significance to Department Counsel’s
arguments or that he was unduly influenced by them.  
3
2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan          
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale           
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
