 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02884 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 22, 2012. 
On June 29, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F.1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 26, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of 
hearing on June 19, 2017, and the hearing was convened on July 11, 2017. Government 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E. The record was held open so that Applicant could 
submit additional evidence. He submitted additional documents marked together as AE 
F, and they were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on July 20, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old operational and space systems engineer employed by 
a defense contractor since 2009. He previously worked for another government contractor 
from 1999 to 2009 before he was terminated for performance issues. When he departed 
his last position in 2009, he incurred a tax penalty when he withdrew the proceeds of 
various retirement plans and used the funds to pay credit cards and other debts. He 
remained unemployed for about eight months until about December 2009, when he 
obtained a job with his current employer, and worked part-time as a census enumerator 
for a short time. 
 
Applicant graduated from a military service academy in 1983 and completed some 
work toward a master’s degree. He served in the U.S. Air Force from 1983 to 1996, when 
he was honorably discharged as a Captain (O-3). Applicant was previously married in 
1987 and divorced in 1988, and again married in 1991 and divorced in 1992. He was last 
married in 1995. His spouse was medically retired from her job in 2013, which reduced 
the family income by $25,000. She suffered from diabetic blindness and passed away in 
October 2015. He has three adult children and step-children. 
 
The SOR alleges that the IRS filed a Federal tax lien for approximately $57,366, 
and Applicant failed to file and pay Federal and state income tax returns for two states for 
tax years 2009 and 2010 when due. In addition, the SOR alleges Applicant owes 
approximately $19,000 on a delinquent line of credit account and a charged-off credit card 
debt. 
 
Applicant did not file his 2009 and 2010 Federal and state tax income returns or 
pay taxes owed when they were due. In his personal subject interview (PSI) with a 
security clearance investigator, Applicant also noted that he failed to file and pay his 2011 
Federal and state taxes on time.  He noted in the interview that he was unsure of how to 
account for the 2009 retirement account penalty, and did not have the funds to pay his 
taxes when due. The following two years snowballed into inaction with his taxes until he 
consulted a tax relief company. He filed extensions, but did not pay taxes owed. 
Applicant’s 2009 adjusted gross income was approximately $150,000, and his 2010 
adjusted gross income was approximately $138,000.  
 
In May 2013, the tax relief company filed the 2009 and 2010 Federal tax returns 
after Applicant was interviewed during his security clearance investigation. He paid 
$7,000 to the tax relief company to negotiate a settlement with the IRS, but the tax debt 
was never reduced. Applicant claimed to have started a repayment plan with the IRS in 
 
3 
 
2012, but did not provide documentary evidence showing past payments made to the IRS 
or the regularity of claimed payments. 
 
At the time of the hearing, Applicant claimed that he had been making installment 
payments of $990 per month through the tax relief company to the IRS, but he stopped 
using that particular tax relief company and hired another company in September 2015, 
to negotiate a new payment plan with the IRS. He claimed in his post-hearing submission 
dated July 10, 2017, that the new company was in the process of negotiating a new 
payment plan. He provided a letter dated October 6, 2016 from the IRS, attesting to the 
establishment of a new payment plan to pay $235 per month for taxes owed from 2009 
to 2014, beginning October 28, 2016. He noted that he has not completed payments for 
his 2009 and 2010 income taxes. No documentation of payments on delinquent tax debts 
was submitted. Likewise, Applicant claimed to have paid-off his delinquent state tax 
obligations for two states through installment payments and application of tax refunds 
from subsequent tax years to eliminate the debts. 
 
Applicant hired a new debt management company in October 2013, but was 
unsatisfied and replaced them with another debt repair law group in September 2015, to 
negotiate settlements for several debts, including his delinquent line-of-credit and 
charged-off credit card accounts alleged in the SOR. In an e-mail dated May 31, 2017, 
his debt repair law group confirmed it negotiated a reduced settlement on the line-of-credit 
account, where Applicant is to pay $8,200. Applicant testified that he began payments on 
this account, and expected it to be paid-off by March 2018. Applicant noted that the law 
group is in the process of negotiating the charged-off credit card account, but is was not 
yet resolved. No documentation of payments on either of these debts was submitted. 
Applicant’s summary from the law group shows eight other debts not alleged in the SOR 
as “unsettled.”2 He testified that several of these debts were in a delinquent status. 
 
In his post-hearing submission, Applicant noted that he is not making excuses, but 
that his family has suffered some “extremely rough times” in the past ten years, including 
job losses, family separation, health problems, a runaway teenager, death of in-laws and 
his spouse’s sister, sibling family drama, an out-of-state custody battle for his grandson, 
and his spouse’s death. They “lost control” of their finances. He also noted his 30-plus 
years of work experience and his military service. Applicant claimed to have had financial 
counseling and submitted a budget. Applicant’s friend and church pastor testified to his 
honesty and excellent personal character. 
 
Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, on June 8, 2017. The revised guidelines are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
                                                     
2 (AE E). 
 
4 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
5 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant’s admissions, testimony, and the documentary evidence in the record 
are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
6 
 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent and numerous, however, there is 
insufficient evidence to determine that they were incurred under circumstances making 
them unlikely to recur. Applicant lost a job due to performance issues, and withdrew funds 
from retirement accounts for his personal use without setting aside a portion to pay taxes 
and penalties. His financial issues snowballed from there, as he knowingly failed to file 
the next three years of Federal and state income tax returns when due, and pay taxes 
owed. Applicant’s 2009 and 2010 tax returns, as alleged in the SOR, were not finally filed 
until May 2013.  
 
Applicant delayed repayment of taxes owed until two tax relief companies 
negotiated settlements with the IRS, the last in October 2016. Federal taxes and penalties 
owed have not been fully repaid, and no record of payments to date or resolution of the 
Federal tax lien have been provided. Applicant claimed to have settled and paid his 
delinquent tax obligations to two states, but did so primarily through relinquishing several 
subsequent tax-year refunds. Although Applicant submitted insufficient and confusing 
evidence of resolution of the state tax obligations, the relative amounts owed are too small 
to invoke security concerns. 
 
Applicant has not shown sufficient evidence that he has satisfactorily resolved the 
remaining line-of-credit and credit-card debts alleged in the SOR. Despite an opportunity 
to provide additional documentary evidence after the hearing, Applicant failed to provide 
records of payments on debts. Although he may have made payments toward resolution 
of his tax and credit accounts, I am unable to verify the amount and regularity of such 
payments. This coincided with Applicant’s unconvincing testimony at the hearing where 
he was unable to articulate specific actions with regard to his debts to convince me that 
he has reasonable knowledge and control of his finances.    
 
Applicant has a long history of financial irresponsibility. Despite relatively steady 
employment, he did not responsibly address his taxes and delinquent debts in a good 
faith or timely manner. He obtained financial advice from four different debt and tax 
management companies in an attempt to resolve his financial problems, but insufficient 
progress has been made, given the time elapsed since incurring the debts and the 
number of years he has been pursuing professional assistance. He claimed to have 
received credit counseling and provided a budget, but he did not show in his testimony 
that he fully understands his debt status or that he has regained control over his finances. 
 
7 
 
I find no mitigating condition fully applies except that Applicant filed his Federal tax returns 
and his state tax debts appear to have been recently resolved and are otherwise a 
manageable amount, and he is credited with receiving some financial counseling and 
preparing a budget.  
 
Overall, Applicant’s unresolved debts, both alleged and not alleged in the SOR, 
and his prolonged delinquent Federal tax obligations, reflect poorly on his financial 
management decisions and personal financial responsibility. His financial stability, 
decisions, and financial integrity raise significant concerns. Given his maturity, 
experience, and education level, I am not convinced Applicant is financially responsible, 
makes good financial decisions, or is currently financially stable. These factors do not 
demonstrate the high degree of judgment and reliability expected and required for access 
to classified information. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Applicant has not shown that he is now financially stable and able to adequately 
address his past financial and tax delinquencies in a timely manner. Despite his steady 
employment in his current position since 2009, he has not shown adequate effort, due 
diligence, or financial responsibility in addressing his debts and resolving his Federal tax 
issues. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant him eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
