 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08675 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Veronica T. Barton, Esq., Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
January 25, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 13, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 22, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on November 8, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 22, 2016, scheduling the hearing for December 14, 2016. However, as a 
result of Applicant’s Counsel’s repeated requests, this case was continued until January 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
6, 2017, and then until February 13, 2017. The hearing was convened as finally 
scheduled on February 13, 2017. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 15, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called 
one witness, his wife who handles their finances. Applicant presented documents, which 
I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) 1 through 13. The record was left open until April 
12, 2017, for receipt of additional documentation. On April 12, 2017, Applicant offered 
five additional exhibits that Applicant’s Counsel mismarked as AppX 12, 13, and 
correctly marked as AppXs 14 through 16. I have thus marked the two mismarked 
exhibits as AppX 12(#2) and as AppX 13(#2), respectively. There being no objection, all 
the exhibits were admitted into evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(TR) on February 23, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 5, 
and TR at page 54 line 14 to page 57 line 7.) He has been employed with the defense 
contractor since 2002, but he has held a security clearance since 1987. (TR at page 54 
line 14 to page 57 line 7.) 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties stemmed from investment properties that 
did not provide an adequate return for the investments. (TR at page 46 line 18 to page 
51 line 12.) 
 
 1.a. and 1.b. Applicant used loans from these financial institutions to cover his 
failing investment properties, but eventually fell behind in his payments to these 
institutions. (TR at page 40 line 16 to page 46 line 2, and at page 52 line 17 to page 60 
line 24.) To cover these delinquencies, roughly $60,000, he made monthly payments of 
about $840, for more than four years, to an attorney to address the delinquencies. (Id, 
and (12(#2).) Said attorney, who has since been disbarred, absconded with the funds. 
(TR at page 40 line 16 to page 46 line 2, and at page 52 line 17 to page 60 line 24, and 
AppXs 7~11.) Through reputable legal counsel, Applicant is again making a good-faith 
effort to address these debts, as evidenced by correspondence with the creditors. 
(AppX 13(#2).) 
 
 1.c. Applicant has paid the alleged past-due debt of about $6,255 to his 
Condominium Association. (TR at page 43 lines 14~18, and at page 60 line 25 to page 
61 line 8.) This is evidenced by documentation vis-à-vis the creditor showing a zero 
balance as of July 2016; and furthermore, it does not appear on the Government’s most 
recent February 2017 credit report. (AppX 5, and GX 15.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant has paid the alleged past-due debt of about $3,960 owed on his 
time share property. (TR at page 43 line 19 to page 44 line 18, and at page 60 line 25 to 
 
3 
 
page 61 line 8.) This is evidenced by documentation vis-à-vis the Financial Group, and 
it does not appear on the Government’s most recent February 2017 credit report. (AppX 
6, and GX 15.) 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Above and beyond his attorney’s malpractice, Applicant was delinquent on two 
real estate-related debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems have been resolved. Furthermore, he   
demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(b) and 20(d) have been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
well respected both at his workplace and in his community. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
