 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-07322 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his financial problems. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
        
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant responded to the SOR on June 10, 2016, and he elected a 
decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 29, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted her file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete copy to Applicant. 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2017. 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
On October 16, 2017, I issued an order informing both parties that although the 
SOR referenced the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006, I would be applying the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective as of June 8, 
2017, pursuant to Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4). I also permitted the 
parties to supplement the record with additional evidence and argument. Both parties 
received the order. On October 29, 2017, Applicant submitted one document, which I 
admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, without objection.2 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-11.3 FORM Item 11 
consists of the unauthenticated summaries of two interviews with a government 
investigator conducted on May 30, 2012 and June 11, 2012. In the FORM, Department 
Counsel advised Applicant that he could object to FORM Item 11 and it would not be 
admitted, or that he could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the 
document to make it accurate. Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the 
FORM or to raise any objections could constitute waiver, and the evidence would be 
considered by me. Applicant did not object to any of the Government’s exhibits in his 
October 2017 response. Given Department Counsel’s advisement and Applicant’s 
response to the FORM, I find his waiver to be knowing and intelligent.4 FORM Items 5-
11 are admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 5-11, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges financial considerations security concerns based on Applicant’s 
Federal and state income tax debts and a bankruptcy filing. In his response to the SOR, 
Applicant neither admitted nor denied the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He received his general equivalency degree (GED) in 
1977. He served in the U.S. Air Force Reserve from December 1979 to October 2006. 
Since November 2006, he has been employed full time as a security officer for a DOD 
contractor. Since January 2012, Applicant has held a second full-time security job for 
another DOD contractor. From 2009 to about 2012, he has also been self-employed part 
time with a security business. He was married in 1988 and was divorced in 1999. He has 
two sons, ages 17 and 29.5 
                                                          
2 Administrative Exhibit I includes my order, the attachments, and the Government’s email acknowledging 
receipt. 
 
3 FORM Items 1 through 4 consist of the SOR, administrative documents, and Applicant’s response, which 
are pleadings and are included in the administrative record. 
 
4 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.). See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) 
(“Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”) 
 
5 GE 5; GE 11. 
 
3 
 
 
 In March 2014, Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. In his 
bankruptcy petition, Applicant listed owing Federal income taxes totaling $31,000 and 
state income taxes totaling $6,832 for tax years 2009 through 2011. He also listed 
unsecured, consumer debt totaling $44,565. In April 2015, this bankruptcy case was 
converted to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and the dischargeable debts were discharged in 
July 2015. The tax liabilities were not discharged through the bankruptcy case.6 
 
 During his May 2012 security interview, Applicant explained that he was contacted 
by the IRS in about 2011 because Applicant owed taxes for income associated with his 
self-employment. Applicant claimed that these taxes were resolved; however, he has 
provided no explanation for the ongoing tax delinquencies.7 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant included a payment plan to resolve his 
delinquent state taxes, totaling $12,789. This payment plan was initiated in February 
2016. Applicant made three payments, totaling $1,010, in February 2016, March 2016, 
and April 2016 in accordance with this payment plan. Applicant further included 
documentation from the IRS stating that his tax year 2006 refund ($500) was applied to 
his tax year 2010 delinquency. He also made three payments, totaling $1,500, to the IRS 
in February 2016, March 2016, and April 2016; however, there is no evidence of an 
established payment plan with the IRS.8 
 
 Applicant’s October 2017 response to the FORM included a September 2017 
payment agreement with the IRS to resolve his tax delinquencies for tax years 2011 and 
2014. There is no documentary evidence of any payments in accordance with this 
payment plan, no any further documentary evidence demonstrating that Applicant 
adhered to his previous payment plans to resolve his Federal and state income tax 
delinquencies for tax years 2009 through 2011.9 
 
 Applicant has provided no information as to the circumstances that led to his 2014 
bankruptcy filing, particularly the listed consumer debts. He has provided no explanation 
for his tax delinquencies or the delay in addressing these delinquencies. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
6 GE 7-10. 
 
7 GE 11. 
 
8 Response to SOR. 
 
9 AE A. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
5 
 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
  
 Applicant’s delinquent Federal and state income taxes totaled approximately 
$37,832, for tax years 2009 through 2011. Applicant’s inability to satisfy his financial 
obligations led to his bankruptcy filing and the discharge of approximately $44,000 in 
unsecured, consumer debt. The Government produced substantial evidence to raise the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(f).  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant’s tax delinquencies began with tax year 2009 and they are ongoing. In 
fact, Applicant’s September 2017 payment plan with the IRS indicates that he has a tax 
delinquency for tax year 2014. Applicant has not demonstrated that the circumstances 
that caused his tax delinquencies are unlikely to recur, and his failure to timely address 
his tax delinquencies casts doubt on his reliability and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does 
not apply.   
 
Applicant attributed his bankruptcy filing to his outstanding tax debt; however, his 
bankruptcy filing also included significant consumer debts. Applicant has not identified 
any circumstances beyond his control that contributed to his financial problems. More 
importantly, there is no documentary evidence of any debt-resolution efforts on his 
delinquent taxes for tax years 2009 through 2011 until his February 2016 payments. 
Applicant has not demonstrated that he has acted in a financially-responsible manner in 
addressing his delinquent taxes. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
There is no documentary evidence that Applicant has sought credit counseling. 
Nor is there evidence of his monthly income or expenses to establish that his financial 
problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith requires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. 
Applicant has provided no explanation for his delay in addressing his delinquent taxes. 
Although he has provided documentary evidence of three payments on his Federal and 
state tax delinquencies, he has failed to establish a track record or payments or that he 
adhered to the payment plans. Furthermore, there is no evidence of any payments in 
accordance with the September 2017 payment plan with the IRS. AG ¶ 20(d) does not 
apply. 
 
Applicant initiated payment plans on his delinquent Federal and state taxes in 
February 2016, and he provided documentary evidence of three payments in adherence 
to those plans. He has provided no documentary evidence of any further payments on his 
delinquent taxes. He entered into a second payment plan with the IRS in September 2017; 
however, there is no evidence of any payments under that plan. AG ¶ 20(g) does not 
apply. I find that Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
 
7 
 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
      
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F and the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant did not act in a financially-responsible manner in addressing his aged 
tax delinquencies. He has not established a track record of payments in adherence to the 
payment plans, and he has not demonstrated that his tax problems are unlikely to recur. 
Given his burden to demonstrate financial responsibility, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, I conclude 
that it is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
