 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00433 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jacob Ranish, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s evidence is sufficient to mitigate the foreign influence and foreign 
preference security concerns. There is no evidence to show that the Dominican 
Republic (DR) poses a national security risk. Applicant’s participation in the DR’s Air 
Force Reserve (DRAF) after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen does not present a 
national security concern. Moreover, he renounced his DR citizenship. It is unlikely that 
Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual or government and the interest of the United States. Clearance 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 9, 2014. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign influence), C (foreign preference), and E 
(personal conduct) on September 21, 2015. Applicant answered the SOR on October 
15, 2015, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
 
2 
 
 
DOHA assigned the case to me and issued a notice of hearing on December 8, 
2016, setting the hearing for January 25, 2017. At the hearing, the Government offered 
two exhibits (GE 1 and 2). GE 1 was admitted without objection. GE 2 was marked and 
made part of the record, but it was not admitted as evidence. Applicant testified and 
submitted 15 exhibits, marked as Applicant’s exhibits (AE) 1 through 15. AE 1 (a 
request for administrative notice of facts concerning the DR) was marked and made part 
of the record, but not admitted as evidence. AE 2 through 15 were admitted without 
objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 2, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Applicant requested I take administrative notice of certain facts concerning the 
DR. Department Counsel did not object and I have taken administrative notice of the 
facts contained in the request. (AE 1) The facts are summarized in the written request 
and will not be repeated verbatim in this decision. I note that the relations between the 
DR and the United States are excellent. Both nations work closely in many matters 
including illegal drug interdiction, security, trade agreements, education, and health 
care. There is no evidence to show that the DR poses a security risk to the United 
States.  
 
On June 6, 2016, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding 
subparagraph 1.b, alleging that after becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant maintained a 
passport from the DR until January 2016. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1) Applicant denied the 
amended allegation on June 29, 2016. (HE 2) Department Counsel’s June 2016 motion 
also withdrew SOR paragraphs 3 and 3.a. I granted the motion as requested. 
 
On April 23 and 24, 2017, Applicant submitted motions (HE 4 and 5) requesting 
that I consider the allegation in SOR 1.b moot because of the anticipated National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), promulgated by Security Executive Agent 
Directive (SEAD) 4, to become effective June 8, 2017. On April 24, 2017, Department 
Counsel moved to withdraw SOR 1.b. (HE 3) I granted the motion as requested. Thus, 
Applicant’s motions are moot and they will not be addressed further in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.f through 2.h. He denied all of the 
remaining SOR allegations (¶¶ 1.a and 2.a through 2.e). His SOR and hearing 
admissions are incorporated into my findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
record evidence, and having considered Applicant’s testimony and his demeanor while 
testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old hardware engineer employed with a federal contractor 
since September 2014. He has never been married and has no children. He was born, 
raised, and educated in the DR. His father, 60, was a pilot in the DRAF and retired as a 
general officer in 2009. Applicant talks to his father on a frequent basis, but claimed 
they are no longer close because his father left his mother for another woman. His 
 
3 
 
 
father is a resident of the DR and a dual citizen of the United States and the DR. (AE 3) 
Applicant grew up in a DR military neighborhood. 
 
Applicant’s mother is a retired officer of the DRAF. She practiced as a dentist for 
about 10 years. She immigrated to the United States in 2011-2012, and is currently a 
U.S. permanent resident alien. She is in the process of applying for U.S. citizenship. 
Applicant has two brothers: one is a naturalized U.S. citizen residing in the United 
States. (AE 8) The second brother was born in the United States, but has never lived in 
the United States. (AE 9) He works for a private company in the DR. While his mother 
and father were together, Applicant provided his parents with about $6,000 in yearly 
financial support. 
 
According to Applicant, his grandmother sponsored him into the United States. 
He entered the United States for the first time in 1993, and received his U.S. permanent 
residency in 1994. Thereafter, he frequently travelled back and forth between the United 
States and the DR. 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in the DR. At age 18, he joined the DRAF 
in 2002. He testified he joined the Air Force to earn money to pay for college. He 
testified he served on active duty for about four months during basic training. 
Thereafter, he attended college, drilled during the weekends, and participated on active 
duty training about twice a year. He was commissioned as a DRAF officer in 2003. 
Applicant received his bachelor’s degree from a DR college in 2006. He worked for a 
U.S. federal contractor manufacturing electronics in the DR between 2006 and 2008. 
Applicant immigrated to the United States to work with federal contractors in positions 
related to his job in the DR in October 2008. (Tr. 20-21) He completed a master’s 
degree in technology from an American university. In September 2014, his current 
employer and security sponsor hired Applicant.  
 
Applicant become a naturalized U.S. citizen in August 2012. He renounced his 
DR citizenship and surrendered his DR passport in August 2014. (AE 7) He served in 
the DRAF until December 2015 when, as a captain, he resigned his commission. (AE 2) 
He had to ask his father for assistance to expedite his resignation because it was taking 
too long. He testified that he renounced his DR citizenship and resigned his DRAF 
commission to eliminate any possible security issues or conflict of interest allegations. 
He receives no pension or benefits from the DR government or its armed forces. 
Applicant explained that he elected to become a U.S. citizen because of the quality of 
life and financial opportunities the United States offers. His loyalty is to the United 
States.  
 
Applicant last visited the DR in 2015. Before then, he visited the DR on a yearly 
basis. He still has friends in the DR and in the Air Force with whom he maintains 
infrequent contact. He maintains a bank account in the DR with about $1,000 that he 
used for his travel convenience. He intends to close it in the near future. Applicant’s 
salary is about $86,000 a year. Other than the bank account, Applicant testified he has 
 
4 
 
 
no other financial or proprietary interests in the DR. He travels using his U.S. passport 
since 2012, and is registered to vote in the United States. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Security Executive Agent 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG. I 
decided this case under the current AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
 
5 
 
 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.1 
 
 Individuals are not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have connections and contacts in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing 
an individual’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, an administrative judge must 
take into account the foreign government involved; the intelligence-gathering history of 
that government; the country’s human rights record; and other pertinent factors.2  
 
 In assessing the possible security concern raised by Applicant’s foreign contacts, 
I have considered the following disqualifying and mitigating conditions:   
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology;  
 
                                            
1 ISCR Case No. 09-07565 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2012) (“As the Supreme Court stated in Egan, 
a clearance adjudication may be based not only upon conduct but also upon circumstances unrelated to 
conduct, such as the foreign residence of an applicant’s close relatives.”) (internal citation omitted).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors an administrative 
judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 An individual with family members and other connections in a foreign country 
faces a high, but not insurmountable, hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by 
such foreign ties. An applicant is not required “to sever all ties with a foreign country 
before he or she can be granted access to classified information.”3 However, what 
factor or combination of factors will mitigate security concerns raised by an applicant 
with family members in a foreign country is not easily identifiable or quantifiable.4  
 
Applicant entered the United States in 1993 and received his permanent resident 
alien card (green card) in 1994. He then travelled frequently between the two countries. 
After working during two years for a federal contractor manufacturing products in the 
DR, Applicant immigrated to the United States to work for federal contractors in 2008, 
and became a U.S. naturalized citizen in 2012. Applicant’s father, mother, and one 
brother are naturalized U.S. citizens. His other brother was born in the United States. 
His father and the brother born in the United States are residents of the DR. His mother 
and other brother are residents of the United States. 
 
I note that there is no evidence to show the DR is known for targeting U.S. 
citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information, or is associated with a risk of 
terrorism. (The Government did not allege disqualifying condition AG ¶ 7(a).) The 
relations between the Dominican Republic and the United States are excellent. Both 
nations work closely in many matters including illegal drug interdiction, security, trade 
agreements, education, and health care. There is no evidence to show that the 
Dominican Republic poses a security risk to the United States. 
 
The issue in this case is whether Applicant’s relatives and contacts in the DR 
could result in a divided allegiance, or whether they create circumstances in which 
Applicant may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, or 
organization in a way inconsistent with U.S. interests. The record lacks such evidence. 
 
                                            
3 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
4 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 23, 2014). 
 
7 
 
 
I considered that Applicant’s father (general officer) and his mother (officer) 
retired from the DRAF, and that Applicant served in the DRAF for about 13 years and 
held the rank of captain. Applicant was a reservist in the DRAF and attended drills 
during weekends. His full-time job was working for federal contractors manufacturing 
products in the DR between 2006 and 2008. Because of his expertise, federal 
contractors hired him to work for in the United States starting in 2008. After Applicant 
because aware of the possible security concerns raised by his dual citizenship and 
service in the DRAF, he renounced his DR citizenship and resigned his DRAF 
commission. 
 
Applicant considers the United States his country and seeks the quality of life 
and opportunities that the United States offers. He expressed his loyalty and 
understanding of his fiduciary obligations to the United States. He would like to continue 
to serve the U.S. and work for federal contractors. Additionally, Applicant has developed 
deep and long-lasting bonds in the United States, as evidenced by his mother’s status 
as a permanent alien resident in the United States seeking her naturalization. 
Applicant’s brother is also a permanent alien resident in the United States and seeks his 
naturalization. Applicant’s allegiance to the United States was corroborated by his 
renunciation of his DR citizenship, surrendering his passport, and resigning his 
commission.  
 
Accordingly, after a complete and thorough review of the record evidence, and 
while remaining mindful of my duty to resolve any unmitigated doubt in favor of 
protecting national security, I find that Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised 
by his connections to and contact with his family in the DR and prior military service in 
that country.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The foreign preference security concern is explained at AG ¶ 9:  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
 Applicant served as an officer in the DRAF between 2002 and 2015. He was a 
captain at the time he resigned his commission in 2015. He served in the DRAF after 
becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2012.  
 
8 
 
 
 In assessing the possible security concern raised by Applicant’s foreign 
preference, I have considered the following disqualifying and mitigating conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 10(d): participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, position, 
or political office in a foreign government or military organization . . . .  
 
AG ¶ 11(a): the foreign citizenship is not in conflict with U.S. national 
security interests; 
 
AG ¶ 11(b): dual citizenship is based solely on parental citizenship or birth 
in a foreign country, and there is no evidence of foreign preference; 
 
AG ¶ 11(c): the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce the 
foreign citizenship that is in conflict with U.S. national security interests; 
  
AG ¶ 11(d): the exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen; 
 
AG ¶ 11(e): the exercise of the entitlements or benefits of foreign 
citizenship do not present a national security concern; and 
 
AG ¶ 11(t): the foreign preference, if detected, involves a foreign country, 
entity, or association that poses a low national security risk. 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant mitigated the foreign 
preference security concerns and that all of the above mitigating conditions are 
applicable. I considered that Applicant served about three years in the DRAF as a 
reservist after he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. However, after becoming aware of 
the security concerns raised by both his DR citizenship and officer commission, he 
renounced his citizenship in 2014, and resigned his commission in 2015. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
federal contractors since 2006, and for his employer since 2014. Considering the record 
as a whole, Applicant’s evidence is sufficient to mitigate the foreign influence and 
foreign preference security concerns. The DR poses a low national security risk. 
Applicant’s participation in the DRAF after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, and 
while processing the resignation of his commission, does not present a national security 
 
9 
 
 
concern. He renounced his DR citizenship. It is unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual or government 
and the interest of the United States. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.b:      Withdrawn 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.h:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:      WITHDRAWN 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:      Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
