KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant cites to the Judge’s finding that there is no evidence that he has acted
contrary to the interests of the U.S., arguing that it was inconsistent for the Judge then to have
denied him a clearance.  However, it is not inconsistent for a Judge to make reference to
favorable information in a file yet conclude that the Applicant has not presented sufficient
evidence to meet his or her burden of persuasion regarding mitigation.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 15-06272.a1
DATE: 01/29/2018
DATE: January 29, 2018
In Re:
------------ 
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-06272
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 25, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the
written record.  On October 31, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Stephanie C. Hess denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Defense contractor since 1989 and has held a clearance since
1994.  Born in India, he came to the U.S. in the mid-1980s and became a citizen of this country in
the early 1990s.  His wife is also a naturalized U.S. citizen.  They have two children who were born
in the United States.
Applicant’s mother, numerous siblings, and his father-in-law are citizens and residents of
India.  Applicant speaks with his mother and one of his siblings once a week.  He speaks with other
siblings less frequently, from once a month to once a year.  Applicant travels to India once or twice
a years to visit his family.  He and his wife purchased an apartment building in India, valued at about
$135,000.  In addition he invested a substantial amount of money in certificates of deposit at a bank
in India.  These CDs are currently valued at over $1,000,000.  This money is intended for use during
Applicant’s retirement.  Applicant has previously expressed a willingness to withdraw the funds and
transfer them to U.S. banks.  
India is a parliamentary democracy that is a partner with the U.S. in countering terrorism. 
India has good relations with Iran and supports that country’s efforts in developing nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes.  India is persistently targeted by foreign and domestic terrorist organizations. 
It is an active collector of U.S. proprietary information, and there have been several cases of
industrial espionage arising from India, both from private sources and from the government.  India
has certain human rights problems, such as police abuse, extrajudicial killings, and widespread
corruption.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that India’s geopolitical circumstances, Applicant’s close family
members in that country, and his substantial financial holdings there raise a heightened risk that he
could be subject to coercion or a conflict of interest.  The Judge noted that Applicant has held a
clearance for many years and has previously mitigated concerns arising from his foreign contacts. 
However, she concluded that the increase in value of Applicant’s financial interest in India is a
2
circumstance that has magnified the significance of his foreign ties.  She notes that, despite his stated
intention to reinvest his funds in U.S. banks, he had not done so by the close of the record.  She
stated that the evidence does not establish whether Applicant intends to retire to India.  While there
is no evidence that he has acted contrary to the interests of the U.S., neither is there evidence of deep
and long-standing relationships and loyalties in the U.S. to the extent that it would mitigate concerns
set forth in the SOR.
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s many years of holding a clearance
and his work as a Defense contractor.  However, she also noted Applicant’s significant financial
holdings in India.  She concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the concerns arising from his
foreign connections.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider evidence favorable to him, such as his
many years of holding a clearance without incident or concern.  Applicant’s argument is not enough
to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 17-00257 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2017).  Applicant cites to a Hearing Office case in support
of his effort to obtain a favorable result.  We give this case due consideration as persuasive evidence. 
However, Hearing Office cases are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal
Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-03219 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 15, 2017).  Applicant has not shown
that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No 17-00257, supra, at 3.   
Applicant cites to the Judge’s finding that there is no evidence that he has acted contrary to
the interests of the U.S., arguing that it was inconsistent for the Judge then to have denied him a
clearance.  However, it is not inconsistent for a Judge to make reference to favorable information
in a file yet conclude that the Applicant has not presented sufficient evidence to meet his or her
burden of persuasion regarding mitigation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01669 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan.
29, 2015) (It is not inconsistent for a Judge to find that an applicant’s presentation is believable as
far as it goes yet conclude that the presentation is not sufficient to meet the applicant’s burden of
persuasion).  Contrary to Applicant’s argument, the Judge appears to have satisfied the requirements
of Directive ¶ 6.3, in that she considered the totality of the evidence in reaching her decision.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-00578 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2017).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.    
Signed: James E. Moody        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fileds           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy               
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
