1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
     --------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 15-03951 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He has a history of financial problems that is ongoing, 
and he has done little to address the various delinquent accounts. Accordingly, this 
case is decided against Applicant.    
Statement of the Case 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on January 3, 2013.1 This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on March 30, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
1 Exhibit 1. 
 
2 
 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guidelines known as Guideline F for financial considerations 
based on a history of financial problems, Guideline K for handling protected information 
based on several incidents of mishandling proprietary information in the workplace, and 
Guideline E for personal conduct based on two allegations of falsification of his 2013 
security clearance application.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 27, 2016. His answers were mixed, with 
admissions and denials. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on April 7, 2017. The hearing took place as 
scheduled on April 27, 2017. Applicant appeared without counsel. Department Counsel 
Exhibits 1 and 4-8 were admitted while Exhibits 2 and 3 were not admitted.2 Applicant 
offered no documentary exhibits. No witnesses were called other than Applicant. The 
hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on May 4, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 The SOR was amended at hearing, without objections, to correct minor drafting 
errors in the falsification allegations in SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b.3   
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security clearance 
previously granted to him. His educational background includes a bachelor’s degree in 
computer engineering. He has worked as a software engineer for major defense 
contractors since 1998. He has been employed by his current company since 2004. His 
employment history does not include military service. He married in 2001, his spouse 
told him she wanted a divorce in 2009, she moved out of the marital home with their 
three sons in April 2010, he has had custody of his sons since July 2011, and the 
divorce occurred in May 2012. His middle son returned to living with his mother in 2016.  
 
In his January 2013 security clearance application, Applicant did not disclose, in 
the last seven years, that he had received a written warning, been officially 
reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in the workplace, such as a 
violation of security policy in response to a question seeking that information. Likewise, 
he did not disclose, in the last seven years, the existence of any delinquent routine 
financial accounts in response to a question seeking that information. About a month 
later in February 2013, Applicant self-reported to his employer’s security office that his 
personal residence (with first and second mortgage loans) went into foreclosure due to 
financial problems related to his divorce that occurred in May 2012.4   
 
                                                          
2 Tr. 21-26.  
 
3 Tr. 15-17.  
 
4 Exhibit 2.  
 
3 
 
Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the SOR alleged seven delinquent 
debts ranging in amounts from $28 to $26,910 for a total of about $62,231. The largest 
debt is the $26,910 charged-off second mortgage loan account. There are two charged-
off credit card accounts for a total of $29,589, and there are four collection accounts for 
a total of $5,732. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted a $406 collection 
account, the two charged-off credit card accounts, and the charged-off second 
mortgage loan. He denied and disputed the remaining three collection accounts. And he 
explained in his answer and during the hearing that his marital separation and divorce 
blindsided him, the emotional strain resulted in a lack of focus on financial matters, and 
he did not handle his finances well.  
 
All seven of the delinquent accounts are established by information in credit 
reports from 2013, 2015, 2016, and 2017.5 Applicant did not present documentation to 
establish that any of the seven delinquent accounts were paid, in a payment 
arrangement, settled or compromised, in dispute, cancelled, or forgiven. He admitted 
making no effort to resolve the seven delinquent accounts since receiving the SOR in 
March 2016.6 He attributed his lack of effort to impatience in dealing with the collection 
process.7 He also stated that although he had received written offers to settle delinquent 
accounts, he did not pursue any due to the potential effect on his taxable income.8  
 
Overall, Applicant attributed his financial problems to his marital separation and 
divorce during 2010-2012.9 His current financial situation includes about $13,000 in 
cash savings and an unknown balance in a 401(k) retirement account.10 He has not 
sought or obtained financial counseling or advice.11 The most recent credit report from 
March 2017 includes two medical collection accounts for $168 and $237, which are not 
alleged in the SOR and which Applicant acknowledges.12          
 
Under Guideline K for handling protected information, the SOR alleged five 
incidents in a 12-month period during 2012-2013 when Applicant was cited for violating 
company security rules and regulations by leaving proprietary or export-controlled 
documents or both unsecured in his workspace in an open area. In his answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted three of the five incidents. There is no documentary evidence 
to establish the incidents. At the hearing, he explained that the incidents occurred 
                                                          
5 Exhibits 4, 5, 6, and 7.  
 
6 Tr. 48.  
 
7 Tr. 53.  
 
8 Tr. 64-66.  
 
9 Tr. 37-42.  
 
10 Tr. 69-71.  
 
11 Tr. 71-72.  
 
12 Exhibit 7; Tr. 71.  
 
 
4 
 
shortly after his divorce in May 2012, and he recalled four of the five incidents alleged.13 
He acknowledged that he did not take the initial citation seriously enough, and was then 
cited again.14 The common factor in the incidents was leaving protected information 
unsecured in his workspace along with bad or sloppy habits while working in an open 
area.15 He changed his habits by working exclusively in closed areas, which has 
prevented the recurrence of additional incidents.16     
 
Under Guideline E for personal conduct, the SOR alleged that Applicant 
deliberately falsified his January 2013 security clearance application by failing to 
disclose three security violations that occurred in 2012, and by failing to disclose several 
delinquent financial accounts. Applicant denies both allegations. He explained, in his 
answer and during the hearing, that he did not remember or recall the 2012 violations 
when completing his January 2013 security clearance application. Concerning the 
financial matters, he explained that although he knew he had some delinquent debts, he 
did not believe they were reportable because they were not more than 120 days 
delinquent. If the debts were reportable, then he made a mistake in not reporting them.   
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.17 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.18 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”19 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
                                                          
13 Tr. 57-58.  
 
14 Tr. 59.  
 
15 Exhibits 2-6. 
 
16 Tr. 61-62.  
 
17 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
18 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
19 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.20 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.21 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.22 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.23 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.24 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.25 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.26 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.27 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . .28 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
                                                          
20 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
21 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
22 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
23 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
24 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
25 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
26 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
27 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
28 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 
 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 AG ¶ 19(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of ability to do so;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions taken to resolve the issue.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. His history of financial 
problems is long-standing and goes back to the period of his marital separation and 
divorce during 2010-2012. It was evident in listening to and observing Applicant that he 
went through a difficult period after his then wife decided to leave the household. This is 
the type of life event that falls squarely within the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
 But what is missing here is evidence that Applicant acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. He did not act responsibly because he largely put his head in the sand 
and ignored his financial problems. Likewise, he made no effort, much less a good-faith 
effort, to resolve the seven delinquent debts after receiving the SOR in March 2016. His 
lack of supporting documentation bears this point out. In addition, although he disputes 
three of the seven delinquent debts, he did not offer any documented proof in support of 
his disputes or provide evidence of actions taken to resolve the issues. The seven 
delinquent debts are unresolved and ongoing. And he has done little to help himself, 
despite that he has a long and steady employment history working as a software 
engineer for major defense contractors. These facts and circumstances do not 
demonstrate the high degree of judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability required for 
access to classified or sensitive information.  
 
 
7 
 
 Under Guideline K for mishandling protected information,29 I am not unduly 
concerned about the incidents of Applicant mishandling proprietary or export-controlled 
information in his workspace. The incidents took place several years ago and have not 
recurred. He has since changed his habits and no longer works in open areas, he works 
in closed areas, and his change of work habits appears to have remedied the problem.  
 
 Under Guideline E for personal conduct, the concern is that “conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Of special concern is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative 
or adjudicative processes.”30 A statement is false when it is made deliberately 
(knowingly and willfully). An omission of relevant and material information is not 
deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, 
misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the information did not need to be 
reported.  
 
 Concerning the two falsification allegations, I am not persuaded that Applicant’s 
failure to disclose the relevant information was deliberate. He explained that he did not 
recall the three security violations or incidents from 2012 when he completed his 2013 
security clearance application. He also explained why he omitted delinquent financial 
accounts from his security clearance application. I found both explanations credible and 
worthy of belief. Further, his willingness to self-report the foreclosure in February 2013, 
one month after completing the security clearance application, persuades me that he 
was not engaged in an effort to omit, hide, or conceal his financial problems. His self-
report also put the Defense Department on notice that he was experiencing financial 
problems. Given his self-report of a serious financial problem such as a home 
foreclosure, it is not reasonable to conclude that his failure to disclose the other 
delinquent accounts in his security clearance application constituted falsification.31   
    
 Applicant’s long-standing history of financial problems creates serious doubt 
about his reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified 
information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and 
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice 
versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that he did 
not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
29 AG ¶¶ 33, 34, and 35 (setting forth the concern as well as the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).  
 
30 AG ¶ 15.  
 
31 See ISCR Case No. 15-06990 (App. Bd. Jan. 11, 2018) (held that the Government failed to establish by 
substantial evidence that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose delinquent debts in his security 
clearance application).  
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:   For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
