 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     -------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-05647 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke her eligibility for 
access to classified information. She did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concern stemming from a long-standing history of financial problems, which 
includes bankruptcies, failure to timely file federal and state income tax returns, back 
taxes owed to the IRS, and delinquent accounts. Accordingly, this case is decided 
against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on October 2, 2014. This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on November 14, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
 
2 
 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations 
based on a history of financial problems.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 12, 2016. She admitted the factual 
allegations except for the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.l, for which she submitted 
documentation showing it was no longer a valid debt because it was included in a 2005 
bankruptcy case. She also requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on February 7, 2017. The hearing took place as 
scheduled on April 25, 2017. Applicant appeared without counsel. Both Department 
Counsel and Applicant offered documentary exhibits, which were admitted as Exhibits 
1-13 and A-E, respectively, with the exception of Exhibit 6, which was not admitted.  
The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on May 4, 2017. 
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security clearance 
previously granted to her. She works as a senior assembler for a federal contractor. She 
has worked for the same company or its predecessor in interest since 1982. She 
married in 1991, although she and her husband are now living separately. They have 
two adult children, one of whom, along with a minor child, lives with Applicant.    
 
Applicant does not dispute that she has a long-standing history of financial 
problems.1 The SOR alleged and Applicant admits the following matters: (1) a 
discharged Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1997, a dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2002, 
and a discharged Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2005; (2) failure to timely file federal and 
state income tax returns for tax years 2011 through 2015; (3) approximately $17,000 in 
back taxes owed to the IRS for tax years 2011 through 2013; and (4) several past-due, 
collection, or charged-off accounts. Most of these matters remain unresolved. 
 
At the hearing, Applicant explained that the bankruptcy cases, which were filed 
jointly with her husband, were necessitated by expenses exceeding their income.2 She 
acknowledged that she had yet to file her past-due federal and state tax returns, 
although she hoped to have the returns filed within the next 30 days, as she was in the 
process of hiring a firm to prepare the returns.3 She has had no contact with the IRS 
about the back taxes, and she agreed that she probably now owes more than $20,000 
in back taxes.4 
 
Concerning the delinquent accounts in the SOR, Applicant provided 
documentation or other proof that she resolved or was in the process of resolving 
                                                          
1 Tr. 38.  
 
2 Tr. 44.  
 
3 Tr. 47-49, 51-52.  
 
4 Tr. 49-50.  
 
 
3 
 
several accounts. First, she stated unequivocally that she paid in full the $116 charged-
off account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h.5 Second, she received an offer to settle the delinquent 
account in SOR ¶ 1.g, but had not acted upon it.6 Third, the delinquent account in SOR 
¶ 1.l was resolved in 2005 when it was included in the bankruptcy case.7 Fourth, the 
delinquent account, alleged twice in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.n, is being resolved by $40 
monthly payments.8 Fifth, the delinquent account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m is being 
resolved through payments.9 The remaining delinquent accounts are unresolved.  
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to marital troubles.10 Her husband fell 
ill due to depression after retiring from his job working for a municipality in 2013.11 The 
result was Applicant provided intensive care to him from about October 2013 to 
February 2017. Currently, she did not know if she had a positive or negative monthly 
cash flow.12 She described her financial situation as living paycheck to paycheck.13 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.14 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.15 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
                                                          
5 Tr. 68.  
 
6 Exhibit D.  
 
7 Exhibit C.  
 
8 Exhibit A.  
 
9 Exhibit B.  
 
10 Tr. 39-42. 
 
11 Exhibit E.  
 
12 Tr. 57-58.  
 
13 Tr. 59.  
 
14 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
15 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
 
4 
 
side of denials.”16 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.17 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.18 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.19 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.20 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.21 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.22 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.23 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.24 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . .25 
                                                          
16 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
17 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
19 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
20 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
21 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
22 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
23 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
24 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
25 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income 
tax as required;   
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identify 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.   
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. Her history of financial 
problems is long-standing, going back to at least the 1997 Chapter 7 bankruptcy case, 
which was followed by two additional bankruptcy cases. In addition, and most serious 
here, is her failure to meet her lawful tax obligations by filing returns and paying tax 
when due. She has yet to file state or federal income tax returns for tax years 2011 
through 2015, and she owes at least $17,000 (and probably much more due to 
penalties and interest) to the IRS for back taxes. She was still shopping for a firm to 
assist her with filing her returns, and she had not been in contact with the IRS 
concerning the back taxes.  
 
 Applicant’s tax problem is unresolved and ongoing. The failure to timely file tax 
returns and pay tax when due bears close examination and is a matter of serious 
 
6 
 
concern to the federal government.26 Both the failure to file and pay tax when due 
suggest that an applicant has a problem with complying with well-established 
governmental rules and regulations. Voluntary compliance with such rules and systems 
is essential for protecting classified or sensitive information. An applicant who has a 
history of not fulfilling their tax obligations, which is the case here, may be said not to 
have demonstrated the high degree of judgment and reliability required for access to 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Applicant presented reliable information that she resolved or is in the process of 
resolving several of the delinquent accounts. Nevertheless, her efforts are insufficient to 
overcome the serious concern raised by her failure to meet her tax obligations. She has 
taken little affirmative action to resolve her tax problem, which is a matter that weighs 
heavily in my decision. Indeed, she has made no arrangements with state or federal tax 
authorities to file past-due returns or pay back taxes.    
 
  Applicant’s long-standing history of financial problems creates serious doubt 
about her reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified 
information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and 
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice 
versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that she did 
not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l, 1.m, 1.n:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
26 The General Accountability Office (GAO) expressed serious concern over the relationship between tax 
delinquents and clearance holders in its July 28, 2014 report, Security Clearances: Tax Debts Owed by 
DOD Employees and Contractors, http://www.gao.gov/assets/670/665052.pdf. 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
