 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07150 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the criminal conduct and personal conduct security concerns. 
He failed to mitigate those raised under the alcohol consumption guideline. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On May 16, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), and Guideline 
E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DoD after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented 
and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                            
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant submitted Answers to the SOR in writing on June 8, 2016, August 9, 
2016, and October 21, 2016. (Item 2) He elected to have his case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. On November 7, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 11 Items. Applicant received 
the FORM on November 21, 2016. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not provide a response to the FORM, object to the Government’s 
evidence or submit documents. All Items are admitted into evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on August 14, 2017.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old and married for the second time in 2014. He and his first 
wife divorced in 1994. They have 26-year-old twins. He has a 19-year-old daughter from 
another relationship. Applicant served in the U.S. Army from 1987 to 1992, when he was 
honorably discharged. He held a security clearance while serving. In 2012 he earned a 
construction certificate at a local college. He has worked for his employer, a defense 
contractor, since October 2014. He previously worked for that employer between 2010 
and 2012. (Item 3, Item 11) 
  
 Applicant has a history of criminal conduct, as set out in the SOR, which spans 
from 1988 to 2009. It includes seven incidents, five of which are related to alcohol 
consumption, including four charges for driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol. 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.g, and provided explanations. 
He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a because he did not recall an arrest or charge for a 
failure to appear and burglary-felony in 2009. That criminal incident is documented by an 
FBI record and a state criminal history. Additionally, he described the incident in his 2010 
security clearance application. (Item 5, Item 6, Item 11)  
 
 In his Answers, Applicant stated that some of criminal incidents occurred when he 
was in his early 20’s and while stationed overseas. He stated that his first wife left him in 
1993 and took their twins with her. He has not seen them since then. As a consequence, 
he became seriously depressed and consumed too much alcohol. Applicant stated that 
he has not consumed alcohol since 2009 and does not intend to ever consume alcohol 
and drive. (Item 2) However, that statement contradicts his May 2015 statement to a 
government investigator that he had a few beers the night before he was terminated from 
his job. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a, which alleged that in 2014 he was 
terminated from a position after failing a breathalyzer test which indicated he had 
consumed alcohol. He asserted that he was a diabetic and as a consequence the result 
was essentially a false positive. He stated that as of 2016, when he filed his Answers, the 
matter was in arbitration. He did not submit medical information confirming his contention 
after receiving the FORM. 
                                            
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 During a March 2015 interview, Applicant discussed his position regarding the 
results of the breathalyzer test, his diabetic condition, and termination from work. He also 
stated that he had a few beers the night before the breathalyzer, but had not been drinking 
at the time the test was administered. He said that the case was in arbitration as of that 
date. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b, which cross-alleged the 
allegations under criminal conduct and alcohol consumption. He explained that he has 
been honest and candid throughout the investigative process. (Item 2) 
 
   
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
 
 
 
 
4 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern related to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. They following two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
Applicant was arrested and/or charged with eight criminal offenses from 1988 to 
2009, which cast doubt on his judgment. The evidence, including his admissions and law 
enforcement records, confirm those allegations. The evidence established both 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 32 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under 
this guideline. Two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 The last criminal incident occurred in February 2009, approximately nine years 
ago. The evidence establishes some mitigation under AG ¶ 32(b). In addition to the 
passage of time, the record indicates that Applicant has worked for the same employer 
for about six years, which indicates that he has maintained a good employment record. 
AG ¶ 32(d) provides some mitigation. 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern under this 
guideline. Three of them are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, drinking on the job, or jeopardizing the 
welfare and safety of others, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
Between 1988 and 1999, Applicant was arrested and charged with four DUIs: 
1988, 1991, 1994, and, 1999. He was over the legal limit for alcohol at the time of the 
arrests, indicating that his judgment was impaired. Later in 1988, he was also arrested 
for assault, battery, and disorderly conduct that occurred after he consumed alcohol. In 
2014, he was administered a breathalyzer while at work. The test indicated that he had 
consumed alcohol prior to taking the test. The evidence raised the above three 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 AG ¶ 23 provides the following conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 The last alcohol-related incident occurred in 2014, which was less than two years 
before this SOR was issued. Given Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse, that is not a 
sufficient period of time from which to conclude that similar incidents will not recur. 
Although Applicant asserted that the breathalyzer registered an inaccurate finding, he 
failed to produce evidence to substantiate his position. He also admitted to a government 
investigator that he had consumed alcohol the night before, which is inconsistent with his 
statement that he had abstained from alcohol consumption since 2009. AG ¶ 23(a) does 
not apply. Applicant acknowledged his problems with alcohol, but there is no evidence 
that he participated in treatment, established a pattern of modified consumption in 
accordance with treatment recommendations, or is participating in an alcohol 
rehabilitation program. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 23(b) or 
AG ¶ 23(c).     
   
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 16 contains no disqualifying condition that would support 
security concerns in this case that are independent of those comprehensively addressed 
 
 
 
 
7 
under Guideline J and Guideline G. The SOR merely re-alleges by reference the 
allegations raised under those guidelines. While any conduct involving questionable 
judgment or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can theoretically fall under 
Guideline E, as well as other guidelines, no value is added to the analysis of Applicant’s 
national security eligibility by doing so in this case.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines J and G in this whole-person analysis. I considered that Applicant’s last 
criminal incident occurred in 2009, more than seven years before the SOR was issued. 
Based on that fact and that he has successfully worked for his employer for most of the 
intervening years, he mitigated the criminal conduct security concerns. However, he failed 
to present sufficient evidence to mitigate the alcohol concerns. There is minimal evidence 
from which to conclude he no longer has an alcohol problem or that it is sufficiently under 
control that recurring incidents are unlikely. Overall, the evidence raises doubt as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:           FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:           AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
              Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:          Against Applicant 
     
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT (Duplicative)2 
 
    Subparagraphs 3.a and 3.b:          For Applicant (Duplicative) 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
 
         
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
                                            
2 Paragraph 3 is duplicative of Paragraphs 1 and 2. It supports no separate findings of security concern.  
 
