1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )   ISCR Case No. 15-04353 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not falsify his 2014 security clearance application. Consequently, there 
are no Guideline E personal conduct security concerns. As for the financial considerations 
security concerns, it is too soon to conclude he has mitigated them, given the amount of 
money that Applicant owes in back income tax payments. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On July 30, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guidelines F, financial considerations, and E, personal conduct, explaining 
why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant 
or continue security clearance eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
On September 6, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations, denying all of 
them, and requesting a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on April 7, 2017. On June 5, 
2017, I scheduled a hearing for June 29, 2017. The hearing was held as scheduled. I 
received five Government exhibits (GE 1 – 5), 12 exhibits from Applicant (AE A – AE L), 
and I considered Applicant’s testimony. Additionally, I took administrative notice of the 
Government’s discovery letter to Applicant, dated October 5, 2016. At the close of the 
hearing, I left the record open to allow Applicant the opportunity to submit additional 
exhibits. Within the time allotted, he submitted three additional exhibits. Department 
Counsel did not object, and I incorporated them into the record as AE M through AE O. 
The transcript was received on July 10, 2017. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old married man with one child, a teenager. Applicant 
graduated from college in 1997. He is a physicist who has been working for the same 
employer, a federal contractor, since 2016. He is currently pursuing a master’s degree in 
physics. (Tr. 21) He has held a security clearance for approximately 18 years. (Tr. 58) 
 
 Applicant has a history of trouble keeping up with his rent payments, his student 
loan payments, and his income tax payment obligations, as set forth in the SOR. 
Subparagraph 1.a, totaling $1,472, is a delinquent mortgage payment, stemming from a 
period between November 2010 and August 2012 when Applicant was separated from his 
wife. Applicant acknowledges trouble paying his rent timely while separated from his wife, 
but thought that he was current when he left the apartment and reconciled with his wife. 
(GE 2 at 22) He satisfied it in August 2016. (AE J) 
 
 Subparagraph 1.b, totaling $8,472, is one of Applicant’s student loan accounts. (Tr. 
23) It became delinquent in June 2014. (GE 4 at 1) In January 2016, Applicant began the 
process of consolidating all of his student loans into one account with a principal balance of 
$164,000. (AE F) He has been making monthly payment ranging between $1,500 and 
$1,793 per month since August 2016. (AE B) Recently, upon enrolling in graduate school, 
he placed them in deferment status. (Tr. 17; AE I) 
 
 Subparagraph 1.c, totaling approximately $32,000, is an income tax debt that 
Applicant owes the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for 2013. Applicant incurred this 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
debt after withdrawing $93,000 from his individual retirement account (IRA) to purchase a 
condominium, and neglecting to set aside part of the withdrawal into an escrow account.  
(Tr. 24; GE 2 at 24, 29) Applicant realized that he owed this amount when he began 
preparing his income tax returns in early 2014, prompting him to file for an extension. By 
January 2015, Applicant had negotiated an installment agreement. (AE M at 1) Under the 
plan, he made monthly payments ranging between $498 and $550 monthly. (AE M at 1) He 
stopped making payments in November 2015, after encountering additional financial 
problems. (Tr. 40) In November 2016, he re-negotiated the payment agreement and has 
been making $650 monthly payments since then. (AE M at 1) 
 
 Each year since 2013, Applicant has withdrawn money from his IRA. (Tr. 41, 44) He 
does this to make ends meet. (Tr. 43) He has filed his 2014 and 2015 income tax returns. 
He owes $12,451 and $5,469, respectively. (AE N at 2; AE O at 2) These balances include 
interest and penalties. He has established installment agreements for both years. (AE N, 
AE O) As of the hearing date, he had filed for an extension of the due date for his 2016 
income tax return, and was working on its preparation. (Tr. 41) 
 
 Applicant maintains a budget. He has approximately $1,300 of monthly discretionary 
income. (AE P)  
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application in May 2014. (GE 1) He 
answered “no” in response the following question under Section 26: 
 
In the past seven (7) years, have you failed to file or pay Federal, state, or 
other taxes when required by law or ordinance? 
 
Applicant’s application for an extension of time to file his 2013 income tax return 
was timely. He filed his 2013 income tax return before the extended deadline, and 
began paying the debt shortly after negotiating an installment agreement in January 
2015. 
 
 Section 26 of the security clearance application also required Applicant to 
disclose whether he was 120 days delinquent on any debt when he completed the 
application. The debt alleged in subparagraphs 1.a, an expense related to 
Applicant’s apartment where he lived when he separated from his wife,  was more 
than 120 days late when he completed the security clearance application. Applicant 
did not list this debt on the security clearance application because he thought that 
he had settled the account when he moved out and reconciled with his wife. (Tr. 22)  
 
 The debt alleged in subparagraph 1.b is a student loan. It did not become 
delinquent until one month after Applicant completed the security clearance 
application. (GE 4 at 1) 
   
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number 
of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and 
meet  financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.“ (AG ¶ 
18)  Applicant’s delinquencies trigger the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the 
ability to do so,” AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” and AG ¶ 19(f), 
“failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or 
failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax, as required.”  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
5 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit  
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
  
 Applicant’s tax debt is still outstanding. Consequently, it is too soon to conclude that 
AG ¶ 20(a) applies. Applicant’s rental property delinquency and student loan delinquency 
corresponded with the period when he was separated from his wife. However, he incurred 
the most significant debt, the $32,000 tax bill, after he had reconciled with her. AG ¶ 20(b) 
does not apply. Nevertheless, he has satisfied the rental delinquency, consolidated his 
student loans, and arranged a payment plan to pay his income tax, to which he has been 
adhering for a year. AG ¶¶ 20(d and 20(g) apply, and I resolve subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b 
in his favor. 
 
 Although Applicant has been steadily making payments for the satisfaction of his 
income debt for tax year 2013, he continues to borrow money each year from his IRA 
without properly accounting for the income tax consequences. Consequently, he owes 
money for tax years 2014 and 2015, and has not yet filed his 2016 income tax return. 
Under these circumstances, I cannot conclude that there are clear indications that the 
problem is under control. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information.” (AG ¶ 15) Applicant’s responses to questions about his finances on his 2014 
security clearance application raise the question whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” applies. 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s omission of the debt owed to the company that managed his apartment 
was unintentional because he was unaware that he owed any money when he completed 
the security clearance application. Applicant’s student loan, as listed in subparagraph 1.b, 
was not delinquent when he completed the security clearance application, therefore he was 
not required to disclose it. As for Applicant’s 2013 income tax return, he did not file it when 
due in April 2014, but filed for an extension before the due date tolled. Then, he filed the 
income tax return before the extended time elapsed. Under these circumstances, I 
conclude Applicant did not falsify any of his security clearance application responses. AG ¶ 
16(a) does not apply, and there are no personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
In assessing the whole person, the administrative judge must consider the totality of 
an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2 Applicant is currently making payments towards the 
satisfaction of his income tax debt. However, he continues to borrow money from his IRA 
without properly accounting for the income tax consequences. Therefore, although he is 
currently in compliance with a tax repayment plan, he continues to generate additional 
penalties and tax debt each year that he has not been able to satisfy when due. Under 
these circumstances, Applicant has demonstrated some reform, as exemplified by his 
satisfaction of the apartment complex delinquency and his consolidation of the student loan 
accounts, but the positive security inference from these steps is outweighed by the 
negative inference generated by his continued outstanding tax debt.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:   For Applicant 
                                                 
2 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
