 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 15-08421 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 24, 
2014. On May 31, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 29, 2016, admitting seven of the nine  
SOR allegations in a two-page detailed statement. Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g 
as these alleged debts are being disputed. The alleged delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.i. total approximately $81,000. Applicant also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 25, 2017. On November 27, 
2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the 
hearing was scheduled for December 6, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on December 11, 2017. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record 
open until December 20, 2017, so that he could provide substantiating documentation.2 
He provided supplemental documents including: his marital dissolution agreement; 
letters to the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g disputing those debts; and earnings 
statements showing that his pay has been garnished every pay period since early 2015, 
in the amount of $116, later increasing to $264, to repay his student loans. He was paid 
twice a month. He also produced a payment history from the student loan holder, 
confirming a steady stream of payments and a consistent track record in resolving the 
delinquencies at SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.e and 1.g that comprise his student loans. 
Collectively, these supplemental documents were marked as AE B.  
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant is 37 years old. He graduated from high school in 1998, and he 
obtained his associate’s degree in 2000, and bachelor’s degree in 2002. Applicant has 
been employed with federal contractors since 1998 maintaining aircraft or flight 
simulators. He had a few gaps in employment between contractors. He has had a 
security clearance since 2010. Applicant was married in 2002 and divorced in 2013. He 
had one son, age 14, from that marriage. He pays $689 a month in child support. (Tr. 
26) Applicant remarried in 2015 and he has another son, age 2. Applicant took a 
substantial pay cut from $88,000 to $52,000 per year when he moved from state A to 
state B to try to save his relationship with his first wife. (Tr. 41) Today, he earns $90,000 
per year. (Tr. 42)  
 
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either version.  
 
2 Tr. at 20. 
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s November 24, 2014 
Security Clearance Application (SCA).  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant testified that he consolidated his four delinquent student loans with one 
creditor, and he provided documents establishing that a repayment plan was initiated in 
June 2015. (AE A, Tr. 15) The SOR alleged four delinquent student loans placed for 
collections totaling approximately $46,700. They constitute the majority of his 
delinquencies totaling $82,425. At the hearing, Applicant testified that he is current on 
these student loans now and the balance is $68,275. (Tr. 15) He has been making 
payments on these loans in the amount of $367 per month to the creditor since May 
2017. (Tr. 17) 
 
Previously, he had been making monthly payments directly to Department of 
Education in the amount of $498 for 15 months. (Tr. 19) He stopped payments in 2013 
when he moved across country and took a pay cut while he was embroiled in a divorce 
and expensive custody dispute. (Tr. 36, 50) He testified that his student loan payments 
were deferred for six months following graduation. He then started payments of 
approximately $116 each pay period for several years. Then, he “let the student loans 
slip” by repeatedly getting deferrals, and the interest continued to build. (Tr. 23) The IRS 
attached his income tax refund in 2013 to apply to the delinquent student loans. (Tr. 52) 
Applicant provided supplemental documents showing that since June 2015, his pay has 
been garnished in the initial amount of $116 every two weeks, later increased to $264 
per pay period up to May 2017. (AE B) He has established a consistent track-record of 
payments.   
 
Applicant testified that the debt at SOR ¶ 1.b in the amount of $20,244 was for a 
repossessed automobile. He co-signed for this automobile loan, but it was his ex-wife’s 
vehicle and her responsibility. (Tr. 62) The divorce agreement shows that this was 
assigned to his ex-wife and she was responsible for the payments. (AE B) The 
deficiency after it was repossessed was $5,200. (Tr. 29) Similarly, Applicant produced a 
letter showing that he is actively disputing the delinquency alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c for 
$13,478 (AE B) This was also for a vehicle that his ex-wife simply abandoned. (Tr. 32)  
 
Applicant disputes the delinquent debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f for $1,198. This was 
for a cable-internet bill that his ex-wife was required to pay according to their marital 
dissolution agreement. (AE B, Tr. 28) She kept the phone number when they separated.  
He is actively disputing this debt. (Tr. 62) Similarly, he produced supplemental 
documentation showing that he has long denied the alleged debt at SOR ¶ 1.h for $366 
owed to a utility provider. Applicant and his ex-wife had moved from the house in 
question, where the utility was used, in 2011. (Tr. 45) The creditor has agreed that this 
was a mistake. (AE B)  
 
                                     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
 
5 
 
 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports and answer to the SOR. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.4 Applicant has met that burden.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
                                                          
4 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant was divorced in 2013 around the same time that he took a roughly 
$35,000 pay cut. He was involved in an expensive-custody dispute over his young son. 
He incurred expenses moving across country to try to save his relationship, before the 
divorce. To some extent, these conditions were beyond his control. He has now 
produced relevant and responsive documentation, demonstrating that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has met his burden to provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were 
incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. The delinquent debts have 
been resolved or are being resolved. The mitigating conditions enumerated above apply 
with the exception of AG ¶ 20(c).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines. Most importantly, Applicant has 
addressed the specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative measures to 
resolve them. He has a steady work history and a well-paying job. He has the means to 
 
7 
 
 
resolve all of his remaining debts. I am confident that he will do so, and continue with 
his payments on the student loan repayment plan. He has met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances no longer remain a security concern. There is sufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. The record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:               For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
