 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-04568 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his illegal drug use. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline H (drug 
involvement) and Guideline E (personal conduct).1 Applicant responded to the SOR on 
February 18, 2016, and he elected a decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
On July 18, 2016, Department Counsel submitted her file of relevant material (FORM) 
and provided a complete copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on July 27, 
2016. He was afforded an opportunity to respond within 30 days of its receipt, to file 
objections, and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2017. 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
On October 16, 2017, I issued an order informing both parties that although the 
SOR referenced the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006, I would be applying the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective as of June 8, 
2017, pursuant to Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4). I also permitted the 
parties to supplement the record with additional evidence and argument. Neither party 
submitted any further documents.2 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-6.3 FORM Items 4 
and 5 are unauthenticated summaries of interviews with government investigators 
conducted on September 19, 2012 and February 8, 2008, respectively. Department 
Counsel advised Applicant that he could object to FORM Items 4 and 5 and they would 
not be admitted, or that he could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the 
documents to make them accurate. Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to 
the FORM or to raise any objections may constitute waiver, and the evidence would be 
considered by me. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. Given Department Counsel’s 
advisement and Applicant’s education, I find his waiver to be knowing and intelligent.4 
FORM Items 3-6 are admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 3-6, without 
objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges security concerns based upon Applicant’s illegal drug use, 
including after having been granted a DOD security clearance. In his response to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
  
 Applicant is 42 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in May 2001. He was 
married in June 2005, and they have two children – ages 6 and 9. Since June 2004, he 
has been employed as an analyst for a DOD contractor. He was granted a DOD secret 
clearance in September 2005 and a DOD top secret clearance in February 2008.5 
 
 Between about September 1993 and October 1994, Applicant used marijuana 
approximately 26 times and used psilocybin mushrooms once. After he was charged with 
possession of marijuana in October 1994, he abstained from illegal drug use for about 14 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I includes my order and the revised AG. 
  
3 FORM Items 1 and 2 are the SOR and Applicant’s answer, which are pleadings and are included in the 
administrative record. 
 
4 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.). See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) 
(“Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”) 
 
5 GE 3; GE 6. 
 
3 
 
years. He then used marijuana approximately four times between 2008 and July 2009 
and used psilocybin mushrooms once.6  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by U.S. government investigators in February 2008 and 
September 2012 as part of the security clearance process. During his February 2008 
security interview, Applicant stated that he had no future intent to use illegal drugs. During 
his September 2012 security interview, Applicant admitted that his spouse is unaware of 
his illegal drug use after 1994. There is no evidence that his employer is aware of any of 
Applicant’s illegal drug use, including while possessing a clearance. Applicant attributed 
his drug relapse in 2008 to peer pressure.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
                                                          
6 GE 3-5. 
 
7 GE 4; GE 5. 
 
4 
 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or holding a 
sensitive position. 
  
 Applicant admitted using marijuana and psilocybin mushrooms on several 
occasions between September 1993 and July 2009. His illegal drug use occurred on 
several occasions after having been granted a DOD top secret clearance. The 
Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 
25(a) and 25(f).  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 26. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
 
5 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and  
 
(3) provided a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
The first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) (Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on whether the 
drug involvement was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when 
conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed 
without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine 
whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@8 
 
Despite abstaining from illegal drugs for 14 years, graduating from college, getting 
married, having a child, and expressing his intent to remain drug-free, Applicant relapsed 
within months of having been granted a DOD top secret clearance. On several occasions, 
Applicant used illegal drugs while possessing a security clearance. Applicant has not 
provided evidence of changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant attributed his 2008 relapse to peer pressure, and there is no evidence to 
support a conclusion that Applicant is no longer susceptible to such pressure. He has not 
provided evidence sufficient to demonstrate his disassociation from drug-using 
associates, changed circumstances, or a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement. Given his drug relapse after 14 years, Applicant has not demonstrated 
that he has overcome his problem. AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s repeated illegal drug use while possessing a DOD security clearance 
is a serious security concern. He has not provided documentary evidence as to his 
changed circumstances, good judgment, and rehabilitation. He did not mitigate the drug 
involvement and substance misuse security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). 
 
6 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty 
or rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes . . . (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges Applicant’s illegal drug use, including after having been 
granted a DOD clearance, as a personal conduct security concern. Applicant’s marijuana 
use violated state and federal laws and violated DOD policies governing cleared 
personnel. Applicant has not disclosed his more recent drug use to his spouse, and there 
is no evidence that he has disclosed any of his drug use to his employer. AG ¶¶ 16(d)(3) 
and 16(e)(1) apply. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or such much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant’s repeated illegal drug use while possessing a clearance is a serious 
breach of the DOD’s trust and demonstrates poor judgment. Applicant attributed his illegal 
 
7 
 
drug use to peer pressure, and he has provided no evidence to support a conclusion that 
those circumstances are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
 
 During his September 2012 interview, Applicant acknowledged that neither his wife 
nor his employer is aware of his drug use since 1994. There is no evidence that he has 
disclosed his illegal drug use while possessing a clearance to his employer, a DOD 
contractor, or that he has taken any steps to reduce his vulnerability to exploitation. AG ¶ 
17(e) does not apply. Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H and E and 
the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant’s drug relapse while possessing a DOD security clearance casts doubt 
on his judgment and ability to adhere to rules and regulations. There is no evidence that 
these circumstances are unlikely to recur and that he has taken steps to overcome this 
drug problem and his vulnerability to exploitation. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate 
the drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.9 Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
9 See SEAD 4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(c). 
