 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06333 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On December 10, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 4) A security investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) interviewed Applicant on March 23, 2015. (Item 8, 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI)) After reviewing the background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue 
a security clearance. On May 6, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. 
(Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
 
2 
 
 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 5, 2017. She admitted the eight 
allegations of financial security concern, and requested that the matter be decided on 
the written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on August 10, 2017. (Item 8) Applicant received a complete file of relevant 
material (FORM) on September 5, 2017, and she was provided the opportunity to file 
objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. Applicant did not file a response to the FORM. I was assigned the case on 
December 12, 2017. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all covered individuals 
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and 
are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the PSI (Item 8) was not 
authenticated and could not be considered over her objection. She was further advised 
that she could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it 
clear and accurate, and could object to the admission of the summary as not 
authenticated by a Government witness. She was additionally advised that if no 
objection was raised to the summary, the administrative judge could determine that she 
waived any objection to the admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant did not respond 
to the FORM, so she did not raise any objection to consideration of the PSI. Since there 
is no objection by Applicant, I considered information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 41 years old. She graduated from high school in June 1994. She married in 
September 1999, separated in September 2012, and divorced in September 2014. 
There are two children from the marriage.  
 
 Applicant has been employed as an emergency service dispatch for a defense 
contractor since December 2014. Prior to that, she had temporary employment from 
September to December 2014. She was unemployed from March to September 2014 
after working as a dispatcher for a service company from July 2013 until March 2014. 
She was unemployed from July 2012 until July 2013, after being terminated for poor 
 
3 
 
 
performance as a fire dispatcher which she held from April 2001 until July 2012. (Item 4, 
e-QIP, dated December 10, 2014; Item 8, PSI, dated March 23, 2015)  
 
 Applicant listed delinquent debts on her e-QIP. The SOR alleges, and Applicant’s 
PSI, her response to the SOR, and credit reports (Item 5, dated December 18, 2014; 
Item 6, dated March 23, 2016; Item 7, dated June 8, 2017) confirm the following 
delinquent debts in collection: a credit card for $8,748 (SOR 1.a); a utility debt for $171 
(SOR 1.b); a credit card for $6,709 (SOR 1.c); for $555 on a telephone bill (SOR 1.d); a 
credit card for $3,228 (SOR 1.e); a credit card for $1,105 (SOR 1.f); a credit union 
account for $4,692 (SOR 1.g); and a department store account for $541 (SOR 1.h). The 
total amount of the SOR listed delinquent debt is approximately $26,000. (Item 4, e-QIP, 
dated December 10, 2014; Item 8, PSI, dated March 23, 2015)  
 
 Applicant and her husband’s divorce decree directed that the husband pay 
$25,000 to Applicant by October 2014 to help pay debts incurred during the marriage. 
Her husband has not paid Applicant the funds as directed by the divorce decree. He 
also has not paid child support as ordered. As of February 2017, he is over $16,644 in 
arrears. (Item 3, Response to SOR, Court and Child Support Documents, submitted on 
July 7, 2017).   
 
 Applicant provided documents showing that some debts that arose during the 
marriage were resolved. The utility debt at SOR 1.b was paid in July 2014, the cell 
phone debt at SOR 1.d was settled and paid in December 2013, and the credit card 
debt in collection at SOR 1.e was paid in January 2017. (Item 3, Response to SOR)   
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant claims that the remaining marital debts at 
SOR 1.a, 1.c, 1.g, and 1.h have been removed from her credit report. She did not 
present evidence of any actions or documents to show that she paid or otherwise 
resolved the debts. She claimed that the remaining marital debt at SOR 1.f was to be 
paid and resolved within 30 days of her SOR response. She did not present documents 
to show payment or resolution of this debt. Applicant stated that her former husband 
has not provided her any information or documents on the actions, if any, he may have 
taken to pay or resolve the debts. (Item 3, Response to SOR) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
4 
 
 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. An individual 
who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18).  
 
 A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Credit reports confirm Applicant’s SOR 
delinquent debts. This information is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts, and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Once the Government has established adverse financial issues, the Applicant 
has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issues. I considered the information and 
documents Applicant provided as mitigation in response to the SOR. The available 
evidence presented by Applicant shows the debts at SOR 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e have been 
paid and resolved. She presented evidence that shows that the debts at SOR 1.a, 1.c, 
1.g., and 1.h. have been removed from the credit reports. Applicant claims that she will 
pay the debt at SOR 1.f. Applicant’s failure to pay or resolve all of her debts shows an 
inability and history of not meeting financial obligations. Applicant’ evidence raises the 
following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible sources, such as a non-profit credit counselling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not fully apply based on the insufficient evidence 
provided by Applicant and contained in the case file. Applicant has resolved some of her 
debts, but she has not resolved or paid all of her debts. The unresolved debts are 
numerous and recent, and amount to over 60% of the SOR debts. Applicant did not 
provide information concerning financial counseling or participation in debt consolidation 
programs.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant did not establish a good-faith effort to resolve all of her debts. Good 
faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty and obligation. Applicant is not required to be debt-free nor must the 
plan require paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is 
that Applicant act responsibly given her circumstances. Applicant must establish that 
she has a reasonable plan to resolve financial problems, and that she has taken 
significant action to implement that plan. Applicant’s plan must show a systematic 
method of handling debts, and Applicant must establish a meaningful track record of 
debt payment. A meaningful track record of debt payment can be established by 
evidence of actual debt payments or reduction of debt through payment of debts. A 
promise to pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in 
a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible manner.  
 
Applicant did not present evidence of debt payments or resolution of four of the 
debts but claims that they were removed from her credit reports. She claims one debt 
will be paid. Applicant had periods of unemployment, she has been gainfully employed 
for most of the recent 17 years. Her husband has not made all of the payments in 
accordance with the divorce decree he was required to make to her. However, she 
appears to have the means to pay and resolve her debts. She has not acted responsibly 
because she has not developed plans to pay her outstanding delinquent debts. She did 
not provide documentation to show proof of payments, correspondence to or from the 
creditors to establish maintenance of contact, copies of debt disputes, evidence of 
attempts to negotiate payment plans, or other evidence of progress or resolution. There 
is no clear evidence that her debt problems have been resolved, so her finances are not 
under control. She appears to rely on the fact that the debts are no longer being 
reported on her credit reports to show that the debts have been resolved.  
 
Debts remain relevant for security clearance purposes even if they are no longer 
enforceable due to the running of the statute of limitations or cannot be legally listed on 
a credit report due to the passage of time. Security clearance decisions are not 
controlled or limited by statutes of limitation. The reliance on a state’s statute of 
limitations does not constitute a good-faith effort to resolve financial difficulties and is of 
limited mitigation value. A security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating 
an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Accordingly, even if a 
delinquent debt is legally unenforceable under state law, the federal government is 
entitled to consider the facts and circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in 
incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner. There is no clear evidence 
that Applicant’s debt problems have been resolved, so her finances are not under 
control. There is insufficient evidence to establish why Applicant was unable to make 
greater progress resolving his debts.  
 
 The ability to resolve her financial problems were within Applicant’s control. She 
did not present a plan to resolve her financial problems or show any efforts to pay or 
resolve the majority of her delinquent debts. Her lack of reasonable and responsible 
actions towards her finances is a strong indication that she will not protect and 
 
7 
 
 
safeguard classified or sensitive information. She did not present information to show a 
good-faith effort to resolve his debts, and she has not presented sufficient information to 
mitigate financial security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In requesting an administrative 
determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, she failed to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her financial 
circumstances, adequately articulate her positions, and provide facts to mitigate the 
financial security concerns. In short, the file contains insufficient evidence to establish 
that she made adequate efforts to pay, settle, compromise, dispute, or otherwise 
resolve her delinquent accounts. The record does not show corroborating or 
substantiating documents and details to explain he finances. Applicant did not establish 
that she appropriately managed her finances. The lack of action by Applicant to resolve 
financial issues, are firm indications that she may not adequately safeguard classified 
information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. She has not 
established her suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f - 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
