1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ADP Case No. 15-07535 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his financial problems. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 11, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant responded to the SOR on June 15, 2016, and he elected a 
decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 11, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted his file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete copy to Applicant. 
Applicant received the FORM on August 1, 2016. He was afforded an opportunity to 
respond within 30 days of its receipt and to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The 
case was assigned to me on June 2, 2017. 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
On October 26, 2017, I issued an order informing both parties that, although the 
SOR referenced the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006, I would be applying the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective as of June 8, 
2017, pursuant to Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4). I also permitted the 
parties to supplement the record with additional evidence and argument. Neither party 
submitted anything further.2 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-5.3 FORM Items 3-
5 are admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 3-5, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges financial considerations security concerns based upon 
Applicant’s bankruptcy filing (SOR ¶ 1.a.), two unpaid judgments (SOR ¶¶ 1.b.-1.c.), and 
nine delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d.-1.l.).  In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
all of the allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact:  
  
 Applicant is 42 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in October 2000. He 
has been married since 2003, and he has four children and two stepchildren (ages 8, 12, 
13, 17, 18, and 20). Since November 2003, Applicant has had two periods of 
unemployment – June 2010 to November 2011 and November 2012 to April 2013. Since 
May 2014, he has been employed full time as an engineer for a DOD contractor.4  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and his April 2015 credit report establish his bankruptcy 
filing, two unpaid judgments, and nine delinquent debts. In August 2009, Applicant filed a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. The dischargeable debts were discharged in December 
2009. The two unpaid judgments, totaling approximately $2,147, were entered against 
Applicant in September 2010. The nine delinquent debts, totaling approximately $15,890, 
became delinquent between January 2010 and February 2015. There is no evidence of 
any payments or debt-resolution efforts on the unpaid judgments or delinquent debts.5 
 
  On his March 2015 security clearance application, Applicant attributed his 2009 
bankruptcy to a reduction in income and attributed his delinquent debts to his 
unemployment.6  
                                                          
2 Administrative Exhibit I includes my order, the attachments, Department Counsel’s email acknowledging 
receipt, and tracking information showing delivery to Applicant’s address of record. 
 
3 FORM Items 1 and 2 consist of the SOR and Applicant’s answer, which are pleadings and are included 
in the administrative record. 
 
4 GE 3. 
 
5 Response to SOR; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5. 
 
6 GE 3. 
3 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”7 
The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning the person to sensitive 
duties is “clearly consistent with the interests of national security.”8 DOD contractor 
personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made.9  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.10 Once the 
Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, the burden 
shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.11 An applicant 
has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never 
shifts to the Government.12 An applicant has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue eligibility for access to 
sensitive information.  
 
 
 
                                                          
 
7 Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
8 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
9 Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
10 Directive ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
11 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
12 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. , , ,  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant filed a voluntary petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2009 due to an 
inability to satisfy his debts. Since the bankruptcy, he has incurred two unpaid judgments 
and nine delinquent debts, totaling approximately $18,037. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts became delinquent between January 2010 and February 2015. 
There is no documentary evidence of any debt-resolution efforts or that Applicant has 
acted responsibly in addressing these debts. Applicant’s inactivity on these delinquent 
debts undercuts his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply.   
 
Applicant’s periods of unemployment constitute circumstances beyond his control 
that impaired his ability to satisfy his debts. Nonetheless, he has been gainfully employed 
full time by a DOD contractor since May 2014, and there is no documentary evidence of 
any debt-resolution efforts with respect to the alleged debts. Applicant has not 
demonstrated that he has acted financially responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant has sought credit counseling. Nor is there 
evidence of his monthly income or expenses to establish that his financial problems are 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith requires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. There 
is no documentary evidence of any debt-resolution efforts with respect to the two unpaid 
judgments and nine delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Applicant bears the 
burden to demonstrate his financial responsibility. I find that Applicant did not mitigate the 
financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a public 
trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
6 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under these guidelines, but some 
warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant experienced two periods of unemployment that hindered his ability to 
satisfy his delinquent debts. Nonetheless, he has been gainfully employed by a DOD 
contractor since May 2014, and there is no evidence of any debt-resolution efforts or 
evidence demonstrating financial responsibility. After evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness 
concerns. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant him eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.l.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
 
