 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-07845 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns 
relating to his connections to Colombia. He provided his Colombian passport to his 
security officer. He has strong connections to the United States. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2015, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Position (SF-86). On April 19, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; 
and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and C (foreign preference).  
 
On May 11, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
June 30, 2016, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On August 4, 2016, the 
case was assigned to me. On September 28, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for October 27, 2016. 
(HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits; Applicant offered 
two exhibits; there were no objections, except for Department Counsel’s objection to 
documents in Spanish; and all other proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. 
(Transcript (Tr.) 10-12, 71-74; GE 1-2; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-B) Applicant’s exhibits in 
Spanish were admitted subject to inclusion of post-hearing translations of exhibits from 
Spanish into English. (Tr. 75) Applicant provided a certified translation after his hearing. 
(AE C) On November 4, 2016, DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing. 
On December 9, 2016, Applicant provided one exhibit, which was admitted without 
objection. (AE C) The record closed on December 15, 2016. (Tr. 69, 74, 81-82) 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made 
applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs 
supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or 
after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel offered a summary for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to Colombia. (Tr. 
11; HE 4) Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 16-02522 at 2-3 (App. Bd. July 12, 
2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n. 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-
24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 
n. 4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to 
facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE 
LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative 
notice). Applicant did not object to me taking administrative notice of the proffered 
documents. (Tr. 11) Department Counsel’s request for administrative notice is granted. 
The “Colombia” section in this decision is quoted verbatim from Department Counsel’s 
administrative notice request without footnotes, quotation marks, and bullets for each 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
paragraph. However, portions of the administrative notice are out of date given positive 
changes that have taken place within Colombia since this hearing was held.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges foreign preference security concerns because Applicant 
possesses a valid Colombian passport with an expiration date in April 2017 (¶ 1.a), and 
he used that passport in lieu of his U.S. passport in October 2011, December 2011, and 
March 2014 (¶ 1.b). Applicant’s SOR alleges foreign influence security concerns 
because his mother (¶ 2.a), father (¶ 2.b), and sister (¶ 2.c) are citizens and residents of 
Colombia. Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. (HE 2) He also provided mitigating 
information. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor who has been 
employed as a technical manager since 2003. (Tr. 11-12) He was born in Colombia. (Tr. 
13) In 1991, he graduated from high school in Colombia, and in 1997, he received a 
bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering in Colombia. (Tr. 14) In 1997, he 
immigrated to the United States on a student visa. (Tr. 25) In 1999, he completed a 
master’s degree in business administration in the United States. (Tr. 23-24) He has not 
served in the Colombian or U.S. armed forces. (Tr. 23) In 2011, he became a U.S. 
citizen, and he received a U.S. passport. (Tr. 26-27) His two children are ages five and 
seven. (Tr. 38) A security clearance is not essential to his continued employment. (Tr. 
13) There is no evidence that Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused alcohol 
or illegal drugs, or violated any of his employer’s rules. 
 
Applicant and his spouse vote in U.S. elections. (Tr. 33) He has not voted in 
Colombian elections after becoming a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 39) His spouse was born in the 
United States. (Tr. 33) She is not of Colombian descent. (Tr. 34) Her parents and 
siblings reside in the United States. (Tr. 34-35) Applicant’s children were born in the 
United States. (Tr. 33)    
 
Applicant’s father is employed in the importation and sales of specialized 
consumer products. (Tr. 15-17) His mother is not employed outside her home. (Tr. 17) 
He communicates with his parents on a weekly basis, and they visit Applicant’s family in 
the United States annually. (Tr. 22, 64) His grandparents and 10 aunts and uncles live 
in Colombia. (Tr. 50-51) When he travels to Colombia, he visits various family members. 
(Tr. 49-50) None of his relatives in Colombia are affiliated with, or employed by, the 
Colombian Government. (Tr. 17, 52-53) He sends about $250 annually to one of his 
aunts who is living in Colombia. (Tr. 53) 
 
Applicant’s younger sister is a citizen and resident of Colombia. (Tr. 20; SOR 
response) She does not work outside her home. (Tr. 20) Her husband is employed in 
the private sector, and he is not associated with the Colombian Government. (Tr. 21) He 
                                            
2 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
communicates with his sister about once a month, and she has visited Applicant’s family 
in the United States a “few times” in the last five years. (Tr. 23, 65) In 2011, Applicant 
sponsored her for permanent residency in the United States. (Tr. 65-66) 
 
Applicant’s older brother is a permanent resident of the United States. (Tr. 17-18) 
His spouse and two children live in the United States. (Tr. 19-20) The net worth of 
Applicant’s property in the United States, including his home, bank accounts, and 401(k) 
account is about $700,000. (Tr. 30-33, 36-37) He has a Colombian pension plan valued 
at about $4,000 from his employment in college before he moved to the United States. 
(Tr. 33, 39-40) 
 
Applicant offered to renounce his Colombian citizenship. (Tr. 28, 79) At the time 
of his hearing, he had retained an active or unexpired Colombian passport because a 
Colombian passport was required for any Colombian citizen to travel to Colombia. (Tr. 
29, 44) He used his Colombian passport on a number of trips from 2008 to 2016 to 
travel to Colombia. (Tr. 46-47; GE 1; GE 2) He traveled to Colombia for a wedding, an 
anniversary, and birthdays for family in Colombia. (Tr. 47-49) All of his travel to 
Colombia was to visit his family. (Tr. 47) He planned to travel to Colombia using his 
Colombian passport in November 2017. (Tr. 70-71) In 2010 and 2011, he went to Brazil, 
and he used his Colombian passport. (Tr. 55) He traveled to Brazil for business, and he 
needed to use his Colombian passport because he did not need a visa to travel to 
Brazil. (Tr. 55) For his most recent travel overseas, he used his U.S. passport. (Tr. 56) 
At his hearing, he said he planned to give his Colombian passport to his security officer. 
(Tr. 29) On December 2, 2016, he provided his Colombian passport to his security 
officer. (AE C) His security officer indicated if Applicant asked for his Colombian 
passport, he would file an “incident report” to DOD. (AE C)   
 
When Applicant traveled to Colombia after 2009, he did not take his spouse or 
children with him because of the high levels of crime in Colombia. (Tr. 63-64) Some of 
his family in Colombia have been the victims of crimes such as car theft. (Tr. 63-64)     
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s overall excellent performance evaluations, a 2008 award, emails in 
March 2014, and photographs of aircraft his employer provided to an ally establish 
Applicant’s important contributions to the U.S. national security and our allies. (AE A; 
AE B) Applicant is a diligent and dedicated employee of a defense contractor. (AE A; 
AE B) A manager described Applicant as loyal to the United States, dedicated, diligent, 
honest, patriotic, and trustworthy. (AE C)   
 
Colombia 
 
For nearly 50 years, Colombia has experienced conflict with illegal armed 
groups, including Marxist guerillas and transnational criminal and narcotics trafficking 
organizations.  
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The Secretary of State has designated two Colombian groups - the Revolutionary 
Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), and the National Liberation Army (ELN), as Foreign 
Terrorist Organizations. Peace talks between the Government of Colombia and FARC 
began in October 2012, and are ongoing. The FARC and ELN focused on low-cost, 
high-impact asymmetric attacks, as they did in 2014, and both groups continue to 
condemn any U.S. influence in Colombia.  
 
In its most recent Travel Warning for Colombia, issued on April 5, 2016, the U.S. 
Department of State warns U.S. citizens about the dangers of travel to Colombia, and 
specifically the potential for violence by terrorist groups and armed criminal gangs called 
“BACRIMs” in all parts of the country. BACRIMs are heavily involved in narco- 
trafficking, extortion, kidnapping, and robbery, and violence associated with their 
activities has spilled over into many major metropolitan areas.  
 
Terrorists and other criminal organizations continue to kidnap and hold persons 
of all nationalities and occupations for ransom. No one is immune from kidnapping on 
the basis of occupation, nationality, or other factors.  
 
According to the U.S. Department of State’s 2015 Human Rights Report, the 
Colombian government continued efforts to prosecute and punish perpetrators of 
abuses, including members of the security services. The most serious human rights 
problems were impunity, an inefficient judiciary, forced displacement, corruption, and 
societal discrimination. Other problems included extrajudicial and unlawful killings; 
insubordinate military collaboration with members of illegal armed groups; forced 
disappearances; overcrowded and insecure prisons; harassment and attacks against 
human rights groups and activists, including death threats and killings; violence against 
women and girls; trafficking in persons; and illegal child labor. Illegal arms groups-
including the FARC and the National Liberation Army (ELN), as well as organized crime 
groups (some of which contained former paramilitary members) -- committed numerous 
abuses, including the following: political killings; killings of members of the public 
security forces and local officials; widespread use of land mines and improvised 
explosive devices (IEDs), kidnappings and forced disappearances; sexual and gender- 
based violence; subornation and intimidation of judges, prosecutors, and witnesses; 
infringement on citizens’ privacy rights; restrictions on freedom of movement; 
widespread recruitment and use of child soldiers; attacks against human rights activists; 
and killings, harassment, and intimidation of teachers and trade unionists. 
 
All U.S. citizens who do not also hold Colombian citizenship must present a valid 
U.S. passport to enter and depart Colombia. U.S. citizens traveling to Colombia do not 
need a Colombian visa for a tourist/business stay of 90 days or less. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Exec. Or. 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should 
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President,  
Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 has two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant has frequent contacts with his parents and sister who are citizens or 
residents of Colombia. His contacts with family are a manifestation of his affection for 
them. His communications and relationships with his relatives in Colombia are sufficient 
to raise a security concern.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with one or more family members living 
in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B; however, 
if an applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case 
No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001). There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002).  
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Colombia with the United 
States, and the situation in Colombia places a significant, but not insurmountable 
burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his family 
members living in Colombia do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed 
into a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States 
and a desire to assist a relative living in Colombia.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives, criminals, or terrorists 
from foreign countries seek or have sought classified or economic information from or 
through Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a 
possibility in the future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Colombia has 
problems with terrorism and widespread crime. Applicant’s relationships with relatives 
who are living in Colombia create a potential conflict of interest because terrorists or 
criminals could place pressure on his family living in Colombia in an effort to cause 
Applicant to compromise classified information. These relationships create “a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 
7. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts and 
relationships with family residing in Colombia. Department Counsel has raised the issue 
of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and 
further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited application, and 8(b) applies. Applicant 
frequently communicates3 with his parents and sister who are citizens and residents of 
                                            
3 The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more frequently constitutes 
“frequent contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings 
once every four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Colombia. He frequently visited Colombia and his Colombian relatives have often visited 
Applicant. His relationships with family members residing in Colombia are sufficient to 
cause security concerns. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” In 1997, Applicant immigrated to the 
United States, and in 2011, he became a U.S. citizen. He is married to a U.S. citizen; 
his two children are U.S. citizens; and his brother is a U.S. permanent resident.   
 
Applicant’s years of support to a DOD contractor weigh towards mitigating 
security concerns. He has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States 
during his employment.    
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives who are citizens 
and residents of Colombia. His relatives living in Colombia are at risk from terrorists and 
criminals, and Applicant’s access to classified information could theoretically add risk if 
the terrorists or criminals discover he has relatives in Colombia.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his relatives living in Colombia are less 
significant than his connections to the United States. His employment in support of the 
U.S. Government, his investments of about $700,000 in the United States, his U.S. 
residence and citizenship of his spouse and children, and his U.S. citizenship are 
important factors weighing towards mitigation of security concerns. His connections to 
the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome and mitigate the foreign 
influence security concerns under Guideline B. Even if foreign influence security 
concerns were not mitigated under Guideline B, they would be mitigated under the 
whole-person concept, infra. 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 explains the security concern about foreign preference stating: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 10 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying including: 
 
(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country; 
 
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by 
any country other than the United States; 
 
(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; 
 
(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, 
position, or political office in a foreign government or military organization; 
and 
 
(2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in any way that conflicts with U.S. national 
security interests; 
 
(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country in violation of U.S. law; and 
 
(f) an act of expatriation from the United States such as declaration of 
intent to renounce U.S. citizenship, whether through words or actions. 
 
AG ¶ 10(c) applies. Applicant used a Colombian passport to enter Colombia and 
leave Colombia every year from 2011, when he became a U.S. citizen, to November 
2017. As a Colombian citizen, he had to use a Colombian passport to enter and exit 
Colombia, even though he was also a citizen of the United States. It is unclear whether 
he used a U.S. passport to enter or leave the United States. At the time the hearing was 
held, the disqualifying condition focused on possession of a foreign passport and not on 
whether it was used to enter or leave the United States. I will assume for purposes of 
this decision that he used his Colombian passport to enter and exit the United States.     
 
AG ¶ 11 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) the foreign citizenship is not in conflict with U.S. national security 
interests; 
 
(b) dual citizenship is based solely on parental citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country, and there is no evidence of foreign preference; 
 
(c) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce the foreign 
citizenship that is in conflict with U.S. national security interests; 
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(d) the exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen; 
 
(e) the exercise of the entitlements or benefits of foreign citizenship do not 
present a national security concern; 
 
(f) the foreign preference, if detected, involves a foreign country, entity, or 
association that poses a low national security risk; 
 
(g) civil employment or military service was authorized under U.S. law, or 
the employment or service was otherwise consented to as required by 
U.S. law; and 
 
(h) any potentially disqualifying activity took place after receiving the 
approval by the agency head or designee. 
 
AG ¶¶ 11(a), 11(c), 11(e), and 11(f) apply. Applicant has expressed a willingness 
to renounce his Colombian citizenship. He provided his Colombian passport to his 
security officer. Colombia and the United States maintain a positive relationship and any 
foreign preference, if detected, poses a low national security risk. Foreign preference 
security concerns are mitigated.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guidelines B and C are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor who has been 
employed as a technical manager since 2003. He was born in Colombia. He graduated 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
from high school and received a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering in 
Colombia. In 1997, he immigrated to the United States on a student visa. In 1999, he 
completed a master’s degree in business administration in the United States. In 2011, 
he became a U.S. citizen, and he received a U.S. passport. His net worth in the United 
States is about $700,000. His spouse and two children were born in the United States.  
 
Applicant’s character evidence establishes Applicant’s important contributions to 
the U.S. national security and our allies. He is a loyal, dedicated, diligent, honest, 
patriotic, and trustworthy employee of a defense contractor. 
 
Applicant’s parents, sister, and 10 aunts and uncles are citizens and residents of 
Colombia. He frequently communicates with his parents and sister. He frequently 
travels to Colombia to visit family, and his parents and sister have visited Applicant in 
the United States. He held and used a Colombian passport to enter and exit Colombia 
until December 2, 2016. Any relationships with citizens and residents of Colombia and 
possession and use of a foreign passport raise important security concerns, and they 
must be balanced against his connections to the United States.      
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Colombia must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.4 Colombia is a dangerous place because of 
violence from terrorists and criminals. These entities continue to threaten the Colombia 
Government, the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed Forces, and those who 
cooperate and assist the United States. The Colombian Government does not fully 
comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many instances. The United States 
and Colombia Governments are allies in the war on terrorism and in their efforts to 
suppress illegal drugs from entering the United States.       
 
In 1997, Applicant immigrated to the United States, and in 2011, he became a 
U.S. citizen. When he became a U.S. citizen, he took an oath of allegiance to the United 
States. He offered to renounce his Colombian citizenship, and he gave his Colombian 
passport to his security officer. There is no evidence that Applicant has engaged in 
criminal activity, abused alcohol or illegal drugs, or violated any of his employer’s rules. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign influence and 
foreign preference security concerns are mitigated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
