 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04447 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), Guideline K (Handling Protected Information), and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 23, 2013. On 
March 28, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines F, K, and E.1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 3 and May 27, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
issued a notice of hearing on June 20, 2017, and the hearing was convened on July 12, 
2017. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence. Applicant and 
three witnesses testified. Applicant submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B. The 
record was held open so that Applicant could submit additional documentary evidence. 
He submitted additional documents marked together as AE C, and they were admitted 
without objection, except that Department Counsel noted Applicant’s cover letter 
constituted additional argument. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 20, 
2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old internet technology (IT) consultant for a defense 
contractor since 2012, where he worked part time until 2015, then began full-time 
employment in 2015. He previously worked as an IT director for another company from 
April 2012 to December 2013, until he was terminated for work accuracy, tardiness, not 
attending meetings, and discussing company business in violation of company policy. He 
also worked as a full-time consultant for other organizations from June 2014 to June 2015. 
Applicant graduated with a GED degree in 1994, and has various IT certificates. He was 
married in 1995 and has three children. He previously held a security clearance, but he 
noted that it was revoked. 
 
The SOR2 alleges Applicant is delinquent on approximately $65,000 in debts, two 
state tax liens, a $10,000 state debt for unpaid self-employment gross receipts tax, and 
a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2000. Additionally, the SOR alleges under Guidelines F, K, and 
E, that Applicant was accused of security violations and embezzlement by a former 
employer in 2014. Applicant denied the SOR allegations, except he admitted that he filed 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
 
Applicant owned a business, but failed to file state gross receipt taxes for 2008 to 
2012, resulting in liens filed against him. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.q) After issuance of the SOR, 
Applicant contacted the state tax authorities and made arrangements to pay the 
delinquent taxes on an installment plan. The plan to pay $20,708 in tax liability required 
Applicant to begin paying $345.61 per month in May 2016, with the final payment due in 
April 2021. At the hearing, Applicant took responsibility for not paying his taxes when 
owed, but he was inconsistent as to how much was owed, the number of years he did not 
pay, and when installment payments were to begin. After the hearing, Applicant provided 
a 2016-2017 summary of payments by credit card, e-check, or other methods showing 
irregular amounts and inconsistent payments from August 2016 to August 2017. The 
document did not clearly describe to whom payments were made and, for several months, 
how much was paid. 
 
 
 
                                                     
2 The SOR was amended at the hearing, without objection, to re-letter the last two allegations under SOR 
¶ 1 as 1.y and 1.z, respectively, and to re-letter the text in SOR ¶ 2 and ¶ 3, to cross allege subparagraph 
1.z. Pen and ink changes were made to the SOR copy in the orange AJ file. 
 
3 
 
At the hearing, Applicant acknowledged his debts, but generally denied their status 
on his credit report. He claimed that a judgment creditor could not verify the debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a, but said his records may have been destroyed in a flood in his home. He 
acknowledged a $14,000 debt on a credit card alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but was unsure what 
he did to address the debt. He also acknowledged the remaining SOR debts, and 
requested additional time to submit documentary evidence showing their resolution. He 
provided a letter dated July 7, 2017, from a credit-repair firm stating that they were hired 
to update inaccurate and erroneous information on Applicant’s credit report and to restore 
his credit within a designated timeline, however no evidence was submitted showing 
resolved debts or disputed credit report entries. 
 
Applicant noted that he was married when he was 19 years old and quickly had 
two children. He was laid off from a stable job he held from 1998 to 2000, and attended 
school while managing his family’s expenses on unemployment insurance. He struggled 
financially beginning in 1999, and did not earn enough to cover debts and expenses. He 
found new employment in 2000, and sought financial assistance from a debt consolidation 
company. They recommended he file Chapter 7 bankruptcy. After discharge of the 
bankruptcy in 2000, Applicant believed he was financially stable until he was again laid-
off in 2008. He then purchased the business, but experienced the national recession in 
2009. He believes his current financial status is good, and his spouse is employed as a 
nurse. 
 
Applicant’s current credit report shows significant current consumer debt, with ten 
revolving accounts totaling approximately $6,500, and five installment accounts such as 
student loans and vehicle debts of approximately $71,000. He owns a home worth 
approximately $220,000 with $15,000 in equity, and has about $700 in savings and 
$14,000 in a 401k retirement account. 
 
Insufficient evidence was submitted to show Applicant had a history of security 
violations, breaches, or embezzlement. Allegations of tardiness, missed meetings, poor 
performance of tasks, or sending e-mails to former employees raise issues that may have 
served as the basis of the termination, but Applicant disputed these allegations and 
believed the company terminated him because he raised security issues that were not 
well received by management. There was evidence provided to show that Applicant 
transferred a particular file to a personal account, which he believed he was permitted to 
do, but the company claimed was a violation of company policy. Applicant’s co-worker, 
who was the former facility security officer and was fired for the same reasons as 
Applicant, supported Applicant’s work performance and Applicant’s view that the 
employer made allegations against him in retaliation for complaints that he and the 
witness made about the company’s security integrity. The witnesses and persons who 
provided letters of recommendation fully support Applicant’s personal integrity, work 
performance, high moral character, and reliability. I conclude the Government failed to 
establish by substantial evidence, the allegations listed under SOR ¶¶ 1.z, 2.a, and 3.a.  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, on June 8, 2017. The revised guidelines are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
 
5 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant’s admissions, testimony, and the documentary evidence in the record 
are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
 
6 
 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent and numerous, however, there is 
insufficient evidence to determine that they were incurred under circumstances making 
them unlikely to recur. Applicant has a history of job losses and a business downturn that 
likely resulted in his financial distress. He was able to discharge debts through the 
bankruptcy court, but his continued job losses resulted in additional debts. He also failed 
to file state gross receipt taxes when due. Although years later he agreed to make 
installment payments, he has not shown sufficient or reliable evidence of regular 
payments with sufficient progress toward resolution of the debts. 
 
Applicant has not shown sufficient evidence that he has satisfactorily resolved the 
debts alleged in the SOR, despite their appearance on his credit report. Despite an 
opportunity to provide additional documentary evidence after the hearing, Applicant failed 
to provide records showing resolution of the SOR debts. Although he may have made 
payments toward his tax obligations and some credit accounts, I am unable to verify the 
amount and regularity of such payments, or other efforts to resolve his financial 
delinquencies. This coincided with Applicant’s unconvincing testimony at the hearing 
where he was unable to articulate specific actions with regard to his debts to convince me 
that he has reasonable knowledge and control of his finances. 
 
Applicant has a long history of financial irresponsibility. Despite relatively steady 
employment since beginning full-time work in 2015, he did not responsibly address his 
tax liabilities and delinquent debts in a good faith or in a timely manner, until they impaired 
his security eligibility. He obtained financial advice from debt-relief companies, but 
besides a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2000, no other convincing evidence of debt resolution 
 
7 
 
was provided.  I am not convinced Applicant fully understands his debt status or that he 
has regained control over his finances. I find no mitigating condition fully applies.  
 
Overall, Applicant’s unresolved debts, prolonged delinquent state tax obligations, 
and current financial condition reflect poorly on his overall financial management 
decisions and raise significant concerns about his personal financial responsibility. Given 
his maturity and experience, I am not convinced Applicant is financially responsible, 
makes good financial decisions, or is currently financially stable. These factors do not 
demonstrate the high degree of judgment and reliability expected and required for access 
to classified information. 
 
Guideline K: Handling Protected Information 
AG ¶ 33 expresses the handling protected information security concern: 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information-which includes classified and other sensitive 
government information, and proprietary information-raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
Relevant conditions that could raise a security concern under AG ¶ 34 and may be 
disqualifying include: 
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of protected information to 
unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, personal or business 
contacts, the media, or persons present at seminars, meetings, or 
conferences; 
 
(b) collecting or storing protected information in any unauthorized location; 
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, storing, transmitting, or otherwise handling 
protected information, including images, on any unauthorized equipment or 
medium; 
 
(f) viewing or downloading information from a secure system when the 
information is beyond the individual’s need-to-know; 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or sensitive 
information; and 
 
(h) negligence or lax security practices that persist despite counseling by 
management. 
 
 Insufficient evidence was submitted to support allegations that Applicant 
committed security violations or embezzlement against a former employer in 2014. 
 
8 
 
Applicant fully discussed the circumstances of his employment, and although he may 
have had some performance related issues while employed, he rebutted allegations of 
wrongdoing, rules violations, or lax security practices to my satisfaction. On the contrary, 
Applicant and a witness raised questions of the employer’s own security integrity to 
support his contention that he may have been dismissed in retaliation for raising such 
issues. I am unable to resolve the employment issues raised at the hearing, but there is 
insufficient evidence to support SOR ¶ 2.a, and therefore disqualifying security concerns 
under AG ¶¶ 34 are not implicated by the evidence. 
 
Guideline E; Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information . . . (3) a 
pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
 
9 
 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing; . . . 
 
The allegations alleged under SOR ¶ 1.z (Guideline F) are cross-alleged under 
Guidelines K and E. The allegations are specifically covered under those guidelines, and 
were adequately discussed above. Under these circumstances, AG ¶ 16 is not implicated  
or is otherwise explicitly covered and adequately addressed under other guidelines. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guidelines F, K, and E, in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Applicant has not shown that he is now financially stable and able to adequately 
address his past financial and tax delinquencies in a timely manner. Despite his full-time 
employment in his current position since 2015, he has not shown adequate evidence of 
due diligence, sufficient progress, or financial responsibility in addressing his debts and 
resolving his state tax issues. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States 
to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.x:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.y and 1.z:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
