 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-01985 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by his 
past financial problems. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial 
considerations guideline. Applicant answered the SOR on October 8, 2015, and 
requested a determination on the administrative (written) record. 
 
 On December 23, 2015, Department Counsel sent Applicant a file of relevant 
material (FORM). With the FORM, Department Counsel forwarded to Applicant six 
exhibits, pre-marked Items 1 – 6, which the Government offers for admission into the 
record. Applicant submitted a Response to the FORM. With his Response, Applicant 
offers a number of documents for the record. Applicant’s Response and the 
accompanying documents were collectively marked Item 7. The exhibits offered by the 
parties, Items 1 – 7, are admitted into the record without objection. 
 
 Applicant’s case was originally assigned to another administrative judge, but 
jurisdiction over the matter was lost before a decision was issued. In October 2017, 
Applicant’s employer re-submitted Applicant for a security clearance. On November 3, 
 
2 
 
2017, I was assigned the case and subsequently received written confirmation that 
Applicant remains sponsored for a security clearance.1 Accordingly, I have jurisdiction to 
issue a decision. ISCR Case No. 14-03753 (App. Bd. Sep. 23, 2016). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is in his late 40s. He and his wife have been married for 17 years and 
they are the parents of two minor children. They owned and lived in their former marital 
residence for 15 years from 2000 to 2015. In 2014, after conducting an investigation, DoD 
found it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a common access 
card in connection with his employment as a defense contractor.2  
 
Applicant’s financial problems were due to unsteady employment. He was 
unemployed from July 2011 to July 2012. He experienced additional periods of short-term 
unemployment between 2012 and 2014. He fell behind on his bills, including his 
mortgage. Failing to modify his mortgage and restructure his other debt, Applicant filed 
for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He was able to make the monthly Chapter 13 plan payments 
until approximately late 2014, when he was laid off by his employer. Applicant then had 
the option to lower his monthly Chapter 13 payments. His lender, however, offered to 
accept a deed-in-lieu in return for Applicant dismissing the bankruptcy case. Applicant 
accepted the offer and the Chapter 13 bankruptcy case was dismissed. Applicant 
submitted the deed in lieu paperwork, a 1099-C, and the relevant portion of a recent credit 
report. These documents show that the $93,000 mortgage debt was cancelled in June 
2015. The 1099-C also reflects that the fair market value of Applicant’s former home had 
decreased to $40,000. The mortgage-related debt related to Applicant’s former home 
comprises the bulk of the debt listed on the SOR and is referenced at SOR 1.e. This debt 
has been resolved.3 
 
Applicant reported the Chapter 13 bankruptcy case (SOR 1.b), his delinquent 
mortgage, and a tax debt for his 2012 taxes on his security clearance application. He 
submitted the application in December 2014. He explained that the tax debt was due to 
a miscalculation. He addressed and paid the debt. With his Answer, Applicant submitted 
his IRS account transcript for the 2014 tax year. It reflects a $0 account balance and that 
Applicant was issued a $1,277 refund. The tax debt is referenced at SOR 1.a and has 
been resolved.4 
 
After the Chapter 13 bankruptcy case was dismissed, Applicant reached out to his 
creditors about his other debts. He worked out settlement agreements and paid the debts 
or is paying them per the agreement terms. He provided the documentation showing that 
                                                          
1 Appellate Exhibit I. I reopened the record to allow both sides an opportunity to submit updated information, 
but no additional evidence was submitted. The record closed on November 20, 2017. (Appellate Exhibit II.) 
 
2 Item 3 at 32.  
 
3 Item 7.C; Answer. 
 
4 Answer; Item 3 at 33-41. Although Applicant did not submit his IRS account transcript for the 2012 tax 
year, the IRS will generally not issue a refund to a taxpayer who has unpaid taxes for other years.  
 
3 
 
he addressed the debts referenced at SOR 1.c – 1.d and 1.g – 1.h.5 The only alleged 
debt that Applicant could not provide documentation regarding is a business-related debt 
listed at SOR 1.f. In both his sworn Answer and Response, Applicant explained that his 
former business partner had agreed to take on responsibility for the debt and, to the best 
of his knowledge, the debt had been resolved. Recent credit reports from 2015 and 2016 
no longer reflect this debt.6  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 
2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards). 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
                                                          
5 Item 7.A, 7.B, 7.D – 7.F. 
 
6 Items 4 and 5. 
 
4 
 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.7 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4), ¶ E.4. Additionally, 
the Supreme Court has held that responsible officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.8  
 
The security concern here is not limited to a consideration of whether a person 
with financial issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in 
other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances 
giving rise to delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other 
qualities essential to protecting classified information.9 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions listed under Guideline F, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
                                                          
7 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
8 AG ¶ 18. 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem . . . and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not meant to serve as a means to punish an 
applicant for past poor financial decisions. Furthermore, persons applying for a security 
clearance are not required to be debt free, nor are they required to resolve all past-due 
debts simultaneously or even resolve the delinquent debts listed on the SOR first. Instead, 
they are expected to present documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security 
concerns raised by their financial circumstances, to include the accumulation of 
delinquent debt. They also bear the burden of showing that they manage their present 
finances in a manner expected of those granted access to classified information.10 
 
 Applicant met his burden of proof and persuasion. He demonstrated that his past 
financial problems do not cast doubt on his current judgment, reliability, and ability and 
willingness to handle and safeguard classified information. His past financial issues were 
primarily attributable to unstable employment. Applicant did not use his financial 
difficulties as an excuse to not pay his debts. Instead, he attempted to address and 
resolve his past-due debts by directly negotiating with his creditors. Only after failing to 
resolve his debts on his own, did Applicant file for bankruptcy. His lender then finally 
agreed to an equitable resolution of the mortgage-related debt. Applicant resolved the 
mortgage-related debt for his former home in 2015 – several months before the SOR was 
issued. He then responsibly addressed the other personal consumer debt listed on the 
SOR. He presented documentation to substantiate his debt resolution efforts. The manner 
in which Applicant responsibly addressed and managed his past personal financial 
problems, notwithstanding the old business-related debt listed in 1.g, tends to show that 
he can be counted on to manage his security obligations in a responsible manner. AG 
20(a) – 20(d) apply. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts 
about Applicant’s present eligibility for a security clearance.11 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
11 In reaching this conclusion, I also considered the favorable whole-person factors raised by the record 
evidence, including the candor Applicant showed in reporting the financial information on his security 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a –1.h:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
clearance application. He continued to be upfront about his finances throughout the security clearance 
process, as evidenced by his decision to voluntarily provide with his Answer his IRS tax account transcript, 
which, at the time, would have been for the most recent tax year. See generally AG ¶ 2  
