 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08678 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ken L. Kambich, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant was fired from a previous job due to personality conflicts with 
coworkers and her refusal to violate restrictions imposed by applicable financial 
regulations. Resulting security concerns were mitigated. Based upon a review of the 
testimony, pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On January 20, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 30, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DoD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 27, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on February 13, 2017. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on April 27, 2017, setting the hearing for May 16, 2017. On that date, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence. 
Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through F into evidence. I granted 
Applicant’s request to leave the record open until May 30, 2017, to permit submission of 
additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted another exhibit, which was marked AE 
G and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 
31, 2017.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative 
guidelines that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility1 
determinations issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as promulgated in 
Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the 
new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. This decision is issued 
pursuant to the new AG, but my decision would be the same under either set of 
guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is employed as an administrative assistant by a U.S. defense 
contractor, and is applying for a security clearance in connection with that work. She 
denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a, concerning her May 2013 termination from previous 
employment as an accounting clerk by a different defense contractor. (GE 1; GE 2; 
Answer.)  
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. She is married and has four adult children. She 
graduated from high school in 1976, and earned an associate’s degree in Business 
Finance in June 2011. She has no military service or Federal government employment, 
but her husband retired in 2014 after 30 years of active naval service. She has 
successfully held a security clearance for more than 15 years in connection with 
previous employment. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 23, 71-73.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleged that Applicant’s previous employment with a different defense 
contractor was terminated in May 2013 for misconduct, including failure to follow 
instructions, insubordination, misuse of government equipment, and conflict with a 
federal government customer after receiving written warnings/counseling from her 
                                            
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines National Security Eligibility as eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information. 
 
 
 
 
3 
employer regarding her conduct and performance. This allegation accurately reflects the 
contents of documentation prepared by her prior employer in connection with her 
termination. That employer also submitted a JPAS Incident History report on May 23, 
2013, reporting that she received counseling and was terminated for “poor attitude and 
work performance,” with no mention of misconduct. (SOR; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5.)  
 
 Applicant had worked in that financial analyst/accounting clerk position since July 
2005 for three different companies that won successive support contracts for the Navy 
facility involved. The facility primarily performed work in support of U.S. Navy 
operational requirements, but was also substantially involved in Foreign Military Sales 
(FMS) programs. Applicant’s job description involved FMS financial management and 
accounting functions. Her position was paid through FMS funding, which is required 
under applicable fiscal regulations to be kept separate from general Operations and 
Maintenance (O&M) – Navy funded activities. Some five or ten years before Applicant 
started working there, the facility had failed an inspection and been reprimanded for 
comingling FMS funding and activities with their other O&M funded operations. As a 
result, the respective financial support offices were in separate locations and employed 
independent accounting practices. (GE1; GE 2; AE A; AE C; Tr. 48-50.) 
 
 In December 2012, Applicant’s work station was moved from the FMS office area 
to be collocated with two civil service employees who performed accounting functions 
for the Navy operational activities of the facility. They were longtime friends, and 
Applicant did not get along well with either of them. The facility management wanted to 
consolidate the accounting operations for the various Navy funds and the FMS funds, 
which Applicant resisted because she knew that it violated applicable fiscal regulations. 
The Deputy Customer Advocate for FMS at the facility, who is charged with 
administering FMS funds and managing FMS customer needs, stated in a sworn 
declaration that Applicant was keenly aware of the applicable financial regulations 
prohibiting misallocation of funding and assets between FMS and Navy operational 
projects, and appropriately raised her concerns about being asked to violate them as 
anyone in her position should be expected to do. He stated that she was an exemplary 
employee who performed her duties strictly by the applicable rules and regulations. He 
further expressed his respect and appreciation for her integrity and terrific work product. 
Applicant properly filed an Inspector General Action Request to the Navy Regional 
Commander reporting the ongoing attempts to improperly comingle and misallocate 
funds at the facility. (GE 2; AE A; AE C; AE D; Tr. 50-51.) 
 
 Applicant’s former employer began documenting counseling sessions shortly 
after her move to collocate with the government employees and her resulting resistance 
to improperly performing non-FMS work at their request. Other than the facts that she 
did not get along with those employees, or follow her supervisor’s direction to violate 
applicable financial regulations if the government employees asked her to do so, the 
grounds asserted for her termination were largely pretextual. The alleged misuse of 
government equipment involved reading general news sites on the internet after her 
work was fully caught up and a few personal telephone calls on the government landline 
phone with family members concerning emergent circumstances. The two government 
 
 
 
 
4 
employees with whom Applicant had ongoing conflicts submitted complaints to their 
supervisor each time they detected such activity (despite the fact that they regularly 
engaged in similar conduct), which is not considered fraud, waste, or abuse as long as it 
is reasonable and does not interfere with job accomplishment. Although not alleged on 
the SOR, Applicant was also investigated after her termination for potential destruction 
of Government property and data. The investigation found that she had done nothing 
wrong, had properly disposed of hard-copy spread sheets she no longer needed in a 
shredding bin, and properly deleted her email files from her desktop computer. No data 
or government property was either lost or mishandled. (GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; AE B; 
AE C; AE E; Tr. 42-46, 51-67.)  
 
 Applicant submitted copies of her performance evaluations from 2006 through 
2011 at the facility where she performed FMS work, and from her current employer, all 
of which document her outstanding professional performance. She also submitted 
letters from current and former supervisors who highly praise her trustworthiness, 
reliability, integrity, dedication, and performance. (AE G.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
 
 
 
5 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concerns pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
Applicant’s termination documentation could be interpreted to support security 
concerns under this disqualifying condition, but the full record presents a weak case, at 
best. She was terminated for declining to violate applicable Government financial 
regulations, and in order to assuage her supervisor and the civil service employees with 
whom she was reassigned to work. Her behavior did not constitute untrustworthy or 
unreliable conduct, but demonstrated her willingness to comply with applicable rules 
and regulations in the face of adverse personal consequences. The alleged misuse of 
Government property was minor, routine, and within the normal bounds of ethics 
regulations and office practices in most Federal settings. Overall, the evidence failed to 
establish substantial security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(d).  
 
AG ¶ 17 includes two conditions that would fully mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s alleged personal conduct should the PSAB find such concerns 
are valid: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
This case arose from Applicant’s determination not to violate regulations when 
asked to do so by her supervisor and civil service coworkers. They were determined to 
have her terminated, and created a sufficient record to support that action. Applicant’s 
performance before and since these few months of conflict at her former workplace 
establish a consistent record of excellent performance, trustworthiness, and reliability. 
Any potential security concerns are either based on unfounded allegations or were fully 
mitigated. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who was terminated from her previous employment, after more than seven highly 
successful years, because she declined to comply with a reorganization plan that 
violated applicable regulations. There is substantial evidence of rehabilitation, should 
any be necessary, from her outstanding performance in her current position. Any 
potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress is eliminated by this change of 
environment. Overall, the evidence creates no doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, 
eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. She fully met her burden to mitigate 
the potential security concerns arising under the guideline for personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
                                        
         
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
