 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04084 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Although Applicant 
has taken some steps to resolve his outstanding tax debt, he has failed to address the 
underlying problem. As a result, his financial problems are not under control. Clearance 
is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 14, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke his security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 On March 22, 
2017, I issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission 
of discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses, and the parties 
complied.3 At the hearing, convened on June 8, 2017, I admitted Government’s Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 8 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F, without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on June 19, 2017.4  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since August 
2015. When he completed the security clearance application in August 2014, he was 
working for a different federal contracting company. On his security clearance 
application, Applicant disclosed some derogatory financial information: a 2012 Chapter 
7 bankruptcy and unpaid state taxes for the 2013 tax year. Applicant’s background 
investigation revealed additional delinquent accounts: $10,042 in unpaid federal taxes 
and another outstanding state tax debt for $3,380. The SOR alleges the four debts, 
which Applicant admits.5 
 
 According to Applicant, his financial problems started when he refinanced his 
home in 2006 or 2007. Applicant initially purchased the home in 2002 with traditional 
30-year financing. He refinanced the home with an adjustable rate mortgage (ARM), 
believing that the payment would not adjust more than $100 per month. In August 2007, 
Applicant’s mortgage adjusted more than $600 per month, which he could not afford. 
For the next 18 months, the lender modified the terms of the loan. When the 
modification period ended, Applicant could not afford to make the adjusted mortgage 
payment and his other obligations, which included a home equity line of credit (HELOC) 
he opened in approximately 2006. Applicant stopped paying all financial obligations 
associated with the home in 2010.  He diverted the money that would have paid his 
mortgage to other things, admitting that he behaved irresponsibly with his money during 
that time.  In 2012, the HELOC creditor sued Applicant for non-payment. He consulted 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit (HE) III.  
 
3 The prehearing scheduling order and the discovery letter are appended to the record as HE I and II, 
respectively.  
 
4 HE IV. 
 
5 Tr. 22 -24; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
an attorney, who advised him to file for bankruptcy protection. Applicant did so, using 
the process to seek relief from over $450,000 in liabilities. Applicant ultimately lost his 
home to foreclosure in December 2015.6 
  
 Between 2006 and 2012, Applicant also began to experience federal and state 
tax income tax problems. Applicant is single and lives alone. Although he has a child, he 
does not claim her as a dependent. From approximately 2002 to 2006, Applicant 
claimed nine state and federal income tax exemptions from his pay. This resulted in 
insufficient tax withholdings. Applicant’s tax problem was exacerbated in 2010, after he 
stopped paying his mortgage because he could no longer claim the mortgage interest 
deduction. As a result, Applicant incurred $10,042 in federal and $3,997 in state tax 
debt he could not pay as alleged in the SOR.  In 2013, Applicant reduced his state and 
federal income tax exemptions to 6 or 7 in an effort to reduce his end-of-year additional 
income tax payments. For the 2016 tax year, Applicant reduced his exemptions to five.7 
 
 In 2015, Applicant tried to set up a payment plan for his federal tax debt. 
Because someone filed a fraudulent income tax return in 2014 using Applicant’s social 
security number, the IRS would not enter into an installment agreement with Applicant 
until the agency could resolve the issue. Applicant also claimed that his employer 
experienced a security breach that compromised employees’ 2015 W-2 forms, which 
led to another incident of identity theft. In May 2017, Applicant entered into an 
installment agreement with the IRS, agreeing to pay $75 per month on his federal taxes 
beginning in June 2017. The payment amount will increase to $335 per month in June 
2018. In March 2016, Applicant established a payment agreement of $148.00 for 80 
months to pay $8,845 in outstanding state taxes. Applicant is in compliance with the 
payment agreements. Applicant, who currently has $700 in disposable income each 
month, plans to get a part-time job so that he can continue to make the tax payments.8  
 
 As of June 2017, Applicant owed $25,562 in federal taxes and $10,336 in state 
taxes. At the time of the hearing, Applicant had not filed his 2016 federal or state 
income tax returns. He timely filed a request for an extension until October 2017. 
Applicant testified that he had completed the forms, but was going to have them 
reviewed by another person before submitting them. Applicant expects to owe $3,000 in 
federal taxes and $2,300 in state taxes.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
6 Tr. 24-31, 47-50; GE 2-3; AE F; Answer.  
 
7 Tr 21-22; 32-38, 41, 50-51, 55. 
 
8 Tr. 38-41; GE 4-5; AE A-D; Answer.  
 
9 Tr. 43-46, 54, 56, 59-65.  
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.10  
                                                          
10 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
The record establishes the Government’s prima facie case, that Applicant has a 
history of not meeting his financial obligations and an unwillingness to pay his debts, 
regardless of his ability to do so.11 Applicant’s history of financial problems began in 
approximately 2009, when he could no longer afford to pay the mortgage on his home. 
Applicant decided to use the funds that would have otherwise paid his other creditors for 
other purposes, admitting that he behaved irresponsibly. Over the three years, 
Applicant’s failure to pay his bills resulted in his being sued by a creditor in 2012 
followed by his decision to seek Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection and the loss of his 
home to foreclosure in December 2015.  
 
The record also establishes that Applicant has failed to pay Federal and state 
income taxes as required.12 Applicant’s tax issues were caused by his failure to properly 
manage the number of federal and state withholdings from his pay. Although he has 
now established an installment agreement to pay his federal taxes and has been 
participating in a payment plan for his state taxes since April 2016, it is not enough to 
mitigate the underlying concern. Applicant’s tax problem is ongoing. As of the 2016 tax 
year, the income tax withholdings from Applicant’s pay were insufficient, resulting in 
additional tax liability.  
 
After a review of the record and a consideration of the whole-person factors at 
AG ¶ 2(d), I conclude that Applicant’s financial problems render him unsuitable for 
continued access to classified information at this time. This decision should not be 
construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the type of financial 
stability necessary to reapply for national security eligibility in the future. Rather, it is 
recognition of the fact that financial issues have historically been a motivating factor 
behind acts of espionage. The award of a security clearance is not a once-in-a-lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. While a favorable decision is not warranted at this time, he may 
present persuasive evidence of financial rehabilitation and reform in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
11 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
12 AG ¶ 19(f). 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
