 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03545 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 17, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 27, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under 
Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available 
to the government, DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR on January 25, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (RSOR.) The case was assigned to me on March 13, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a first notice of 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
hearing on March 21, 2017, setting the hearing for May 4, 2017. Because of a conflict, a 
second notice of hearing was sent out on April 17, 2017, scheduling the hearing for May 
3, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were 
admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented three 
documents, which were identified and entered into evidence without objection as 
Exhibits A through C. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on May 12, 
2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, as described 
above, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of 
fact:  
 
 Applicant is 46 years old.  He was married two previous times, and he is currently 
engaged to be married again. He has five daughters. Applicant graduated high school 
and attended a technical college where he studied air conditioning. Applicant has been 
employed by a defense contractor since 2010 as a Lead Computer Numerical 
Machining Operator, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his 
employment in the defense sector. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 The SOR lists eleven allegations (1.a. through 1.k.) regarding financial 
difficulties, specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. All of the SOR 
allegations were established by Applicant's credit reports, (Exhibits 3 through 5), and/or 
Applicant's admissions in his RSOR. The debts will be discussed below in the order 
they were listed on the SOR: 
 
 1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of 
$4,322. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR. He wrote that this debt and all of the 
debts listed as medical debts (1.a. through 1.d.) were incurred as a result of his taking 
his daughter, who was sick at the time in 2011, to the emergency room of a hospital 
near him.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant claimed that he had phoned the hospital shortly after 
answering the SOR, and he was informed that the hospital did not have a record of 
these debts. He also confirmed that he had not paid any of these four debts. (Tr at 25-
30.) No evidence has been submitted to establish that this debt has been resolved or 
reduced.    
 
 1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of 
$625. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR. (See 1.a., above.) No evidence has 
been submitted to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.   
 
3 
 
 1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of 
$330. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR. (See 1.a., above.) No evidence has 
been submitted to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.    
 
 1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of 
$258.  Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR. (See 1.a., above.) No evidence has 
been submitted to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.    
            
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a tax lien entered in 2010, and 
owed to the Federal Government in the amount of $14,380. Applicant admitted this debt 
in his RSOR, and wrote that he is currently on a five year plan with the Federal 
Government to pay $700 a month.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he had been making payments for past tax 
liens and on April 15, 2016, based on new arrangements, he started to pay $700 a 
month for the two debts listed on the SOR, 1.e. and 1.f. He testified that he has made 
each payment since that date. (Tr at 26-34.) Exhibit B consists of two receipts from the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), which show that as of April 5, 2017, the total amount 
Applicant owes to the IRS is $59,419.93, and he has an installment agreement requiring 
him to pay $700 a month toward this debt. The debt is for tax years 2007, 2008, 2012, 
2013, and 2014. Applicant testified that the debt will take five years to be paid in full, but 
my calculations show this debt will take approximately seven years to be resolved. (Tr 
at 34.)  
 
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a tax lien entered in 2016, and 
owed to the Federal Government in the amount of $47,063. Applicant admitted this debt 
in his RSOR, and wrote that he is currently on a five year plan with the Federal 
Government to pay $700 a month. (See 1.e., above.) 
  
 1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount 
of $601. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR, and he wrote that at the time the bill 
was incurred, he had recently lost his job, and moved to another state without 
employment. He further wrote that he was unable to pay the bill or make payments at 
that time. 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified that he has not paid this bill as his goal is to 
first satisfy the debt to the IRS. He plans to pay this debt, and the debts listed below, 
1.h., 1.i., 1.j., and 1.k., after he has satisfied the IRS debt. (Tr at 34-36.) Based on the 
above stated calculations, this debt and the others listed below will not be paid for at 
least seven years.  
 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount 
of $585. This debt has not been resolved or reduced.  (See 1.g., above.) 
  
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount 
of $3,697. This debt has not been resolved or reduced.  (See 1.g., above.) 
 
 
4 
 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount 
of $61. This debt has not been resolved or reduced.  (See 1.g., above.) 
 
1.k. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount 
of $3,732. This debt has not been resolved or reduced.  (See 1.g., above.) 
  
 Applicant explained that he had worked as a subcontractor for 10 years and after 
construction stopped in 2008, he became unemployed or underemployed in 2009. (Tr at 
31-33.) He confirmed that he is currently living from paycheck to paycheck with $50 in 
his checking account, $0 in his savings account and no 401k or other savings plan. (Tr 
at 45-46.) While Applicant was unemployed during 2009, he has been employed full-
time by his present employer since 2010.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
5 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
 
6 
 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; 
 
(g) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that are inconsistent with known 
legal sources of income; 
 
(h) borrowing money or engaging in significant financial transactions to 
fund gambling or pay gambling debts; and 
 
(i) concealing gambling losses, family conflict, or other problems caused 
by gambling. 
 
  Applicant has had several delinquent debts for several years, which have not 
been resolved. Also, while he regularly filed his tax returns, he was not able to always 
pay his taxes in a timely manner, and he owes almost $60,000 for past taxes. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions (a), (c), and (f) in this case.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
7 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquencies to his loss of income in 2009. This is a 
circumstance beyond his control. However, I do not find that he has established that he 
acted reasonably or responsibly with respect to his debts. While he now has a payment 
plan to resolve his Federal tax debt of approximately $60,000, that debt will not be 
satisfied for seven years. Based on Applicant's testimony, he has no intention of even 
attempting to resolve the other debts until he has resolved the tax debt. Therefore, I do 
not find he has demonstrated that he addressed his debts in a responsible or timely 
manner. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not been established. I do find AG ¶ 20(g) for 
Applicant, because he has begun a payment plan with the IRS. However, since no other 
debts have been resolved or reduced, and it will be seven years before this significant 
debt is satisfied, Guideline F is found against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant or continue national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
8 
 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns 
under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. National Security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
