
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 31, 2017. The case was assigned to 
another administrative judge on April 27, 2017, and reassigned to me on July 17, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on 
August 8, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 27, 2017. The 
Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and presented Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through O. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 12, 2017. The 
record was left open for the receipt of additional evidence. On November 17, 2017, AE 
P through AE R were submitted, and received without objection. The record closed as 
scheduled on December 1, 2017. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national 
security eligibility. My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines, 
although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.f. He denied SOR 
allegations ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He is divorced, with one minor child. He served in the 
Navy from 2007 to 2012. He has worked for his employer since April 2015. (GE 1; Tr. 
31, 42.) 
 
 Applicant began incurring delinquent debt at the age of 23. (Tr. 19.) He attributes 
his debts to the death of his father in May 2012, and his 2013 divorce. Prior to these 
events, he was current on all of his debts. (AE E; AE F; Tr. 21-23, 35-41.)  
 
 Applicant was alleged to be past due in the amount of $718 on delinquent 
student loans totaling $10,161, as stated in SOR ¶ 1.a. In March 2017, Applicant 
entered into a rehabilitation agreement with this creditor to bring this account current 
through nine monthly payments of $157. He documented that he successfully made 
those nine payments, and plans to continue making payments on this debt until it is fully 
resolved. This debt is being resolved. (AE A; AE G; AE P; AE R; Tr. 24, 52-53, 62-63.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on a charged-off account in the amount of 
$7,737, as stated in SOR ¶ 1.b. This debt was for a loan. Applicant presented a letter 
 
 
3 
 
 
from this creditor that shows this debt was settled for $2,995 in September 2017. This 
debt is resolved. (AE H; Tr. 24-25, 45.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on a charged-off credit card account in 
the amount of $2,558, as stated in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant presented a letter from this 
creditor that shows this debt was settled for $920.45 in September 2017. This debt is 
resolved. (AE H; Tr. 25, 46.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on a medical collection account in the 
amount of $1,344, as stated in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant paid this debt in full in March 2017, 
as documented in a letter from this creditor. It is resolved. (AE I; Tr. 25.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on gas bill in the amount of $95, as stated 
in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant resolved this debt, as documented in a March 2017 letter from 
this creditor. (AE J; Tr. 25, 47.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on a collection account in the amount of 
$4,671, as stated in SOR ¶ 1.f. This debt was owed to his divorce attorney. At the time 
of the hearing, Applicant testified he was saving up money to resolve this debt. In his 
post-hearing documentation, he presented a November 2017 letter from this creditor 
reflecting the debt “was satisfied by settlement in full.” It is resolved. (AE G; Tr. 25-27, 
44.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on a collection account in the amount of 
$720, as stated in SOR ¶ 1.g. A second debt to the same creditor in the amount of $600 
was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. Both debts were for traffic citations and were resolved in 
2015. Applicant provided a statement from the creditor, dated March 15, 2017, showing 
these accounts were resolved. (AE K; Tr. 27, 48-49, 51.) 
 
 Applicant has attempted to improve his financial situation by downsizing and 
living within his means. Additionally, he has been promoted by his employer and now 
has more funds available to maintain current payments toward his debts. He is also 
saving for his future. (Tr. 29-30, 58.) 
 
 Applicant was awarded the Navy Good Conduct Medal; an Army Achievement 
Medal; and the Army Meritorious Unit Commendation. He served two tours in 
Afghanistan and received Bronze Stars. He also has received a performance based 
award from his employer. (AE A; AE B; AE C; Tr. 19-21.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
 
 
4 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.   
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was delinquent on eight debts totaling $27,886. These debts became 
delinquent beginning in 2013. These facts establish prima facie support for the 
foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those 
concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant made good-faith efforts to address and repay his debts that became 
delinquent after the death of his father and his divorce. Since then, he has acted 
responsibly by resolving all of his delinquent debt except for his student loan debt, 
which he has brought current. He has changed his financial practices and downsized. 
He is saving for retirement. Future financial delinquencies are unlikely. All of the above 
mitigating conditions were established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who took effective action to resolve the financial issues created by the death of his 
father and his divorce. He has earned awards for his professional excellence, been 
promoted, and demonstrated that future financial issues are unlikely to arise. The 
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress has been eliminated. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and 
suitability for a security clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
