 
1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-01804 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Aileen Xenakis, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by his 
past tax problems. He filed and paid his taxes on time until 2012, when his then three-
year-old daughter was forcibly sodomized and raped by a daycare employee. Over the 
next two years, Applicant and his wife focused on caring for their daughter. They 
disregarded some of their financial obligations, including preparing and filing their tax 
returns. Applicant addressed his overdue tax filings and tax debt by securing the services 
of an accounting firm in 2014. He filed his overdue tax returns and paid his taxes. He self-
reported the information on his security clearance application and fully cooperated with 
the ensuing security clearance investigation, including voluntarily providing his tax returns 
and IRS account transcripts. His financial situation is under control and it is unlikely that 
similar financial issues will recur. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 10, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
 
 On December 19, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was 
held. Applicant testified and the exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into the 
 
2 
administrative record without objection. (Government Exhibits 1 – 3; Applicant’s Exhibits 
A – F.) The transcript was received on December 27, 2017.1 
 
 After the hearing, I informed both sides my intent to resolve the case through 
summary decision unless an objection was raised. See generally ISCR Case No. 15-
03176, n.2 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017) (providing a benchmark for when summary 
disposition is warranted). Department Counsel objected to a summary decision.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 46, earned his bachelor’s degree in information systems operations 
management in 2009. He is currently employed in that field. He leads a team of 
professionals providing cybersecurity services to federal agencies. He received his initial 
security clearance in 2008. He has not had any security violations or infractions.3 
 
Applicant has been with his current employer for nearly seven years. His recent 
performance review reflects that he is a positive leader who mentors other employees. 
Coworkers and social references submitted letters noting Applicant’s patriotism, integrity, 
trustworthiness, and overall good character.4 One of Applicant’s coworkers describes 
Applicant as a person who holds and exhibits actions deeply rooted values.5 
 
Applicant and his wife have been married for nearly 20 years. They have three 
children, twin 8 year olds and a 13-year-old. Applicant’s children are the focus of his life. 
He volunteers his time to help coach his sons’ sports teams and does not miss a game 
unless there is a conflict with his daughter’s gymnastics. Applicant is also active in his 
church. He has been a member of the same church for about 15 years and is part of the 
men’s choir. He is a self-taught bass player.6 
 
In 2012, Applicant’s then three-year-old daughter was sexually assaulted at a 
home-based daycare.7 Applicant explained that “everything just stopped there in that 
moment for our family.” Applicant’s main focus for the next several years was on caring 
for his daughter and getting her back on the “right track.”8 In addition to the emotional and 
                                                          
1 Correspondence, the notice of hearing, the case management order, and other administrative documents, 
if any, were marked and are attached to the record as Appellate Exhibit I. 
 
2 Appellate Exhibit II. Department Counsel did not provide a basis or explanation for their position. 
 
3 Transcript (Tr.) at 13-15, 28; Exhibit A. 
 
4 Tr. at 13-15; Exhibits B – C. 
 
5 Exhibit C. 
 
6 Tr. at 16-17. 
 
7 Answer; Tr. at 18-20; Exhibit D (newspaper article describing heinous criminal acts, including forcible 
sodomy and aggravated sexual battery).  
 
8 Tr. at 18. The transcript does not adequately capture Applicant’s raw emotion and demeanor as he testified 
how “[t]he toughest thing was just sitting there with my daughter and she’s telling me that this hurts and 
there’s absolutely nothing as a father you can do.” 
 
3 
psychological toil this situation exacted from Applicant, he also faced increased financial 
costs associated with his daughter’s care and, after he returned to work on a full-time 
basis, daycare expenses for his daughter and her twin brother at a corporate daycare 
facility ($150 a week for two children increased to about $2,000 a month).9   
 
After the incident, Applicant did everything he could to keep his daughter safe and 
he acknowledges that everything else for the most part fell by the wayside. He was able 
to pay their recurring bills and “keep a roof” over his family’s head, but other financial 
obligations, such as preparing and filing his tax returns, were disregarded.10  
 
Further complicating Applicant’s financial situation was his wife’s decision a few 
months before the incident to start her own business. She had taken a 401(k) loan before 
she left her former job and the remaining loan amount became taxable income. Shortly 
before their tax returns were due, their accountant told them that, due to the complicated 
nature of their return, she was unable to help them. They started looking for a new 
accountant, but then their daughter was assaulted and her care became the main and, at 
times, sole priority in their lives for several years.11  
 
Time went by and before Applicant realized it, he had not filed his tax returns for 
several years. In 2014, he hired a new accountant and began the process of preparing 
and filing his overdue tax returns and paying his taxes. With the accountant’s help, 
Applicant negotiated a payment plan with the IRS. He routinely sent extra money each 
month to pay off his federal tax debt sooner. He finally started to see light at the end of 
the tunnel, when his mother was diagnosed with breast cancer in late 2016. His mother 
moved into their home, and Applicant and his wife helped care for her after her surgeries. 
Notwithstanding the increased workload at home and stringent demands of his job, 
Applicant has filed all overdue federal and state income tax returns. He has paid all federal 
taxes that were owed, and is paying his past-due state tax debt. He provided copies of 
his federal and state tax returns. His IRS account transcripts from 2011 through 2016 
reflect that Applicant routinely deducted an excess amount in taxes from his wages to pay 
off his tax debt. The account transcripts also reflect a $0 balance for each year.12  
 
Before the 2012 incident, Applicant had timely filed and paid his taxes. He retains 
the accounting firm that he hired in 2014 to help him keep on top of his tax issues moving 
forward. He and his wife have centralized all their documents, so that they can quickly 
turn them over to their accountant as soon as they receive their W-2 tax statements and 
other tax documents. His wife is no longer self-employed and has been working for her 
current employer, a private firm, for the past three years. Applicant and his wife’s adjusted 
gross income for 2016 was $220,000. They pay their regular, recurring bills and debts on 
time.13 Applicant explained their view about paying their financial obligations:   
                                                          
9 Tr. at 18-21, 33. 
 
10 Tr. at 20. 
 
11 Tr. at 20-21, 29-31, 35-39. 
 
12 Tr. at 21-28, 34; Exhibit 3; Exhibit E; Exhibit F. 
 
13 Tr. at 21-33; Exhibit F. 
 
4 
Both my wife and I feel the same way about this. We don’t like to owe. We 
like to pay what we owe. And we don’t believe that there’s a free ride. . . . 
this is just who we are. I don’t like being indebted to anyone and I don’t like 
missing deadlines. I just don’t. My wife doesn’t. We want to make sure that 
we’re hitting these things because that’s who we are. We believe that if it’s 
owed from us, then it’s owed from us and we want to make sure that’s taken 
care of. That’s just how we were raised and that’s how we are.14  
 
Applicant’s testimony was credible and fully supported by corroborating 
documentation. He self-reported his tax issues on a security clearance application that 
he submitted in July 2014, and discussed them fully during the course of his recent 
security clearance investigation. He also voluntarily provided his tax returns and IRS 
account transcripts during the course of the security clearance process.15  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 
2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards). 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
                                                          
14 Tr. at 24-28. 
 
15 Exhibits 1, 2. 
 
5 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.16 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court has held that 
responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions listed under Guideline F, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or 
local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax as required; 
 
                                                          
16 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
6 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago . . . or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source . . . and there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(g):  the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 In a Guideline F case, an administrative judge examines the way an applicant 
handles his or her personal financial obligations to attempt to discern how they may 
handle their security obligations. Here, Applicant’s security clearance eligibility was called 
into question because he did not timely file his income tax returns for successive years 
(tax years 2011 – 2016) and incurred past-due tax debt. An applicant’s failure to timely 
file his or her income tax returns and/or pay taxes raises heightened security concerns 
about the person’s judgment and ability to abide by rules and regulations. This, in turn, 
requires a judge to closely scrutinize the circumstances giving rise to tax-related financial 
issues and the person’s response to it.17 
 
The record evidence clearly reflects that Applicant was not trying to evade paying 
his taxes, nor was his tax situation due to procrastination. In light of the circumstances 
giving rise to Applicant’s past tax-related financial problems and a review of the entire 
record evidence, I find that his tax issues do not cast doubt on his reliability, judgment, 
trustworthiness, and ability and willingness to follow the law, rules, and regulations.  
 
Applicant became overwhelmed coping and dealing with the consequences 
flowing from the 2012 assault. Before then, he had filed and paid his taxes on time. It took 
Applicant a couple of years to come to grips with his circumstances. He started to address 
and resolve his tax situation in 2014 – three years before the SOR was issued. He hired 
an accountant, filed his overdue returns, and paid all outstanding taxes. He has retained 
the accountant and instituted other measures to stay on top of his tax situation going 
forward. Additionally, other circumstances that impacted his ability to timely file and pay 
his taxes in the past, notably, his wife’s self-employment, are no longer an issue.  
                                                          
17 See generally, ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (Board explained the heightened 
security concerns raised by tax-related financial issues, “A security clearance represents an obligation to 
the Federal Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor other obligations 
to the Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s . . . ability to protect classified information.”). 
 
7 
Beyond responsibly addressing and resolving his past tax issues, Applicant has a 
track record of responsibly handling his personal financial and security obligations. He 
has held a security clearance without issue for a decade. He was upfront and candid 
about his tax issues throughout the security clearance process. He voluntarily provided 
his tax returns and IRS account transcripts.  
 
Applicant demonstrated that his current financial situation is under control and, 
going forward, he can once again be trusted to responsibly handle his financial obligations 
in the manner expected of all clearance holders.18 AG 20(a) – 20(d), and 20(g) apply, in 
full or in part. Additionally, a number of favorable whole-person factors weigh in favor of 
mitigation.19 In short, the circumstances giving rise to Applicant’s tax-related financial 
problems and the manner in which he responsibly addressed them mitigate the security 
concerns at issue. Applicant met his burden of proof and persuasion.20 Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s continued eligibility for 
a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive, ¶ E3.1.25, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
18 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 15-03481 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016) (filing of overdue tax returns alone 
insufficient to mitigate heightened security concerns, because no evidence of financial reform or 
extenuating circumstances to explain the late filing). 
 
19 AG ¶ 2; SEAD 4, ¶ E.4. 
 
20 In reaching this favorable conclusion, I took particular note and considered the Appeal Board’s recent 
decision in ISCR Case No. 15-06440 (App. Bd. Dec. 26, 2017). In the cited case, the Board reversed a 
favorable decision involving an applicant who had failed to file his tax returns for 10 successive years (2005-
2014). The following significant factors that the Board relied on in its decision were considered.  
 
(1) Reason for not filing returns: The applicant in the cited Appeal Board case claimed to misunderstand 
his tax filing obligation based on a casual conversation with an acquaintance (a friend of a friend). Here, on 
the other hand, the extenuating circumstances giving rise to the tax issues are quite unique and clearly a 
matter beyond Applicant’s control that directly impacted his ability to prepare and file his tax returns. 
 
(2) Timing of remedial action: In the cited case, the applicant had only filed one of his overdue tax returns 
before receiving the SOR. He waited until 2016 to start repaying his tax debt. In contrast, in this case, 
Applicant started taking action to resolve his tax situation three years before the SOR was issued. He had 
been paying on an installment agreement for some time when the SOR was issued.  
 
(3) Candor: In the cited case, the applicant minimized the extent of his tax problems on his security 
clearance application. Here, however, Applicant fully disclosed the issue on his application and remained 
candid about it throughout the security clearance process. Additionally, unlike the applicant in the cited 
case who only provided his tax returns, in this case, Applicant provided his IRS account transcripts, which 
allowed the Government to independently verify the information he provided.  
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant Applicant continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
