 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02866 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leon J. Schachter, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Applicant responded to the SOR on December 19, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on March 30, 2017. It 
was reassigned to me on June 5, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 6, 2017, scheduling the hearing for July 26, 
2017. The hearing was convened on that date. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on August 2, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 1 
through 26, which were admitted without objection.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Russia. Without objection, I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in the request. The facts are summarized in the written request and will not 
be repeated verbatim in this decision. Of particular note is that Russia is one of the two 
leading intelligence threats to U.S. interests. It conducted extensive espionage and 
other actions against the United States and other countries. It also has human rights 
problems; and it has been victimized by terrorism. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old research scientist working on a defense contract at a 
university. He has worked in that position since 2012. He was born in Russia. He has a 
bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in Russia. He also has a master’s degree and a 
PhD from a U.S. university. He is married without children.1 
  
 Applicant came to the United States in 2001 to pursue additional education. He 
grew to love the United States and the freedoms and opportunities it offered. He 
remained as a permanent resident, and he became a U.S. citizen in 2014. He 
renounced his Russian citizenship and surrendered his Russian passport. His wife is a 
native-born U.S. citizen.2 
 
 Applicant’s mother, stepfather, and two stepsiblings are citizens and residents of 
Russia. His mother and stepfather married when Applicant was an adult. He has regular 
contact with his mother and through her, his stepfather. He only met his stepsiblings a 
few times, and he has had no contact with them in more than ten years. None of 
Applicant’s family members have any direct connection to the Russian government. His 
mother and stepfather regularly travel to the United States. He hopes that his mother 
and stepfather will immigrate to the United States.3 
 
 Applicant used to own an apartment in Russia with his mother. He transferred his 
interest to his mother. He now has no assets or financial interests in Russia. His and his 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 28-35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. At 28-31, 34-36; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 28-29, 32, 34-37, 41-45, 52-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE 20. 
 
 
3 
 
wife’s combined annual income is more than $180,000. They own their home and have 
other investments. Their net worth in the United States is about $885,000.4 
 
 Applicant has not returned to Russia since 2013. He expressed his undivided 
love for the United States, which he considers his home. He and his wife are ready to 
start a family. He votes in U.S. elections. He credibly testified that he would report any 
attempt to use his Russian family members against him. He reported two foreign 
countries’ attempts to obtain sensitive but unclassified information.5 
 
Applicant called two witnesses and submitted numerous documents and letters 
attesting to his academic achievements and his excellent job performance. He is 
praised for his high morals and ethics, honesty, judgment, maturity, trustworthiness, 
loyalty to the United States, reliability, professionalism, dedication, patriotism, and 
integrity.6 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
                                                          
4 Tr. at 33-34; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE 14-18. 
 
5 Tr. at 32, 39-40, 45-52, 57; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE 13. 
 
6 Applicant’s response to SOR; AE 1-12, 20-25. 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 
5 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology.  
 
Applicant has family members who are citizens and residents of Russia. Russia 
is one of the two leading intelligence threats to U.S. interests. It conducted extensive 
espionage and other actions against the United States and other countries. It also has 
human rights problems; and it has been victimized by terrorism. Applicant’s foreign 
contacts create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following is potentially applicable:  
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Russia. The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen. None of his Russian family members have any 
direct connection to the Russian government. Applicant renounced his Russian 
citizenship. He has no plan to move back to Russia. His wife is a native-born U.S. 
citizen, and they are ready to start a family. He votes in U.S. elections. He expressed 
his undivided love for the United States, which he considers his home. People who 
know him attested to his patriotism. 
I find that Applicant’s ties to Russia are outweighed by his deep and long-
standing relationships and loyalties in the United States. His closest family, life, home, 
assets, and professional career are in the United States. He credibly testified that he 
would report any attempt to use his Russian family members against him. He reported 
two foreign countries’ attempts to obtain sensitive but unclassified information. I find that 
there is no conflict of interest, because he can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s credible 
testimony and strong character evidence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude foreign influence 
security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
