KEYWORD: Guideline G
DIGEST: The ultimate resolution of a case does not necessarily turn on whether one or more of
the disqualifying or mitigating conditions applies, in whole or in part, to the facts of the case.  
By the same token, security concerns do not arise simply by virtue of the proportionate number
of disqualifying conditions that a Judge might find relevant.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-02592.a1
DATE: 01/31/2018
DATE: January 31, 2018
In Re:
---------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-02592
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 4, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On October 18, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Francisco Mendez denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant retired from the military in 1995 and has worked for contractors since.  His current
employment began in 2003.  He has held a security clearance for over 40 years.  His SOR lists four
incidents of drunk driving that occurred from 1978 until 2013.  On the last occasion, Applicant had
consumed alcohol while watching a football game.  A policeman stopped him for erratic driving. 
A breath analysis showed that Applicant’s blood alcohol level was .18.  These incidents were met
by penalties of increasing severity.  The one from 2013 resulted in a jail sentence, two years of
probation, twelve weeks of alcohol counseling, and attendance at a drunk driving impact panel.  He
was ordered to attend alcoholics anonymous (AA) while on probation and to abstain from alcohol. 
He completed the terms of his probation in 2016 but then resumed drinking.  He stopped attending
AA after he completed his probation.   
Applicant’s facility security officer (FSO) testified that he had informed her of his drunk
driving incidents.  She testified that she found him to be reliable and trustworthy.  She also stated
that Applicant’s employer would be willing to implement any conditions that the Government
imposed, including random alcohol screening and submitting regular reports.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted Applicant’s four drunk driving offenses, along with his penalties and the
treatment and counseling that he has received.  However, he stated that Applicant had not altered
his behavior and that he continues to drive after having consumed alcohol.  The Judge acknowledged
Applicant’s many years of military service as well as his service to the U.S. as a contractor and that
he had reported his offenses.  However, the Judge cited to Applicant’s admission that he continues
to drive after having consumed alcohol.  The Judge concluded that Applicant does not yet fully
appreciate the significance of his misconduct and has not sufficiently reformed so as to warrant a
favorable result in this adjudication.
Discussion
2
Applicant’s brief includes reference to a substantial amount of information that he did not
submit previously and that is not contained in the record.  We cannot consider new evidence on
appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant takes issue with the Judge’s statement that he continues to
drink and drive.  He contends that it makes him sound as if he drank and drove daily and is therefore
misleading.  The challenged finding is based upon Applicant’s hearing testimony, in which he stated
that as recently as the week preceding the hearing he had driven his vehicle after having consumed
two beers and that he had continued to drink and get behind the wheel of a car after having been told
not to at the victim impact panel.  Tr. at 25, 29-30.  The Judge’s findings, viewed as a whole, do not
suggest that he improperly magnified Applicant’s misconduct or otherwise viewed the evidence as
more egregious than it actually is.  The Judge’s material finding are based upon substantial evidence
of constitute reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the evidence.    See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 14-04724 at 3 (App.  Bd. Aug. 18, 2017). 
 
Applicant notes that the Judge cited to the Guideline G security concern and found that two
disqualifying conditions apply to his circumstances.  He argues that these two conditions are only
a small part of the total number of disqualifying conditions listed in the Directive under all of the
Guidelines.  He argues that the Judge should have ruled in his favor in the whole-person analysis
on the view that the great number of conditions that were not raised suggests that his record, on the
whole, does not present security concerns.  Applicant also contends that the Judge found his
misconduct to be “literally disqualifying,” regardless of all of the positive evidence in the record. 
The ultimate resolution of a case does not necessarily turn on whether one or more of the
disqualifying or mitigating conditions applies, in whole or in part, to the facts of the case.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 15, 2003).  By the same token, security concerns do
not arise simply by virtue of the proportionate number of disqualifying conditions that a Judge might
find relevant.  The purpose of a DOHA adjudication is to see if the applicant has engaged in conduct
or undergone circumstances that suggest that he might be lacking in judgment or otherwise unable
to meet the requirements of holding a clearance.  
In the case before us, Applicant’s four DUIs and his acknowledgment that he continues to
drive after having consumed alcohol support the Judge’s overall adverse holding.  A person who,
by his own admission, continues to drink and drive despite four previous DUIs may well be lacking
in the judgment and reliability expected of those who have access to national secrets.  We find no
reason to disturb the Judge’s handling of the disqualifying conditions.  Neither do we find error in
the Judge’s whole-person analysis.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-03592 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 14,
2017).  Contrary to Applicant’s argument, the Judge analyzed Applicant’s security-significant
conduct in light of the record as a whole.  Applicant’s references to his favorable evidence, such as
his service to the nation in the military and later as a contractor, are not enough to rebut the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
16-03219 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov.15, 2017).  
Applicant states the following: “I do not anticipate a personal representative to accompany
me at this appeal.”  Appeal Brief at 2.  To the extent that he expects that there may be some other
3
proceeding in his case, such as a personal appearance before us, the Directive provides that the
Appeal Board bases its decisions on the briefs of the parties and on the record.  Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28-
32.  There is no provision for oral argument or other in-person meeting between an applicant and
members of the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-01321 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2010).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.     
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale                 
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
