 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-04051  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 26, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 21, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). On March 13, 2017, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 5, 2017.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.)  On 
June 29, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 6 Items, was mailed 
to Applicant and received by him on July 12, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he 
 
2 
 
had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant failed to respond to the 
FORM.  Applicant did not object to Items 1 through 6, and they were admitted into 
evidence.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 59 years old.  He is the owner and consultant of a defense 
contracting company.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with 
his employment in the defense industry. 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline E – Personal Conduct)  The Government alleged that Applicant 
is ineligible for a clearance because his conduct exhibits questionable judgement, lack 
of candor, dishonesty or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations  that raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answer 
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process.  
 
 From January 2012 to October 2012, Applicant was employed as the Chief 
Operating Officer (COO) for Company A that provided technologies and software design 
to customize and enhance the Microsoft SharePoint platform.  Company A was 
headquartered in the United States.  Applicant worked at the headquarters, and there 
were offices in Vietnam and the Netherlands.  (Government Exhibits 4 and 5.)   
 
 The Applicant, as COO, arranged for the Company A to hire his brother to head 
the Office in when it opened in 2006.  The office in Vietnam was established as a 
development office only, meaning there were no sales emanating from that office.  In 
2006, Applicant’s brother was hired as the Chief Representative for the Vietnam office.  
Applicant’s brother reported to Applicant and was responsible for all aspects of the 
operations as the company’s representative in Vietnam.  Applicant’s responsibilities 
from headquarters included receiving and approving all funding requests from his 
brother in Vietnam.  From the time Applicant’s brother started working with the company 
until he resigned in 2012, there were numerous unexplained increases in expenses for 
 
3 
 
the Vietnam Office, yet there were no receipts or other documentation available to 
support the expenses because the documents were lost in an officer renovation.   As 
the result of an audit, it was determined that the company paid the Vietnam office 
approximately $478,836 in cash, for various things that were not support by sufficient 
documentation.  It was also determined that the Applicant had used the Company A’s 
corporate credit card on multiple occasions to purchase personal items worth several 
thousands of dollars.  (Government Exhibits 4 and 5.)     
 
 In October 2012, it was determined that Applicant and his brother started doing 
business as Company B in direct competition with Company A, while they were both still 
employed by Company A, and while still holding their respective positions as Chief 
Operating Officer and Chief Representative.  It was also alleged that Applicant and his 
brother, while still employed with Company A, notified several Company A employees of 
a business opportunity in Vietnam worth approximately 16 million dollars.  Applicant and 
his brother resigned from Company A in October 2012.  Both the Applicant and his 
brother are currently still employed with Company B.  (Government Exhibits 4 and 5.)  
 
 There is evidence that after leaving Company A, Applicant and his brother 
continued to participate in a scheme to take Company A’s entire team of SharePoint 
programmers and developers and relocate them the Company B, their new business 
created for the purpose of taking Company A’s resources and using them to compete 
against Company A.  Malicious and false rumors were spread among Company A 
employees suggesting to them that Company A would be going out of business in a few 
months.  Thus, encouraging them to leave Company A and go work for Company B.  
Several employees from Company A have accepted Applicant’s invitation to work for 
Company B.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  
   
 In 2013, Company A filed a lawsuit against the Applicant and his brother in civil 
court alleging misappropriation of trade secrets, breach of fiduciary duty, statutory 
business conspiracy, conversion, and tortious interference with contracts.  In September 
2014, Applicant signed a settlement agreement wherein he agreed that he and his 
brother and their company were in possession of data belonging to Company A,  and 
that Company  A claimed was confidential and a trade secret.  Applicant agreed to pay 
Company A exactly $100,000 to settle the matter.  (Government Exhibit 6.) 
 
 A letter dated March 3, 2016, from Applicant’s counsel indicates that Applicant 
only settled the lawsuit filed against him by Company A as a business decision to avoid 
the cost he would incur in litigation fees.  He argues that the claims were never proven 
and that there was a complete lack of evidence to support them.  He claims that 
Applicant denies the validity of any of the claims.         
 
 
        Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
5 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information.  This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
 (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate other government protected information; 
 
 (2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
 (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
 
 
6 
 
 (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as: 
 
 (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior, when considered as a whole, demonstrates that there has 
been questionable conduct and at least a misappropriation of trade secrets.  It is noted 
that the matter was not litigated but instead settled, and so it is not proven whether the 
other claims were valid.  However, Applicant agreed to pay Company A $100,000 to 
settle all disputes and claims against him.  The settlement agreement clearly states that 
Company B is in possession of data belonging to Company A, and that Company A 
claims that the data is confidential and trade secret.  The settlement agreement also 
specifically requires Applicant and company B to destroy any data belonging to 
Company A, with certain restrictions.  Based upon the statement of facts set forth 
above, the above disqualifying conditions have been established. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. None of the 
mitigating conditions are applicable here.    
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant’s involvement in such a scheme demonstrates untrustworthy, poor 
judgment and unreliability.  There is nothing in the record to guarantee that this situation 
would not occur again, given the right set of facts.      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant’s profile is not that of 
a person with whom the Government would have great trust.  Applicant’s questionable 
judgment is disqualifying and does not show the requisite good judgment and reliability 
required to have access to sensitive and/or classified information.  Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with many questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Personal Conduct concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
