 
1 
 
                                                               
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03786 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns, and the 
Government did not establish that he intentionally falsified his security clearance 
application when he failed to list his charged-off debt and home foreclosure. Clearance 
is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 5, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 20, 2017, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on June 19, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on June 29, 2017. He did not respond to the Government’s FORM. 
The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 8 are admitted in evidence 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on October 17, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations.2 He is a 41-year-old aircraft mechanic 
employed by a defense contractor since September 2014. He obtained his high school 
diploma in 1995, and received an airframe and power plant certificate from a community 
college in 1998. He has worked either as an aircraft mechanic for various companies or 
a state police officer since March 1998. He has never held a security clearance.3  
 
 Applicant is married and he has three minor children. He owned his first home 
from February 2005 to March 2009, and he owned his second home from March 2009 
to August 2014. As of April 2015, he owned his third home since August 2014.4     
 
 The SOR alleges a $57,854 charged-off home equity account and a March 2009 
home foreclosure. It also alleges that Applicant falsified his May 2015 security clearance 
application when he failed to disclose, in response to section 26, the account and home 
foreclosure. A credit report from May 2015 verifies Applicant’s charged-off home equity 
account and home foreclosure. The report does not list any other outstanding accounts. 
Credit reports from October 2016 and March 2017 reflect that Applicant does not have 
any outstanding accounts.5 
 
 Applicant obtained a first mortgage loan for $325,000, for which his monthly 
payment was $2,000 for 30 years. The charged-off home equity account listed on his 
credit report was a second mortgage loan from the same creditor, which he was 
required to obtain because he did not qualify for 100% financing on his first mortgage. 
His second mortgage was $65,000, and his monthly payment was $450 for 30 years.6 
 
 Applicant stopped making his mortgage payments in early 2008. His income was 
reduced when he was laid off by his employer in December 2007 and he subsequently 
worked as a state police officer. Simultaneously, he stated that the real estate crash 
caused the market value of his home to drop to $150,000, when he owed $300,000 on 
                                                          
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Items 1, 3, 4, 8.  
 
4 Items 1, 3, 4, 8.  
 
5 Items 1, 3, 5-7. 
 
6 Item 8. 
 
3 
 
his primary mortgage. He indicated that the creditor refused to work with him to short 
sell the home. In March 2009, he told the creditor that he could no longer afford to pay 
his delinquent mortgage, he returned the home to them, and he walked away. He 
indicated that he did not thereafter receive from the creditor any correspondence 
notifying him of any outstanding liability for his delinquent mortgages, he was unaware 
of the status of both of the mortgage loans, and he was unaware when the home was 
foreclosed. As such, he did not feel responsible for the mortgage loans and he did not 
realize he was required to list them on his security clearance application.7 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
7 Items 4, 8. 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was unable to pay his mortgage loans. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
5 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant’s layoff and the consequent reduction in income, and the real estate 
crash, constitute conditions beyond his control that contributed to his delinquent 
mortgages and home foreclosure. When the creditor did not work with him to short sell 
the home, he notified them that he was returning it to them and he walked away. Thus, 
he failed to show that he acted responsibly under his circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) does 
not apply.  
 
However, Applicant did not receive from the creditor any correspondence 
notifying him of any outstanding liability for his delinquent mortgages. While the 
charged-off account and home foreclosure are listed on the May 2015 credit report, they 
are not listed on his recent credit reports from October 2016 and March 2017. All three 
credit reports reflect that Applicant does not have any other outstanding accounts. 
Subsequent to the March 2009 home foreclosure, Applicant owned a second home from 
March 2009 to August 2014. As of April 2015, he owned a home since August 2014. 
There is sufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur, 
and they do not continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
While Applicant admitted ¶ 2.a, he stated during his interview that he did not 
realize he was required to list his charged-off account and home foreclosure. He had 
not received any correspondence from the creditor since March 2009, he was unaware 
of the status of both of the mortgage loans, and he was unaware when the home was 
foreclosed. In light of his statements, I conclude that Applicant did not deliberately falsify 
his application. AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply and I find SOR ¶ 2.a for Applicant.      
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F and Guideline E in this whole-person analysis.  
 
The record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and the Government did not establish disqualifying conduct under 
Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
