 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 16-03959  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Tara K. Karoian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 29, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On November 20, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). On May 11, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines H, Drug Involvement; F, Financial Considerations; and E, Personal 
Conduct.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 31, 2017.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.)  On 
July 12, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 6 Items, was mailed 
to Applicant on July 14, 2017, and received by him on July 21, 2017. The FORM notified 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant  
responded to the FORM, and his response was admitted into evidence.  Applicant did 
not object to Items 1 through 6, and they are also admitted into evidence.  Hereinafter, 
they are referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 6.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He is employed by a defense contractor as an Aircraft 
Mechanic II.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his 
employment.   
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the United States Air Force from April 2006 to 
June 2010, when he was honorably discharged.  While in the Air Force, Applicant 
applied for, and was granted, a security clearance in 2006 that he has continued to hold 
until the present.  Following his military service, Applicant used marijuana with varying 
frequency from 2010 until at least October 2015.    
 
 Applicant began working for his current employer in December 2013.  Applicant 
admits that he used marijuana at various frequencies from 2010 until at least October 
2015.  During his most recent interview with OPM signed on April 7, 2017, Applicant 
stated that he used marijuana on two occasions with his former spouse in October 
2010.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  She purchased it for him to use.  They shared a 
marijuana joint both times at their house.  Applicant explained that the effects of 
marijuana made him more personable.  The next time he used marijuana was during his 
five day trip to Amsterdam, Holland, in October 2015.  While in Holland, Applicant 
purchased marijuana from a coffee shop about three times, spending about $10 per 
gram for his purchases and purchasing two grams.  Applicant states that he smoked a 
marijuana joint every day with the thought that he did so legally as it was legal in 
Holland.  At this time, Applicant worked for a defense contractor and held a security 
clearance.  Applicant knew that his use of illegal drugs including marijuana was 
prohibited under Federal law and against his company policy.  Applicant did not report 
 
 
3 
 
 
his drug use to his employer.  He did not report his conduct to OPM because he states 
that he did not know that he had to do so.  He also did not list his illegal purchase and 
use of marijuana on his security clearance questionnaire dated November 20, 2015.  
(Government Exhibit 3.)  Applicant states that his use of marijuana was only 
recreational.           
 
  In October 2015, Applicant was charged with Possession of Marijuana, 
Mushrooms and recreational drugs at an airport.  Applicant explained that while in 
Holland, he also purchased a small bag of mushrooms, because he had never tried 
them and wanted to.  Applicant forgot that the drugs were packed in his items, when he 
was randomly selected for a search when he arrived at the Chicago Airport.  Applicant 
was detained for two hours, required to write a statement explaining the event, and 
required to pay a $500 fine.    Applicant was then released.  Applicant states that he did 
not tell anyone of this incident, as he was scared and concerned about his security 
clearance.  (Government Exhibit 4.) 
  
 Applicant failed to file his Federal income tax return for tax years 2013, 2014 and 
2015.  Applicant stated that during each tax time for three years, he was deployed 
overseas.  He was twice in Afghanistan and once in Turkey.  Applicant stated that since 
he believed the Government owed him money, he took care of the tax matter with the 
help of a professional when he returned state-side in 2016.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  
Applicant claims that he is in the best financial situation he has ever been in.  During his 
separation and then divorce in 2013, he experienced some rough financial times, but 
since he has been working for a defense contractor, and deploying every four months, 
he has been in the best financial state since becoming an adult.  
 
 Applicant stated that in August 2009, he was with his best friend and his cousin 
from Puerto Rico.  They were trying to enter a casino with Puerto Rican identification.  
An argument ensued, and Applicant was charged with trespassing. 
 
 In January 2010, Applicant was charged with Possession of a Dangerous 
Weapon, 1st Offense, Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, Fail to Drive Marked Lines, 
and No Proof of Insurance.  Applicant explained that he was leaving Las Vegas when 
his tire blew out on a merge lane, and ended up hitting the median.  Applicant was 
pulled over by an officer who asked if he had been drinking.  Applicant admitted that he 
had, and Applicant was subsequently charged with the above violations.  Based upon 
this incident, although Applicant was given an honorable discharge from the Air Force, 
he was denied the opportunity to re-enlist.   
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
 
 
4 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying.  
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia. 
 
 (f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or holding a 
sensitive positon.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. None of the conditions are applicable. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
  
Applicant’s use of marijuana while possessing a security clearance from 2010 to 
2015, is clearly prohibited by the DoD.  Furthermore his criminal arrest in October 2015 
for possession of illegal drugs shows the depth of his involvement.  He states that he no 
longer intends to use illegal drugs including marijuana, and there is no other evidence of 
illegal drug use since 2015.  However, given his history and pattern of misconduct over 
the years, it cannot be determined that he will not continue to use marijuana in the 
future.  At this time he is not responsible enough to access sensitive or classified 
information. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
  
(g) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has a history of failing to file his federal income tax returns for three 
years, 2013, 2014 and 2015.  He claims that he has corrected this problem and filed 
these tax returns, but he has failed to provide any proof of filing them.  Under these 
 
 
7 
 
 
particular circumstances, there is no acceptable excuse.  These facts establish prima 
facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant 
to mitigate those concerns. Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he made  
decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified information.   
  
 None of the guidelines could mitigate the security concerns arising from 
Applicant’s alleged failure to file his Federal income taxes.  Even assuming that AG ¶  
20 applies: 
 
 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
Applicant has not acted responsibly under unforeseen difficult circumstances that 
were completely beyond his control, and there are no clear indications that his financial 
issues are under control. He simply ignored filing his tax returns for the three years he 
was deployed. The record establishes no mitigation of financial security concerns under 
the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(g). 
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for the personal conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-personal assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information.  
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
  (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violation; 
 
 (e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group.  Such 
conduct includes: 
 
 (1) engaging in activities, which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
  (2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that 
country or that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States land may serve as 
a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or other 
group.  
 
 Applicant’s use of marijuana while in Holland may have been legal in that country 
but is not legal under Federal law.  Furthermore, his past derogatory conduct involving 
his citation for trespassing; his arrest for Possession of a Dangerous Weapon; Driving 
Under the Influence of Alcohol; Failure to Drive In Marked Lines; and No proof of 
insurance shows poor judgment and unreliability.  Applicant’s failure to follow Federal 
tax laws also show an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.  These 
serious errors in judgment show his level of immaturity and his inability to qualify to 
adequately protect classified information.      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 
 
9 
 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 32-year old 
adult, who does not seem to understand that by his age, he should be showing more 
responsibility and good judgment.  From 2010 to 2015, he used marijuana while holding 
a security clearance.  He was arrested in October 2015 for illegal possession of 
marijuana and mushrooms at the airport during a random search.  He failed to file his 
Federal income tax returns for tax years 2013, 2014, and 2015.  He was cited for 
Trespass in 2009, and arrested and charged with Possession of a Dangerous Weapon, 
DUI, failure to Driven in Marked lines, and No proof of insurance in 2010.  He has not 
demonstrated sufficient responsibility on any level.  Overall the record evidence leaves 
me with serious doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security 
clearance. He has not met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 3.b     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 3.c     Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
