 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01528 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred more than $125,000 in tax liens and other delinquent debts 
over the past eleven years. He provided insufficient documentation of resolution or of 
legitimate reasons for nonpayment, and failed to demonstrate the means or a workable 
plan to resolve remaining financial issues. Resulting security concerns were not 
mitigated. Based upon a review of the testimony, pleadings, and exhibits, national 
security eligibility is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On September 28, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 13, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 18, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on February 8, 2017. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on April 27, 2017, setting the hearing for May 16, 2017. On that date, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into evidence. 
Applicant testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G into evidence. All 
exhibits were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the 
record open until June 16, 2017, to permit submission of additional evidence. Applicant 
timely submitted additional documentary exhibits, which were marked AE H, I, and J, 
and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 31, 
2017.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative 
guidelines that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
determinations issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as promulgated in 
Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the 
new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. This decision is issued 
pursuant to, and cites, the new AG; but my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant has been employed by a defense contractor since 2014 as an 
environmental manager and a site safety and health officer, and is applying for a 
security clearance in connection with that work. The SOR alleged 11 delinquent debts, 
totaling $125,644. Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, and 
1.k. He admitted the remaining debts, with some explanations. (Answer.) Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated in the findings below.   
 
 Applicant is 54 years old and married for the fourth time. He has two adult 
children and three adult stepchildren. He has no previous military or Federal 
government service, and this is his first application for a security clearance. He is a high 
school graduate, and has earned multiple professional certifications from several 
community colleges. He was unemployed for two months in 2005 after retiring from a 
23-year career as a county firefighter, and for two months in 2010 between jobs, but has 
otherwise held full-time employment since April 1982. (GE 1; GE 3; Tr. 47-49.)  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f alleged five tax liens stemming from delinquent 
Federal or state income tax debts totaling $119,043. During his December 2014 security 
interview, he told an OPM investigator that the tax debts arose because his wife’s 
brothers failed to pay required taxes from 2006 through 2008 for their business, of 
which they had made his wife a nominal 51% owner. He said he had made 
 
 
 
 
3 
arrangements with the IRS to pay $500 per month for three years, and with the state tax 
authority to pay $100 per month for two years, to resolve these liens. In his November 
2016 Answer, Applicant admitted that the liens were his, but said they were based on 
false information given to the IRS. He said that the tax accounts had been reviewed and 
updated, and that the amounts due had been (Federal) or would be (state) deleted. 
During the hearing, Applicant established that the $8,840 Federal lien for 2008 taxes 
(SOR ¶ 1.c) and the $9,217 Federal lien for 2005 taxes (SOR ¶ 1.e) were paid and 
released in February 2017 and February 2013, respectively. However the remaining 
Federal and state tax liens, including the $192 balance still due for 2006 Federal taxes, 
remain unresolved. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; AE A; AE H; Tr. 46-57.) 
 
 Applicant successfully disputed and obtained cancellation of the $8,022 judgment 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, which was fraudulently obtained in a 2012 small claims court 
action. (AE G; Tr. 44-45.) He said he had paid the $2,943 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, 
but failed to provide documentation supporting that claim after saying that he would. 
(Answer; Tr. 46-47.) He also disputed that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 1.k 
were valid, but failed to document either a reasonable basis to dispute their legitimacy 
or substantial actions to resolve them. (Answer; GE 2; AE C; AE D; AE F; AE H; Tr. 27-
28, 38-40, 43-45, 58-61, 66-67.)  
 
 Four current or former coworkers wrote letters describing Applicant as a 
dependable, reliable, honest, and trustworthy individual with an outstanding work ethic, 
and a history of careful compliance with protocols, regulations, and guidelines for proper 
handling of sensitive information. Applicant’s descriptions of his debts, in his Answer 
and during his testimony, did not demonstrate a comprehensive grasp of the overall 
status, or responsible management, of his financial obligations. His testimony, however, 
was forthright and credible. He provided no evidence of financial counseling or 
budgetary information from which to determine his future financial stability. (AE I; AE J. 
Tr.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
4 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant incurred numerous delinquent debts, totaling more than $125,000, over 
the past eleven years. More than $119,000 of that debt involved Federal and state 
income tax liens. The evidence corroborates that he resolved two of the alleged debts 
(totaling $17,239) before the SOR was issued, and one more (of $8,840) since that 
time. However, substantial delinquent debt remains, concerning which he demonstrated 
neither substantial progress toward resolution nor a legitimate basis for dispute. These 
facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift 
the burden to Applicant to mitigate the resulting security concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes six conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
 
 
 
6 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
Applicant continues to owe substantial tax and consumer debt that he incurred 
over the past decade. His only periods of unemployment during that period were two 
months during job changes in 2005 and 2010, and he did not assert that his financial 
issues were caused thereby. To the extent that some tax debts might be attributable to 
business activities involving his wife and her brothers, he did not document such 
causation or demonstrate responsible actions under the circumstances. He has neither 
received financial counseling, nor demonstrated a budget that would support a 
conclusion that his finances are under control. Applicant documented his resolution of 
three SOR-alleged debts, but did not demonstrate a legitimate basis to dispute his 
responsibility for any of the remaining unresolved debts. He told the OPM investigator 
that he had entered into repayment agreements with Federal and state tax authorities, 
but did not provide evidence showing compliance with such plans and admitted that the 
substantial state tax debt has not been addressed. 
  
Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish complete mitigation of security concerns 
arising from his financial irresponsibility under any of these conditions. He resolved 
three formerly delinquent debts so, other than the historical pattern to which they 
contribute, resulting security concerns were mitigated concerning those debts.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for the decisions that led to substantial debt he did not repay in a 
timely manner. He continues to owe substantial delinquent debt that he accumulated 
over the past eleven years and either could not, or chose not to, repay or successfully 
dispute. Past and current coworkers provided strong character references. However, 
there is insufficient evidence of rehabilitation or a track record of compliance with debt-
resolution agreements, and the potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains 
substantial. Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f through 1.k:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information or to occupy a sensitive position. National security 
eligibility is denied. 
                                        
         
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
