 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 16-00502 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel1 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 12, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on September 7, 2016. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the trustworthiness concerns. Applicant received the FORM on September 
                                                          
1 Mr. Velvel prepared the file of relevant material (FORM). Mr. Hayes acted on the case after I reopened 
the record. 
 
 
2 
29, 2016. As of November 29, 2016, he had not responded. The case was assigned to 
me on August 8, 2017.  
 
On November 9, 2017, I reopened the record to permit Applicant to submit 
additional documentary evidence. Applicant responded with documents that I have 
marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F. The Government exhibits included in the 
FORM and AE A through F are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He has worked for his current employer or a 
predecessor defense contractor since January 2010. He is a high school graduate. He 
married in 1992 and divorced in 2006. He has lived with a cohabitant since 2009. He 
had three children, but one of his children died of cancer in 2012.2 
 
 Applicant worked as an operator and a supervisor for a company from 1977 until 
the plant closed in 2004. He worked at another company for about ten months. He 
worked at another plant as a machine operator from 2005 until that plant also closed in 
2009. He found a job in the local area until that contract ended. He was given a choice 
of transferring to a military hospital six hours away or losing his job. Since 2010, he has 
left his home at 6:00 on Sunday night and drives the six hours to the hospital’s location. 
He works from Monday through Thursday, and then drives back home.3 
 
 Applicant’s child and both of his parents passed away within a two-year period. 
His cohabitant became ill and was unable to work for a few years. With those events 
and the costs associated with Applicant working six hours away from his home, he was 
unable to pay all his bills, and a number of debts became delinquent.4 
 
 The SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts totaling about $34,000. Applicant admitted 
owing all the debts with the exception of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, which he stated 
he paid, and the $124 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. Both debts are listed on a 
January 2015 credit report, but neither debt is listed on a November 2017 credit report. 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a $7,498 charged-off debt. The credit reports list the debt as charged 
off, with a high credit of $7,498, but with a $0 balance. The debt is not listed on the 
January 2016 credit report.5 
 
 Applicant paid a $4,000 judgment owed to a credit union in about 2012. He paid 
a charged-off account, and he settled and paid a collection account in about December 
                                                          
2 Items 1, 2; AE B. 
 
3 Items 1, 2; AE B. 
 
4 Items 1-5; AE B. 
 
5 Items 1-5. 
 
 
3 
2012. He has been paying back taxes owed to the IRS. None of these debts were 
alleged in the SOR.6 
 
 Applicant was diagnosed with an autoimmune disease last year, which cost him 
time off work and made paying his debts difficult. He stated that he chose not to file 
bankruptcy or go on disability or Social Security. He wanted to continue working for the 
next two years, when he will retire. He reported his debts on his 2014 Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions. He loves his job and working with the patients at the military 
hospital. He has continued paying his back taxes, and now that he is financially stable, 
he is committed to paying his remaining delinquent debts.7  
 
Applicant submitted letters attesting to his excellent job performance. He is 
praised for his professionalism, work ethic, dedication, honor, courtesy, honesty, 
reliability, dependability, positive outlook, responsibility, and integrity.8 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on June 8, 
2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
6 Items 1-5; AE B. 
 
7 Items 1; AE B. 
 
8 AE C-F. 
 
4 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems, including multiple delinquent debts. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
 
5 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant worked at the same job for 27 years until the plant closed in 2004. He 
lost another job in 2009 after that plant also closed. In 2010, he was given the choice of 
transferring to a job six hours away or losing still another job. He lost his child and both 
parents in a two-year span. His cohabitant became ill and was unable to work for a few 
years. He paid a judgment, paid or settled two debts, and began paying his back taxes, 
and then he developed an autoimmune disease. He loves his job and wants to continue 
working for the next two years, when he will retire. He is now financially stable; he has 
continued paying his back taxes; and he is committed to paying his remaining 
delinquent debts.  
 
  A trustworthiness adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a procedure 
designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. See ISCR 
Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as a matter 
of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only 
establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). It may 
take some time, but I am convinced Applicant will eventually resolve his financial 
problems.9 The above mitigating conditions are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009) and ISCR Case No. 09-08462 at 4 (App. Bd. 
May. 31, 2011): “Depending on the facts of a given case, the fact that an applicant’s debts will not be paid 
off for a long time, in and of itself, may be of limited security concern.” 
 
6 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s favorable 
character evidence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
   
 
 
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
