 
1 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-03129 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Tokay T. Hackett, Esquire 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, the AGs were updated and the AGs effective September 1, 2006 were cancelled.  
This decision will be decided based on the new AGs effective on June 8, 2017.  If I were 
to consider this case under the AGs effective September 1, 2006, it would result in the 
same outcome.  
  
 On February 17, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 
22, 2017. The case was assigned to me on October 12, 2017. On October 17, 2017, a 
Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for November 15, 2017.  The 
hearing was held as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered two 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 2.  Applicant testified, 
called four witnesses, and offered three exhibits which were admitted as Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A - C. The transcript (Tr.) was received on November 27, 2017. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance. He was hired by his current employer in March 2015. He 
has worked for various defense contractors since 2004. He has held a top secret 
clearance since July 2004. He has handled classified information for 14 years without 
incident. Applicant was born in India. He arrived in the U.S. in 1981 when he was 
adopted by his parents, both U.S. citizens.  He became a U.S. citizen in 1985. He has a 
bachelor’s degree. He is single and has no children. (Tr. 34-38, 43, 47-49; Gov 1; Gov 
2)    
 
The SOR consists of one allegation under Personal Conduct.  It is alleged and 
Applicant admits to using escort services with varying frequency from 2002 to at least 
2013. Applicant began to hire escorts when he graduated from college and worked a 
very stressful job at a hospital. He would work 24-hour shifts and then would have six 
days off in a row. He spent a lot of time in his off-duty hours looking at pornography on 
the internet. His conduct escalated to visiting massage parlors and using escort 
services. He used an escort service between two to three times a month. Applicant 
hired an escort because he believed it was legal. He admits to having sexual 
intercourse with the escorts. He believed it was morally wrong, but did not think it was 
illegal. He held a top secret clearance during most of the time when he hired escorts. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a: Tr. 38-40; Gov 2; Response to SOR; AE A).  
 
Applicant stopped using escort services in 2013 after he had an HIV scare. He 
had unprotected sex with an escort, who later told him that she was HIV positive. 
Fortunately, he tested negative for HIV. After that incident, he decided to change his 
conduct. In 2014, a friend told him about Sex Addicts Anonymous (SAA). He began 
attending weekly meetings and started meeting with a sponsor once a week. His 
sponsor moved out of the area in 2016. (Tr. 40-42; AE A) 
 
In 2016, Applicant also sought spiritual help by joining a Bible study group. He 
shared with the men in the group his temptations and struggles. He currently attends 
church and Bible study when his job allows. Applicant’s job involves extensive travel 
both in and outside the United States. (Tr. 40 – 42; AE A)  
 
In his free time, Applicant volunteers at the local historical society and as an 
emergency medical technician (EMT) with a local fire department. Applicant finds his 
volunteer work beneficial. He is proud of his job and states it is an honor to serve his 
country. He believes he is not a threat to national security. He looks to God, support 
groups, family and friends to help him struggle with his temptations. He has disclosed 
 
3 
 
 
his struggles to family, friends and coworkers. He believes he is not susceptible to 
blackmail or coercion. He is deeply ashamed of his use of escort services. (Tr. 40 – 42; 
AE A)  
 
Applicant provided a notarized statement of his intent to refrain from using escort 
services in the future. He understands that any future violation will be grounds for 
revoking his security clearance. (AE B)  
 
Applicant claims he is a different man than the man he was five years ago. He 
works the steps of recovery and has the tools to overcome addiction. He met with a 
licensed clinical social worker on one occasion. He also met with licensed clinical 
professionals to deal with anxiety as well his addiction issues. He admits the temptation 
is always there, but he has the tools to deal with his temptation. He now has a steady 
girlfriend. (Tr. 44 – 50)  
 
Whole-Person Factors 
 
 Witness A is Applicant’s life-long friend. Their mothers attended high school 
together and have remained friends ever since. He describes Applicant as being very 
trustworthy and having the highest character of anyone he knows. He sees Applicant on 
average between three and five times a year. He stays with Applicant when he is in the 
area on business where Applicant lives. He first learned about the allegation in the SOR 
about three weeks before the hearing. His opinion of Applicant has not changed after 
learning Applicant hired escorts over a number of years. (Tr. 19 – 20) 
 
 Witness B has known Applicant for 19 years. They met in college. He sees 
Applicant every few months. He describes Applicant as a very good person. Applicant is 
loyal, selfless, a hard worker, and a professional. He learned about the allegation in the 
SOR at the hearing. It does change his opinion of Applicant. (Tr. 24-27) 
 
 Witness C currently works with Applicant. He has worked for the defense 
contractor for four years. He is a program manager. He is a retired US Army lieutenant 
colonel who has held a security clearance since 1974. Applicant worked for him for one 
and a half years. He observed Applicant’s performance usually weekly, but on occasion 
daily. He rates Applicant’s duty performance on a scale of 1-10 as a 10. Applicant told 
him about the issue with his security clearance two weeks ago.  He recommends 
Applicant for a security clearance because Applicant was honest enough to say he was 
in trouble. Witness C does not believe a person who currently uses escort services 
should have a security clearance.  He understands that Applicant no longer uses escort 
services. He believed Applicant when he told him that he no longer uses escort 
services. (Tr. 28 – 33)  
 
 Mr. K is a licensed clinical social worker. He met with Applicant on February 14, 
2017. He states Applicant was forthcoming and cooperative during the evaluation period 
and acknowledged his past use of escorts. He notes Applicant has been actively 
working on his recovery since 2013, by regularly attending a 12-step self-help program, 
 
4 
 
 
as well as a Christian support group with his church. Mr. K did not provide a diagnosis. 
(AE C at 1). 
 
 Mr. G has known Applicant since 2012 when he joined SAA. Applicant attended 
meetings at least once a week. In 2014, Applicant approached him and asked him if he 
could be his sponsor. Mr. G says that he is careful when accepting the position of 
sponsor. He wants to insure the person he sponsors is committed to their recovery. He 
found Applicant to be very committed to his recovery and worked the 12-step program. 
He finds Applicant to be humble and honest. He deeply respects Applicant and vouches 
for his character, stating, “[Applicant’s] work to achieve sobriety from his addiction 
makes him a strong contributor to any organization that values humility and 
truthfulness.” (AE C at 5-6)  
 
 Several other friends and co-workers wrote letters on Applicant’s behalf attesting 
to his integrity, excellent work ethic, dependability, and good judgment. (AE C at 2-4)   
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security or adjudicative processes.  
 
 The following disqualifying conditions potentially apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and   
 
AG ¶ 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such 
conduct includes:  
 
(1) Engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.   
 
 Both AG ¶ 16(c) and AG ¶ 16(e)(1) apply to Applicant’s hiring of escort services 
on numerous occasions between 2002 to 2013. Applicant’s past conduct raises issues 
 
6 
 
 
about his judgment, willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and reliability. This 
raises doubts as to Applicant’s ability to protect classified information.  Applicant’s use 
of escort services over an 11-year period and while he held a security clearance, made 
him vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. His activities could affect his 
personal, professional, and community standing.    
  
 Under Guideline E, the following mitigating conditions potentially apply in 
Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
   
AG ¶ 17(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
AG ¶ 17(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 All three mitigating conditions apply. While Applicant’s conduct over a period of 
11 years cannot be considered a minor offense, Applicant stopped using escort services 
over five years ago. Applicant self-identified the problem and joined SAA and obtained 
counseling. He also joined and attends a Bible study group. He has made positive steps 
to alleviate the stressors and circumstances that contributed to his untrustworthy and 
inappropriate behavior. Considering he has not obtained the services of an escort for 
over five years, such behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant disclosed his history of 
hiring escorts to family, friends, and co-workers, reducing his vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 While Applicant’s history of hiring escort services between 2002 and 2013 raised 
serious security concerns, he has taken actions to deal with the problem by attending 
SAA, counseling and Bible study.  He has demonstrated that he is reliable, trustworthy, 
and has good judgment.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
       I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
reference letters from his superiors, co-workers, and SAA sponsor. I consider the 
testimony of his friends and work colleague during the hearing. Applicant’s 11-year 
history of hiring escort services raised serious security concerns. Applicant is given 
credit for recognizing the problem and taking steps to deal with his sex-addiction issues 
in 2013. Applicant has not hired an escort in over five years.  He mitigated questions 
raised about his trustworthiness and reliability. Security concerns under personal 
conduct are mitigated. Applicant is warned that should he resume similar conduct in the 
future, his security clearance will be revoked.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge  
 
