                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
           ----------------------------------                  )     ISCR  Case No.  16-04094          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se                    
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant  did
not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
 
Statement of Case
On March 10, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility
to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated
substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that
were in effect when the SOR was issued would not affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 10, 2017, and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to me on May 5, 2017, and scheduled for hearing on August 1, 2017.
The Government’s case consisted of three exhibits (GEs 1-3) Applicant relied on one
witness (himself) and two exhibits. (AEs A-B) The transcript was received on August 9,
2017.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) payment receipts, application for approval of an installment agreement, and
an historical accounting of IRS  payments between 2010 and 2016. (Tr. 27, 49) For good
cause shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to supplement the record. Department
Counsel was afforded two days to respond. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with IRS account
transcripts for tax years 2010-2016, timely-filed 2015 and 2016 federal tax returns, and an
historical record of payments made to the IRS. Applicant’s submissions were admitted
without objection as AEs C-E. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) failed to timely file federal tax returns for
tax years 2011-2014 and (b) incurred federal tax liens in May 2010 (for $26,443), in
January 2015 (for $42,315), in January 2015 (for $34,547), and in April 2016 (for
$111,000.
                
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations with
explanations. He claimed he filed all of his back tax returns in December 2016 and is
working with an IRS agent to establish an installment agreement to repay his owed
federal taxes. And he claimed that he and his wife repaid over $10,000 of owed federal
taxes.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 67-year-old senior consultant for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
2
Background
Applicant married in March 1972 and divorced in August 1981. (GEs 1-2) He
remarried in October 1992 and has three adult stepchildren from this marriage. Applicant
earned a bachelor’s degree in June 1972, and a master’s degree in June 1973. (GEs 1-2)
He reported no military service. (GEs 1-2)
Applicant has worked for his current contractor since March 2013. (GEs 1-2) 
Between March 2010 and March 2013, he was self-employed as a senior consultant and
filed ;1099 quarterly forms with the IRS. (Tr. 30) And between March 2005 and March
2010, he worked as an associate for a federal contractor. He has held a security
clearance since July 1992. (GE 1) 
Applicant’s finances
Records confirm that Applicant failed to timely file his federal tax returns for tax
years 2011-2014. (GEs 1-2, A and D) He attributed his filing lapses to insufficient income
to pay his taxes owed. (GEs 1-2 and Tr. 31-33) After completing his security clearance
application (e-QIP) in January 2016 and answering questions about the status of his tax
returns to an agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in a follow-up interview
in August 2016, Applicant filed his back federal tax returns, but not until December 2016.
(GEs 1-2 and AE B; Tr. 35) Applicant is credited with filing his federal tax returns for tax
years 2015 and 2016 in a timely manner. (AE D; Tr. 35-36)
Beginning in 2010, Applicant and his wife encountered difficulties in putting enough
money away to satisfy the IRS’s 1099 quarterly tax payment requirements. (Tr. 31-32)
Their money set-aside efforts were consistently weakened by their competing financial
commitments to travel and buying expensive vehicles. (Tr. 50-52) In November 2009, the
IRS filed a tax lien for taxes owed for prior years. (Tr. 32-33) Records show that this lien
was satisfied and released in 2012. (GEs 2-3; Tr. 32) 
Reported current account balances furnished by the IRS covering Applicant’s
unpaid federal taxes for tax years 2010-2014 exceed $280,283. (AE C) Federal tax liens
filed against Applicant in May 2010 (for $26,443), in January 2015 (for $42,345), and in
April 2016 (for $111,000,) respectively, total $179,788 and have not been satisfied or
released to date. (GEs 1-3) 
From the historical accounting provided by Applicant for the covered years of
2010-2014, he documented voluntary payments to the IRS of around $41,245. (AEs A
and E) Since December 2016, the IRS has been levying Applicant’s social security
account at the rate of $400 a month. (Tr. 27-28, 42-43) 
Currently, Applicant grosses about $140,000 a year using the W-2 supplied by his
employer; while his wife earns approximately $103,000 a year. Applicant has no 401(k)
retirement account or investment income to supplement his  employment income. (Tr. 45-
46)  Without an installment agreement in place with the IRS, it is unclear whether
3
Applicant has formally applied for an installment agreement or whether the IRS would be
willing to enter into a payment agreement with him, given the sizeable amount of back
taxes owed. Based on the evidence presented, owed federal taxes covered by SOR ¶¶
1.b-1.e remain unresolved,  outstanding, and uncovered by any approved IRS installment
agreement.
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
4
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s failure to timely file his federal tax
returns for tax years 2011-2014 and his accrual of $179,788 in unresolved federal tax
5
liens. Applicant’s failure to timely file federal tax returns for multiple years and his
incurring of unresolved federal tax liens warrant the application of four of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”;
19 b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; 19(c), “a history
of not meeting financial obligations”; and 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual
Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or
local income tax as required.”
Applicant’s admitted federal tax filing lapses and his federal tax lien pleading
admissions negate the need for any independent proof. See McCormick on Evidence, §
262 (6th ed. 2006). Each of Applicant’s delinquent federal tax returns and unresolved
federal tax liens are fully documented and create some judgment issues. See ISCR
Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving debt
delinquencies.  
Historically, the timing of filing federal tax returns and resolving federal tax liens
in DOHA proceedings are critical to an assessment of an applicant’s trustworthiness,
reliability, and good judgment in following rules and guidelines necessary for those
seeking access to classified information or to holding a sensitive position. See ISCR
Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App.
Bd. Aug. 18, 2015)
Applicant’s cited extenuating circumstances (i.e., lack of income to cover
delinquent tax debts) provide little basis for his failure to timely file his federal tax returns
and address his federal taxes due for the tax years in issue. He and his wife together
grossed over $200,000 a year for the tax years and still failed to file timely federal tax
returns and adequately address their taxes due for the tax years in issue. 
Not until after Applicant initiated the security clearance process in January 2016
with his completion of an e-QIP did he file his back federal tax returns in issue or apply
for an installment agreement with the IRS. And, since 2011, he has made only modest
payment progress ($41,245) in documented payments) on his accrued taxes due for tax
years 2011-2014.  So, while MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” might have some application to
Applicant’s situation, application is very limited and cannot excuse his past failures to
timely file his tax returns and make his quarterly tax payments as required by law.
6
Applicant’s failure to establish more probative evidence of his addressing his
federal tax returns and tax liens earlier in time precludes his entitlement to credit for his
meeting the acting responsibly under the circumstances prong of MC ¶ 20(b). See ISCR
Case No. 15-06440 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Dec. 26, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005).
For similar reasons, MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated and is adhering to a  good-faith
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,”  is not available to mitigate
his federal tax return filing lapses and incurring of federal tax liens (still unresolved) over
an extended number of years. 
Whether Applicant is entitled to the mitigating benefits of MC ¶ 20(g), “the
individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file or pay the
amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements,” is unclear at this point.
See ISCR Case No. 16-02246, at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 8, 2017) Applicant provided no
documentation at hearing or in permitted post-hearing submissions of his completing an
installment agreement with the IRS and making more concerted prior efforts to file his
federal tax returns and address his federal tax liens before the initiation of the security
clearance process in 2016. 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts, and implicitly where applicable the timely filing of tax
returns. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)  In Applicant’s case,
his late filing of his federal tax returns after the initiation of the security clearance
process and modest efforts in addressing his outstanding federal tax returns with the
benefit of an installment agreement with the IRS are not enough to facilitate favorable
findings and conclusions with respect to raised security concerns. 
Whole-Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. He has shown insufficient 
progress to date in addressing his tax returns and tax liens covered in the SOR to merit
positive overall credit. What general contributions he has made to his current employer
are not enough to overcome historical trust and judgment issues associated with his
failure to timely file his federal tax returns over the course several years (2010-2014)
and his incurrence of federal tax liens that are still far from resolution.   
Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing his finances reflect too little
evidence of restored financial responsibility and judgment to overcome reasonable
doubts about his trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to protect classified information.
See AG ¶ 18. Conclusions are warranted that his finances are insufficiently stabilized at
this time to meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance.    
Unfavorable conclusions are entered with respect to the allegations covered by
SOR ¶¶  1.a-1.e of the SOR. Eligibility to hold a security clearance under the facts and
circumstances of this case is inconsistent with the national interest.
7
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:                           Against Applicant
  
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
  
9
10
