 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 16-02557 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s information is not sufficient to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
raised by his financial problems and failure to timely file his federal and state income tax 
returns. His request for eligibility to occupy a position of public trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On October 28, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for public trust position for his job 
with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators at the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
 
 
2 
 
 
Facility (DOD CAF) were unable to determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests 
of national security to grant Applicant’s request for a position of trust.1  
 
On April 28, 2016, the DOD CAF issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts raising trustworthiness concerns addressed through the adjudicative 
guideline (AG) for financial considerations (Guideline F). At the time the SOR was written, 
adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued a new set of AGs, effective for all security clearance adjudications conducted on 
or after June 8, 2017. I have based my decision in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.2  
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision without 
a hearing. On July 19, 2017, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) sent Applicant a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support of the 
SOR. Applicant received the FORM on August 23, 2017, and had 30 days from the date 
of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to submit 
additional information in response to the FORM.4 Applicant did not respond to the FORM 
or enter any objection to it. The record closed on September 22, 2017, and I received the 
case for decision on January 10, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant did not file or pay his 
federal and state income taxes as required for tax years 2003 through 2010 (SOR 1.a); 
that he owes $17,520 for a federal tax lien entered against him in January 2013 (SOR 
1.b); and that he owes $1,419 (SOR 1.c) and $756 (SOR 1.e) for state tax liens entered 
against him in August 2013 and August 2008, respectively. The SOR further alleged that 
Applicant owes $3,154 for a child support arrearage placed for collection (SOR 1.d); and 
that he owes $5,790 for five other delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.f – 1.j). (FORM, 
Item 1) 
 
 In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, all of the SOR 
debts except SOR 1.e and 1.j. As to SOR 1.e, Applicant averred he was the victim of 
identity theft by his own brother. He claimed no knowledge of the debt at SOR 1.j. In his 
e-QIP, Applicant disclosed the information underlying the allegations at SOR 1.a – 1.d, 
1.f and 1.g. Department Counsel submitted two credit reports and court records that 
further document all of the SOR allegations. Additionally, Applicant discussed his debts 
and his income tax filings with a government investigator in two subject interviews in 
                                                 
1 Required by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive). 
 
2 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
3 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on eight enclosed exhibits (Items 
1 – 8). 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
February 2016. (FORM, Items 2 – 8) In addition to the facts established by the 
Government’s information and by Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and employed by a defense contractor in a position that 
requires eligibility for a position of trust. Applicant’s employer supports aspects of the 
health care system used by members of the military, and his duties include safeguarding 
personally identifiable information (PII) associated with the health care system’s 
constituents. Applicant has worked for his current employer since June 2009. He was 
unemployed for the three preceding months after losing his job due to a reduction in force. 
He had worked in the banking industry since at least 2004. Applicant has a good 
reputation in the workplace for professionalism and reliability. (FORM, Items 2 – 4) 
 
 Applicant has three children, ages 10, 17, and 6. The delinquent student loans 
addressed in SOR 1.f and 1.g were obtained for the education of his oldest child. The 
debts appear to have been consolidated in another education loan in May 2016, requiring 
a $35 monthly payment. Applicant claimed that he is making regular payments and 
provided an email confirmation of a $40 payment made to that creditor in June 2017. 
(FORM, Item 2) 
 
 Applicant admitted owing a child support arrearage caused by his period of 
unemployment. He also claimed he has been making payments through payroll 
deductions. He did not provide any documents to corroborate his claims in this regard. 
(FORM, Item 2) 
 
 Applicant admitted he did not file his tax returns or pay his taxes between 2003 
and 2010. He stated that he followed the advice of a tax preparer in 2003, who told him 
he did not have to file returns based on his finances at the time. Applicant did not explain 
why he continued to follow that advice for the next several years. Applicant claims he has 
resolved his state and federal tax reporting obligations and that he is making regular 
payments on the tax liens that resulted from his failure to file his returns. The only 
information he presented to support his claims consists of a money order receipt for a 
June 2017 payment of $70 to the pertinent state tax authority. (FORM, Items 2 – 4) 
 
 Applicant claimed that the state tax debt alleged at SOR 1.e resulted from acts of 
identity theft perpetrated by his brother. He also attributed the debt at SOR 1.h to identity 
theft. Applicant did not present any information that would support his claims in this 
regard. (FORM, Item 2) 
 
 Applicant claimed that he is making, or will be making, payments on the debts at 
SOR 1.f – 1.i. He did not support his claims with any corroborating information. (FORM, 
Item 2) 
  
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 Eligibility for a position of public trust must be based on a determination that it is 
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.5 All such adjudications 
must adhere to the procedural protections in the Directive before any adverse 
determination may be made. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors, commonly referred to 
as the “whole-person” concept, listed in the guidelines at AG ¶ 2(d).7 The presence or 
absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, 
specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of eligibility 
for a position of trust. 
 
 The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on 
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an 
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a position of 
trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A person who has access to 
sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on 
trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will 
protect sensitive information as his or her own. Any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s 
suitability for access should be resolved in favor of the Government. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The facts established by this record reasonably raise a trustworthiness concern 
about Applicant’s finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
  Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
                                                 
5 Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, Appendix A, Paragraph 1(d).  
 
6 Directive, 6.3. 
 
7  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, 
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's 
age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the 
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations); and 19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, 
or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required). Available information shows that all of the debts alleged in the SOR are 
attributed to Applicant. None of those debts has been resolved. 
 
I also have considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by 
predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due 
debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file 
or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant disputes two of the debts alleged in the SOR as either the result of 
identity theft by his brother, or as unverifiable. He did not provide any information to 
corroborate his identity theft claim or to establish he had filed any disputes with creditors 
or credit reporting companies. Applicant has not sought assistance or counseling from 
any debt management company or other financial professionals. He also did not show 
that he has been making payments on any of his debts. The most he has shown is that, 
in June 2017, he made one payment to his student loan creditor and one payment to a 
state tax authority. There is no record here of consistent, reliable efforts to pay his past-
due debts. Further, Applicant has not posited an acceptable explanation for ignoring his 
federal and state income tax reporting obligations for seven years. As to unforeseen 
events or uncontrollable circumstances, the record reflects only that Applicant was 
unemployed for three months almost nine years ago before he started working for his 
current employer. 
 
All of the foregoing shows there is no basis on which to apply any of the Guideline 
F mitigating conditions. Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised 
under this guideline. 
 
 I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors 
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-
person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant had the burden of producing sufficient reliable 
evidence to resolve doubts about his trustworthiness and judgment raised by the 
Government’s information about his finances. He did not meet his burden. Because 
protection of the interests of national security is the principal focus of these adjudications, 
any remaining doubts must be resolved against the granting of eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for public trust eligibility is 
denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
