 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02982 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Although the personal conduct security concerns are resolved for Applicant, he did 
not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial security concerns arising from his 
delinquent debts. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 14, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) 
in connection with his employment in the defense industry. On November 17, 2016, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, 
personal conduct.1  
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 2, 2017, and elected a decision on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. On August 15, 2017, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including documents identified as 
Items 1 through 8. Applicant received the FORM on August 24, 2017. He was afforded 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, and did not object to the Government’s 
evidence. The SOR and the answer (Items 1 and 3) are the pleadings in the case. Item 2 
is a procedural document. Items 4 through 8 are admitted into evidence without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on December 18, 2017.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). The new AGs became effective June 8, 2017 for 
all decisions after that date, and they supersede the AGs that Applicant received with the 
SOR.2 Any changes resulting from the implementation of the new AGs did not affect my 
decision in this case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.l through 1.n. He denied SOR ¶¶ 
1.d and 1.o. He “admitted” SOR ¶ 2.a, but gave an explanation which I construe as a 
denial. I have incorporated his admissions and other comments into the findings of fact. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He has been married twice, from 1995 to 1999, and again 
from 2000 to 2004. He has two grown children from his first marriage, ages 21 and 25. 
He honorably served in the United States Army for two-and-a-half years (1997-1999). He 
has a high school diploma and has taken some on-line courses. (Item 4) 
 
 Since August 2015, Applicant has worked as a driver for a defense contractor on 
a military installation. Before then, Applicant had sporadic periods of employment. He was 
laid off from his job as a laborer in January 2007, and was then unemployed until April 
2007. He then worked in a convenience store until May 2008, when he took a new job. 
He was laid off when that contract ended, in March 2009. He was then unemployed for 
18 months, until September 2010. He spent most of the next year working in customer 
service. He changed jobs in mid-2011 but was laid off at the end of the contract, in 
January 2012. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant worked in retail from March 2012 to September 2013, when he was laid 
off.3 He was then unemployed again until February 2014. He then worked for a security 
company for a year. He changed jobs in February 2015, but was terminated two months 
                                                          
2 The new AGs are available on the DOHA website at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/DIRECTIVE%202017.pdf.  
 
3 Applicant reported on his SCA that he was terminated from this position for performance issues, but 
clarified in his November 2015 background interview that he was laid off. (Item 4, Item 8 at 3)  
 
3 
 
 
later due to performance issues. He was then unemployed until beginning his current job, 
in August 2015. (Item 4) 
 
Applicant’s background investigation included an October 2015 credit report. (Item 
5) The Government’s evidence also includes more recent credit reports, from August 
2016 and August 2017. (Items 5, 6, 7) He also had several personal subject interviews. 
(Item 8) 
 
Applicant’s credit reports detail the 14 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, most 
of which Applicant admitted. They total about $28,000. These include: four federal student 
loans in collection (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, for $10,818; 1.b, for $7,972; 1.c, for $1,415; and 1.k, for 
$3,998); several phone or cable bills in collection (SOR ¶¶1.d, for $1,095; 1.e, for $868, 
1.g, for $443; 1.i, for $226; and 1.m, for $100); two past-due insurance bills (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 
for $560; and 1.n, for $115); as well as other accounts in collection (SOR ¶¶ 1.h, for $280; 
1.j, for $120; and 1.l, a $30 debt owed to a local government).4  
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.d, asserting it was his ex-wife’s account. It is 
nonetheless listed on his credit reports. He said he was attempting to pay other debts, 
such as SOR ¶ 1.i, 1.j, 1.l and 1.m, but he provided no corroborating documentation. 
 
Applicant disclosed on his SCA that he learned in 2014 that he owed about $100 
in past-due state income taxes from tax year 2012. He also stated he paid the debt in 
August 2015. He did not indicate on his SCA that he had failed to file the return, only that 
he owed money. (Item 4 at 40) The summary of Applicant’s background interview, if 
accurate, reflects that he did not file his 2012 state income tax return because he thought 
whatever he might have owed had been deducted by his employer. (Item 8 at 4) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.o alleged that Applicant failed to file his 2012 state income tax return as 
required. Applicant denied the allegation, and stated that the return had been filed and 
any tax debt satisfied. He provided a typed but unsigned 2012 state tax return for his state 
of residence. If accurate, it reflects that he was due a $242 refund. There is no indication 
of when, or if, the return had in fact been filed. (Item 3)  
 
 Applicant did not offer an explanation for his debts with his answer. The only source 
of information on this point is his interview summary (Item 4), in which he discussed his 
debts at length. Applicant attributed his overall financial difficulties to his unstable 
employment. (Item 8 at 12)  
 
Applicant’s interview summary did not address his monthly income, expenses or 
his assets. Even if it had, that information would now be move than two years old. 
                                                          
4 Item 5 lists SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.n. Item 6 lists SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.j. Item 7 lists SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.k, and 1.m, as well as a new past due phone bill for $194. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant did not provide any information or documents about his finances in his answer, 
and he did not answer the Government’s FORM. 
 
On his August 2015 SCA, Applicant disclosed his $100 tax debt for tax year 2012 
(discussed above). He did not disclose any other financial delinquencies on his SCA, as 
required, in answer to questions about his financial record. (Item 4). 
 
 In his interview, Applicant was asked if he had delinquent accounts, and he 
answered in the affirmative. He was then confronted with his various delinquent accounts, 
as reflected on his October 2015 credit report. (Item 5, Item 8 at 5-12)  
 
 In SOR ¶ 2.a, the Government alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose 
any of his delinquent debts on his SCA in answer to questions about his financial record. 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated, “I admit, was a misinterpretation of the 
question on my behalf.” (Item 3). Though he did not elaborate, I construe that answer as 
sufficient to deny the allegation of deliberate falsification.  
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.5 As noted by 
the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”6 
 
 The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
                                                          
5 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”).  
 
6 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.7 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could rise security concerns. Disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a): “inability to satisfy debts”; and 19(c): “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations” are applicable, given the record evidence of Applicant’s delinquent 
debts.  
 
With respect to SOR ¶ 1.o, the Government did not prove that Applicant failed to 
file his 2012 state income tax return as required. Applicant disclosed on his SCA that he 
learned in 2014 that he owed about $100 in state taxes, and that he paid that debt. He 
did not indicate on his SCA that he failed to file his 2012 state income tax return, only that 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
he owed money. The only such evidence is a reference in Item 8, the summary of 
Applicant’s background interview. Further, he provided a 2012 state income tax return 
reflecting that he had been due a small refund.  
 
Given the record evidence, AG ¶ 19(f) (failure to file annual Federal state or local 
income tax returns as required) is not established. It is also an isolated incident that does 
not suggest that Applicant has an ongoing problem filing his tax returns.  
 
The financial considerations guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquencies are ongoing and are not isolated. He provided 
insufficient evidence from which to conclude that his financial issues are unlikely to recur 
and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 
¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s unstable employment in the years before he began his current job 
(August 2015) likely contributed to his financial issues and his numerous delinquent 
debts. The first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) therefore has some application. However, Applicant 
provided insufficient information to establish that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) does not fully apply. 
 
 The only document Applicant provided with his answer concerned SOR ¶ 1.o. He 
provided no updated information, and no documents, in response to the FORM. Applicant 
did not establish that he “initiated and is adhering to good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts” as required. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 On his SCA, though Applicant disclosed a small tax debt in answer to another 
question, he failed to disclose that he had any other delinquent debts, such as his past- 
due federal student loans, phone or cable bills in collection, and other debts. Applicant 
denied the SOR allegation that he deliberately failed to disclose those debts on his SCA, 
and said he misinterpreted the question. He also acknowledged in his background 
interview that he knew he should have answered “YES” to questions on the SCA about 
his financial record. 
 
 The Government has established that Applicant should have disclosed his 
delinquencies on his SCA. But they have not established that Applicant’s omissions were 
deliberate. I therefore cannot find that AG ¶ 16(a) applies.  
 
 Even if it did, Applicant acknowledged his error in his background interview before 
being confronted about his specific delinquencies. In this case, that is sufficient to satisfy 
AG ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment or falsification before being confronted with the facts). I therefore resolve 
SOR ¶ 2.a for Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. While the personal conduct security 
concerns are resolved, Applicant did not provide sufficient documented information that 
he is resolving his debts in a good-faith, responsible manner, and security concerns about 
his financial situation remain unresolved. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.                       
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
