 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01900 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se1 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his continuing family 
connections in Iraq, and threats he and they received while he was working with U.S. 
forces there. Based upon a review of the record as a whole, national security eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On February 26, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 15, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B: Foreign Influence. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
                                            
1 Applicant hired an attorney to assist him in filing an answer to the SOR. The attorney did not 
represent him in this hearing. (Tr. 5) 
 
 
 
 
2 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DoD after September 1, 
2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued 
after that date.2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 28, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on March 20, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on July 7, 2017, setting the hearing for August 2, 2017. Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence. Applicant testified, called 
one witness, and offered his Exhibits (AE) 1 and 2 into evidence. All exhibits were 
admitted without objection. 
 
 I took administrative notice of facts concerning Iraq, set forth in the Government’s 
Request for Administrative Notice, which was marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 and included 
in the record. (Tr. 15) DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 10, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is employed as a linguist by a U.S. defense contractor and is applying 
for a security clearance in connection with that work. He admitted the allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, concerning two brothers and two sisters who are citizens and residents of 
Iraq.  
 
 Applicant denied that he was threatened by terrorists “numerous times,” as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.c. He stated that the threat occurred only once and it was to his family while 
he was working for the U.S. forces after graduating from high school. (2016 Answer) 
However, that Answer is inconsistent with Applicant’s statement in a January 2011 
Counterintelligence-Focused Security Screening Questionnaire (CFSSQ), in which he 
said that he was “threatened multiple times by anti-coalition insurgents because he 
worked with U.S. Forces.” (GE 4) He had also stated that insurgents left letters at his 
family’s house and left threatening messages on his cellphone. (GE 4)  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. He was born in Iraq. He attended high school and college 
there, earning a bachelor’s degree 2006. He never served in the Iraqi army, but from 
March 2005 to November 2007, he worked as a local-hire linguist supporting U.S. military 
operations in Iraq. He was 25 years old when he started working as a linguist. (Tr. 16-19; 
GE 3; Answer) 
 
 Based on his work with the U.S. forces in dangerous situations and specific threats 
to Applicant and his family, Army officers recommended that Applicant move to the United 
States. In 2007 he applied for and was granted refugee status for himself under the 
                                            
2 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 
8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
3 
Special Immigrant Visa program for Iraqi and Afghani translators/interpreters.3 He entered 
the United States through Syria in March 2008. (Answer)  
 
 Between December 2008 and July 2010, Applicant worked as a Category I linguist 
for the U.S. forces in Iraq. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in October 2013. He was 
again hired to work as a contract linguist supporting U.S. forces deployed in Iraq from 
April 2015 until August 2016. (GE 1; Answer) He said that he did not experience threats 
or hostility during his return trips to Iraq from 2008 to 2010, and 2015 to 2016. (Answer) 
 
 Since arriving in the United States, Applicant has worked and continues to work as 
a medical interpreter/translator for hospitals. He also worked as a sales associate for a 
department store. (GE 1) 
 
 Applicant has been married to his wife for three years. She was born in Iraq. She 
immigrated to the United States in 1995. She is a naturalized U.S. citizen. (Tr. 19; GE 1) 
They met in 2010 through their work as translators. (Tr. 21) All of her family members are 
citizens and residents of the United States, except her mother who is a U.S. permanent 
resident. (Tr. 40) She worked in Iraq as an interpreter for the U.S. forces from 2009 to 
2010. She is currently applying for a security clearance. They married in January 2014. 
(Tr. 38-40; GE 1) They purchased a house with the monies they earned as translators. 
(Answer) 
  
 Applicant’s parents were born and raised in Iraq. His father is deceased. His 
mother is a citizen of Iraq and resident of the United States. She lives with Applicant’s 
brother, a citizen and resident of the United States. (Tr. 25)  
 
 Applicant has nine siblings, five brothers and four sisters. Two brothers and two 
sisters are citizens and residents of Iraq. One of those brothers drives a truck and the 
other brother is an attorney. He speaks to these brothers about once a month or less. The 
last time he saw them was in 2008, before he immigrated to the United States. (Tr. 25-
28) Both of his sisters are teachers. He speaks to one of them every other month; he 
speaks to the other sister every other week. She visited him in 2014. (Tr. 28-30) These 
siblings were aware that Applicant was in Iraq between 2008 and 2010, and between 
2015 and 2016. (Tr. 30-31.  
 
 Two of Applicant’s siblings, a brother and sister, reside in Sweden. The brother 
living in the United States, as mentioned above, worked in Iraq as a translator for the U.S. 
forces. (Tr. 35; GE 2) According to Applicant’s 2015 SCA, another brother is a resident of 
the United States,4 and another sister is a citizen of Iraq and a resident of the United 
States. (GE 1) 
                                            
3 During an April 2015 interview, Applicant indicated that his family moved to Syria in 2006 after 
receiving threats from an unknown group. They returned to Iraq in 2009. (Answer; GE 2) 
 
4 The citizenship of this brother is unknown. 
 
 
 
 
4 
 Applicant submitted numerous recommendation letters and certificates of 
appreciation, attesting to his capabilities and contributions as an interpreter and 
translator. Several officers with whom he has served stated that Applicant’s language 
skills, and his knowledge of Iraq and its culture, were an invaluable asset to their mission 
accomplishment. These officers consider him to be extremely responsible and 
trustworthy. They recognize that Applicant has put his life in danger while performing his 
job, including when his vehicle was bombed. (Answer; AE 2)  
 
Iraq 
I have taken administrative notice of facts contained in U.S. Government 
pronouncements concerning the state of Iraq, as outlined in HE I, including the following: 
Iraq faces many challenges fueled by sectarian and ethnic divisions. Numerous terrorist 
groups are increasingly active throughout Iraq. The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant 
(ISIL or Islamic State) controls some of the country’s territory. Threats of kidnapping and 
violence are high, and the Department of State warns U.S. citizens that all travel to Iraq 
should be avoided. Additionally, human-rights related problems including 
disappearances, torture, denial of fair public trial, and limits on freedom of speech and 
expression have been noted. (HE I.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
 
 
 
5 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in AG 
¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline includes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, that factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
Applicant has ongoing and commendable familial connections with four siblings, 
who are residents and citizens of Iraq. These relationships create a heightened risk of 
foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because terrorists and insurgents in Iraq have 
already threatened Applicant and his family, and may seek intelligence or engage in 
behaviors that are hostile to the United States’ interests. Applicant’s relationship with his 
siblings also creates a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and his desire to help family members living 
in Iraq. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
  
  After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
security concerns based on the facts: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant has ongoing and regular communications with his four siblings, who are 
lifelong residents and citizens of Iraq. Without disclosing unnecessary details, Applicant 
 
 
 
 
7 
and his family have been threatened in the past due to his activities supporting U.S. 
interests, and he left the country as a refugee in 2007 as a result of such threats. Although 
Applicant provided brave and honorable support for U.S. operations in Iraq between 2005 
and 2007, 2008 to 2010, and again from 2015 to 2016, he has done so under conditions 
that placed and could continue to place his family members in Iraq under continuing risk. 
He is a loyal and dedicated U.S. citizen, but the heightened risk and potential for conflict 
of interest situations created by his family circumstances remain insufficiently mitigated 
under any of these conditions. 
 
A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States.” Applicant has established some 
connections to the United States. In 2008, he immigrated to the United States from Iraq, 
and he became a U.S. citizen in 2013. Some immediate family members are citizens 
and/or residents of the United States. His wife is a U.S. citizen. They recently purchased 
a home in the United States. These facts demonstrate some deep connections to the 
United States; however, Applicant’s two long deployments in Iraq, after becoming a U.S. 
citizen, also demonstrate his longstanding commitments to Iraq, the place of his birth and 
upbringing. 
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The Guideline B security concerns do not 
arise from any questionable conduct by Applicant, but rather circumstances that are 
normal and commendable results of his family situation. There is mitigating evidence 
weighing in favor of granting Applicant a security clearance. He is a mature person, who 
has lived in the United States for nine years, at least part of the time, and has been a 
naturalized citizen since 2013. His spouse is also a U.S. citizen. In his employment, from 
 
 
 
 
8 
2005 to 2007, 2008 to 2010, and 2014 to 2016, he provided vital and direct support to the 
U.S. armed forces as a linguist. He placed his life in danger, at least one time, while 
working there. There is no evidence that he has ever taken any action that could cause 
potential harm to the United States. He takes his loyalty to the United States seriously. 
Applicant’s former supervisors and colleagues assess him as loyal, trustworthy, and 
responsible.  
 
However, there are significant factors that weigh against granting Applicant a 
security clearance. First, a Guideline B decision concerning Iraq must take into 
consideration the geopolitical situation and dangers there.5 Iraq is a dangerous place 
because of violence from terrorists and insurgents. These entities continue to threaten 
the Iraqi Government, the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed Forces, and those 
who cooperate with and assist the United States. Although the Iraqi Government is a U.S 
ally, it does not fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many instances. 
Applicant and his family personally experienced terrorist’s threats while living in Iraq, 
which resulted in his family moving to another country. Second, Applicant had numerous 
connections to Iraq before he immigrated to the United States in 2008, and has spent 
substantial periods in Iraq since then. Third, he maintains regular contact with family 
members in Iraq. Applicant’s family living in Iraq is aware that he has assisted U.S. forces 
in Iraq, and a family member could inadvertently disclose that assistance. A terrorist or 
insurgent could learn about his work with the U.S. forces and retaliate against his relatives 
or attempt to coerce Applicant using his relatives to compromise classified information. 
Fourth, an additional matter of security concern is Applicant’s inconsistent statements 
about the threats he received because of his support for U.S. forces. I am not satisfied 
that he was completely frank about his description of the number and content of those 
threats.6   
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all pertinent facts 
and circumstances in the context of the whole-person, including his inconsistent answers 
regarding the number of times he and his family received threats from unknown groups 
or terrorists, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the significant security concerns 
pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility must be resolved 
in favor of the national security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
                                            
5 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
6 I have limited my consideration of Applicant’s inconsistent statements to my assessment of his 
credibility and in the whole-person concept.  
 
 
 
 
9 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
                                        
         
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
