 
1 
 
 
            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01697 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 4, 
2014. On June 3, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 23, 2016, admitting most of the SOR 
allegations except for SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d, under Guideline F. He stated that most of 
the debts were in litigation, and a determination would be made at an August 2016 
hearing about whether he or his ex-wife was responsible for them. Applicant  attached 
several documents to his Answer showing that he completed financial counseling, 
satisfied the tax lien at SOR ¶1.b, and paid SOR 1.d in full. He also requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 25, 2017. On 
November 7, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for December 7, 2017. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. GE 5 was not admitted in evidence as Appellant’s counsel’s objection was 
sustained. At the hearing, Applicant testified and his attorney submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through P, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on December 14, 2017.  
 
  Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant is 48 years old. He obtained a bachelor’s degree in engineering 
technology and has been employed with a defense contractor since April 2010 
maintaining alarm systems and electronic security systems aboard a military installation. 
His brief military service was cut short when he injured his knee in initial training, and he 
was administratively discharged from the U.S. Air Force. (Tr. 24) He was married in 
1993 and divorced in 2013, and has one daughter, age 22. (Tr. 23)  
 
Applicant reported delinquent debts including $113,000 in student loans in 
section 26 of his December 2014 SCA. He claimed he was disputing this with his ex-
wife to determine what amount of the student loan she should pay. He also stated “I am 
working with the student loan office and hiring an attorney to force my ex-wife to pay the 
portion of her student loan.” Applicant disclosed that he filed a successful innocent 
spouse claim for some unpaid federal taxes with the IRS, since his ex-wife handled all 
of their finances and tax returns.3 She misled him into believing the bills were being paid 
timely.  
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s December 4, 2014 
Security Clearance Application (SCA).  
 
3 Tr. at 28, 36. 
 
 
3 
 
 
The SOR alleged nine delinquent debts totaling approximately $187,000. (Tr. 9) 
The largest delinquency concerns student loans. The SOR alleged in ¶1.c that Applicant 
is indebted in the approximate amount of $153,190 [with accrued interest] for student 
loans placed for collection. Also, SOR ¶ 1.h alleges that Applicant has another student 
loan that is 120 days or more past due in the amount of $3,239. Applicant admitted to 
these two delinquent student loans, but stated that SOR ¶ 1.c is in his ex-wife’s name 
and he cannot access it online since it is under her social security number, and he does 
not have the password. In fact, it was a consolidated student loan in both spouses’ 
names. Further, he suggested that this would be resolved at an upcoming divorce court 
appearance scheduled for August 2016.4 It was not.  
 
 The SOR alleges in ¶ 1.b that Applicant is indebted for a state tax lien entered 
against him in the amount of $1,066. Applicant denied this allegation SOR and he 
produced evidence with his Answer documenting that this lien was paid and satisfied on 
December 4, 2014. He also attached documentary evidence that SOR ¶ 1.d was paid in 
full. Applicant testified credibly that he had always relied on his ex-wife to handle their 
finances, including filing state and federal income tax returns. She had neglected to pay 
some state income taxes, which resulted in the tax lien. (Tr. 26, 43) Applicant first 
learned of his delinquencies when he pulled his own credit report when they separated 
in January 2013 after 20 years together. (Tr. 58)  
 
 Through counsel, Applicant submitted numerous documents at the hearing, AE 
A-P. The divorce decree entered in May 2013 allocated the debts that the parties were 
responsible for paying. (AE N) The divorce court determined he was responsible for 
65% of the consolidated student loan principal, and she was responsible for 35%. (Tr. 
29, and AE N) Although it is ambiguous, paragraph 4 of the contract of settlement, 
attached to the final divorce decree, seems to require that “the husband pay his student 
loans, which are currently in both parties’ names, and agrees to hold his wife harmless 
for same.”5 Applicant testified that the drafter of this document was representing his ex-
wife and he was not a divorce attorney. Applicant did not have a divorce attorney. (Tr. 
58) Not surprisingly, a contentious dispute ensued between Applicant and his ex-wife 
over who was responsible for what portion of their consolidated student loans. (Tr. 28 
and AE M, N, O, and P) Applicant filed unsuccessful motions to hold his ex-wife in 
contempt for her failure to cooperate. (AE M and AE O) 
 
 The divorce court held a hearing on March 21, 2017, and in its August 31, 2017, 
Final Order entered the following findings of fact: The parties divorced on May 10, 2013. 
In 2003, they consolidated their respective student loans. The application for the 
consolidation indicates that Applicant had student loans for $41,237. [Ex-wife] had 
student loans for $15,300. They had a joint loan for $11,527. The current total amount 
of the consolidated student loans is approximately $122,000. “Neither party has been 
                                                          
4 Answer to SOR dated June 23, 2016.  
 
5 AE N. 
 
 
4 
 
 
making any payments on the student loans.”6 The court ordered that the parties divide 
the principal amount of $68,065 so that Applicant shall be responsible for 65%, and she 
shall be responsible for 35% of the principal amount. The court declined to make any 
ruling with regard to who should pay interest. Thus, the issue has been litigated and 
Applicant lost. He is responsible for 65% of the student loans. Applicant testified that he 
made payments on the consolidated student loans for seven or eight months following 
the May 2013 divorce. Then, he just stopped. SOR ¶ 1.c has not been resolved.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a was a judgment in the amount of $1,390 entered against Applicant by 
a bank. Applicant’s counsel produced evidence that this judgment has been satisfied. 
(AE D). SOR ¶ 1.e alleged a charged-off debt of $3,433 by another bank. Applicant 
testified that this is a joint credit-card debt and he disputes it because he did not agree 
to pay joint debts. (Tr. 30-32) Similarly, SOR ¶ 1.f is another disputed joint debt. SOR ¶ 
1.g alleges a joint credit-card debt for $2,180. Applicant also disputes this joint debt. 
SOR ¶ 1.i is a debt for $15,007 resulting from the repossession of a recreational vehicle 
(RV) in 2007. (Tr. 35) Applicant testified that he moved across the country in summer 
2007 to try to save his marriage. The economy crashed and he could not keep up with 
payments on his RV. (Tr. 53) It was repossessed shortly thereafter. Applicant testified 
that his ex-wife would know about any deficiency debt since she handled all the 
finances. This RV-related debt has fallen off his latest credit report. Merely waiting for a 
debt to drop off a credit report by the passage of time is not a factor in the applicant’s 
favor. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001). 
 
Applicant presently earns approximately $54,000 per year. He has a budget, and 
usually has $500 - $600 left over each month after paying his expenses. (Tr. 37) He 
presently uses no credit cards and described his purchasing habits as cash and carry. 
He also submitted six positive character reference letters, including one from a 
squadron commander. (AE A) Applicant had credit counseling, including bankruptcy 
information in April 2016. (AE B and AE C) A senior engineer testified by telephone that 
Applicant is a man of integrity and is trustworthy and reliable. (Tr. 17) 
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
                                                          
6 Paragraph 10, AE O.  
 
 
5 
 
 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
6 
 
 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds…  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;    
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
 (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state or local income tax  
           returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state or local income tax as required. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, and Answer to the SOR. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f), thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts.7 Applicant has not met that burden. Although, he recently hired an 
attorney who successfully mitigated many of the delinquencies, the lion’s share of the 
financial concern is obviously the student loans. The divorce court made it clear that he 
was responsible for 65% in 2013, and reaffirmed Applicant’s responsibility in 2017. 
Applicant has done little or nothing to pay his portion of the student loans in the last four 
years. As a co-signor on the loans, he had a responsibility to reach out to the loan 
holder and ask for forbearance or establish a payment plan. No evidence of any such 
efforts was provided. Instead, Applicant conflates his dispute with his ex-wife into a 
dispute with the loan holder. There can be no reasonable dispute that Applicant owes 
65% of the loan principal.   
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
                                                          
7 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 
 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
 To his credit, Applicant has now hired an attorney and obtained financial 
counseling. He has mitigated SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.f. Thus, AG ¶¶20 (b), (c) and 
(d) are only partially applicable. Applicant’s bitter divorce may have been a condition 
beyond his control, but he has no reasonable dispute with the student loan holder and 
he has not acted responsibly under the circumstances. His student loans remain 
outstanding and unresolved.  
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
8 
 
 
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. He has large outstanding 
balances for student loans. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant’s 
financial problems are under control. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.d and 1.f:      For  Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.e, 1.h and 1.i:       Against Applicant  
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
