 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 16-01320 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Donna Price, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant married a citizen and former resident of Iran who is a permanent U.S. 
resident. She frequently communicates with some of her relatives who are citizens and 
residents of Iran. Some of her relatives in Iran have actively protested against the policies 
of the Iranian Government. Foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. 
Personal conduct and financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. Access to 
classified information is denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On September 22, 2014, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86) (SCA). Government Exhibit (GE) 1. On 
September 3, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 
1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs). On October 18, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued an amended SOR. 
 
The SOR and amended SOR detailed reasons under the Directive that it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
 
2 
                                         
 
clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) 2, 3. Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline B 
(foreign influence) and F (financial considerations). HE 2. The amended SOR deleted the 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.b through 1.f, and added an allegation under Guideline E (personal 
conduct). HE 3.  
 
On September 20, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. HE 4. On November 
29, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On December 1, 2016, Applicant 
responded to the amended SOR. HE 5. On August 15, 2017, the case was assigned to 
me. On September 22, 2017, DOHA issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for 
October 26, 2017. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
Department Counsel offered 7 exhibits; Applicant offered 10 exhibits; there were 
no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. Tr. 19-24; GE 1-7; 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-AE J. On November 3, 2017, DOHA received a copy of the 
hearing transcript. On November 29, 2017, one exhibit was received from Applicant, and 
it was admitted without objection. AE K. On November 30, 2017, the record closed. Tr. 
131. On January 8, 2018, Applicant provided some corrections to the transcript, and the 
corrections were admitted without objection. AE L. 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position on or after June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the previous AGs, and I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the 
amended SOR to include allegations that Applicant has in-laws who are citizens and 
residents of Iran. Tr. 10, 130. Applicant objected to the second amendment of the SOR 
to include information about Applicant’s in-laws living in Iran because the Government 
had ample opportunity to amend the SOR before the hearing. Tr. 10-11, 131. I advised 
the parties that the objection would be considered at the conclusion of the evidence, and 
if a delay was warranted an additional hearing would be scheduled. Tr. 10-11. The SOR 
is further amended to add ¶ 1.b under the foreign influence guideline, which states, 
“Applicant and/or his spouse have close and continuing relationships with his spouse’s 
parents, sister, and brother-in-law, who are citizens and residents of Iran.” Applicant 
indicated an additional hearing would be an unreasonable burden. Tr. 12. Applicant 
subsequently advised a written submission would be made in lieu of another hearing 
session. Tr. 131. Applicant submitted a post-hearing statement. AE K.  
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.    
 
3 
                                         
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning Iran. Tr. 
11; Administrative Notice Request; HE 6. There were no objections to the administrative 
notice documents. Tr. 11. I have block quoted from these documents without footnotes 
and made some minor punctuation corrections.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-
18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of 
facts for administrative notice). See the Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran) section of the 
Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, for the administratively noticed facts concerning 
Iran. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted parts of the SOR and amended SOR allegations, and he denied 
other parts. He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. His admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of 
record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old budget integration analytics manager and defense 
contractor. Tr. 25, 122; GE 1. Applicant was born in Russia in 1971. Tr. 25. His 
grandfather died shortly after Applicant was born; his father left Russia three weeks after 
Applicant was born, and Applicant and his mother lost track of him. Tr. 25-30. Applicant 
does not have any siblings. Tr. 25-30. Applicant did not serve in the military of the Soviet 
Union or Russia. Tr. 73-74. In 1995, he entered the United States at the age of 24 on a 
student visa. Tr. 71-73. In 1997, he received a U.S. bachelor’s degree. Tr. 72. In 2000, 
he earned a U.S. master’s degree. Tr. 35, 78; GE 1.  
 
In 2001, Applicant married a U.S. citizen, and in 2007, he divorced her. Tr. 37, 79-
81. In 2005, Applicant was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. Tr. 81. In 2009, he joined the 
U.S. Navy Reserve. Tr. 44. During eight years of Navy service, he accumulated four years 
of active duty points. Tr. 45. He attempted to renounce his Russian citizenship. Tr. 62-63, 
82-83. The Russian Government did not provide confirmation that Applicant’s citizenship 
was renounced. Tr. 86-88. In 2011, his Russian passport was destroyed in the presence 
of his security officer. Tr. 63; AE H at 5. Applicant has not returned to Russia since 1996. 
Tr. 64. In 2013, his mother passed away in the United States. Tr. 47. The SOR does not 
allege and the record does not establish that Applicant’s connections to Russia raise a 
security concern. 
  
                                            
2The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or locations 
in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information. 
 
4 
                                         
 
Foreign Influence  
 
In May 2016, Applicant married Ms. I in the United States. (This was his third 
marriage.) SOR response; SOR ¶ 1.a. She was born in Iran, is a citizen of Iran, and 
resides in the United States. Tr. 56. Ms. I received a master’s degree in Iran. Tr. 107. Ms. 
I and her husband entered the United States from Iran in July 2014. Tr. 108-110. In 2015, 
Applicant met Ms. I though an Internet social group. Tr. 56. Ms. I is 34 years old. Tr. 124. 
She was employed in a store when she met Applicant. Tr. 107. In April 2015, Ms. I and 
her husband were divorced. Tr. 108-110. Ms. I is currently a permanent U.S. resident, 
and she intends to apply for U.S. citizenship in May 2018. Tr. 114. When Ms. I moved in 
with Applicant, he disclosed his relationship with her to his security officer, and he 
disclosed his marital plans to his security officer shortly before he married her. Tr. 57; 
SOR response. Ms. I most recently traveled to Iran in September or October 2015, and 
she retains an Iranian passport. Tr. 125. Ms. I does not intend to visit Iran. Tr. 60-61. 
 
Ms. I’s parents, brother, uncle, and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of Iran. 
Tr. 58, 111. Ms. I frequently communicates with her parents, brother, and sister-in-law. 
Tr. 112. Ms. I, her sister, and her uncle are or were politically active in Iran. Tr. 113. Ms. 
I’s uncle was imprisoned in Iran for about two years because of his political statements. 
Tr. 57-58, 113. Ms. I’s mother works in a store, and her father is retired and receiving a 
pension from the Iranian Government. Tr. 59, 127. In 2011, Ms. I’s parents demonstrated 
against the regime. Tr. 59. Iran did not permit Ms. I’s parents to visit the United States at 
the same time apparently because Iranian officials were concerned if they were permitted 
to leave simultaneously, they would not return to Iran. Tr. 60.  
 
In October 2017, Ms. I’s mother visited Applicant and Ms. I in the United States. 
Tr. 60. Ms. I’s mother came to the United States for the birth of Applicant and Ms. I’s child, 
and Ms. I is very close to her mother. Tr. 116. Ms. I’s family knows Applicant is a U.S. 
Navy officer. Tr. 61. Ms. I’s family in Iran has actively opposed the Iranian Government. 
Tr. 65, 116. Her uncle has been jailed for his political beliefs. Tr. 65. Applicant said if the 
Iranians attempted to use Ms. I’s family to coerce him for classified information, he would 
report the attempt to security officials. Tr. 65. Applicant believes it is unlikely that the 
Iranians would make such attempt. Tr. 65. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a alleges Applicant has a charged-off debt for $16,425. Applicant 
financed a vehicle for his first spouse. Tr. 41. His first spouse was awarded the vehicle in 
the divorce in 2007. Tr. 41. Applicant was unaware that his first spouse did not pay the 
debt for several years. AE B2; SOR response. On February 7, 2016, Applicant wrote the 
creditor seeking validation of the debt. AE B2. Applicant paid the creditor $2,000 to settle 
the debt. SOR response. On March 23, 2016, the creditor wrote that the “account has 
been settled in full.” Tr. 41-42; AE B3; SOR response. Applicant is credited with resolving 
this debt.  
 
Applicant had a substantial arrearage from his divorce because he was unable to 
afford the alimony payments. Tr. 84-85; AE H at 13-14. He had several periods of 
 
5 
                                         
 
unemployment and underemployment after his divorce. AE H. When his income 
improved, he paid the arrearage. Tr. 86. The financial records he provided establish a 
track record of paying his debts.   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant served in Afghanistan from July 2013 to February 2014. Tr. 88-89. When 
Applicant was 43 years old, he engaged in a romantic relationship with Ms. A, a 20-year-
old citizen of Afghanistan, while he was deployed in Afghanistan as a U.S. Navy Reserve 
Officer holding a security clearance. Tr. 49-51, 89-91. Applicant was aware that Afghan 
law prohibited his marriage to Ms. A. Tr. 91-93. Ms. A could be charged in Afghanistan 
with apostasy for marrying a non-Muslim, and he was placing Ms. A “at risk.” Tr. 91-93. 
Around March 2014, Applicant asked and Ms. A agreed to meet him in F, a former Soviet 
Union republic located near Afghanistan.3 Tr. 96; SOR response. Ms. A’s father initially 
approved of Applicant’s marriage to Ms. A, and later he objected to the marriage when 
he learned of Applicant’s first marriage. Tr. 93-95; AE H at 35.  
 
In April 2014, Applicant married Ms. A in F. Tr. 96. Ms. A told Applicant she needed 
to return to Afghanistan to protect her younger sister from a forced marriage. Tr. 52, 97. 
After two weeks in F, Ms. A returned to Afghanistan for a week, and Applicant went to the 
United States. Tr. 97-98, 106. Ms. A informed Applicant that she and her father were 
placed under house arrest because Ms. A married a non-Muslim. Tr. 53, 97-98. She said 
she needed money for a lawyer. Tr. 53. Applicant transferred approximately $7,000 to 
Ms. A. Tr. 53-54, 100; SOR response; AE H at 51.  
 
Applicant returned to F from the United States. Tr. 103-106. Applicant learned that 
Ms. A was married before Applicant married her, and she had an 18-month-old child with 
her husband in Afghanistan. Tr. 54. In May 2014, Applicant divorced Ms. A in F. Tr. 55, 
103-106; SOR response; AE H at 14, 43.   
 
After he left F, Ms. A contacted him several times seeking additional funds. Tr. 56. 
He did not continue his relationship with Ms. A. Tr. 56. At some point in Applicant’s 
relationship with Ms. A, they exchanged nude pictures; however, Applicant’s pictures did 
not include his face. SOR response. In April 2014 after Applicant returned to the United 
States from F, Ms. A or possibly her husband posted nude pictures of Applicant on the 
Internet, and the person posting the pictures sought funds from Applicant. Tr. 66, 101-
102; AE H at 39-40. Applicant reported the possible attempted extortion to DOD law 
enforcement and his command. Tr. 66. The total expenses for Applicant’s relationship, 
marriage, and divorce involving Ms. A, including travel and hotel costs, was about 
$10,000 to $15,000. SOR response; AE H at 27, 41. 
 
  
                                            
3 Applicant said he disclosed his relationship with Ms. A to his supervisor, chaplain, chain of 
command, and a Judge Advocate officer. Tr. 50-51, 92. Their response was that Ms. A was likely seeking 
a green card from the relationship. Tr. 51. They advised him that the relationship was not a good idea; 
however, it was not prohibited. Tr. 129. Applicant said his relationship with Ms. A did not violate his unit’s 
fraternization policy. Tr. 123. 
 
6 
                                         
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant received excellent Navy Fitness Report and Counseling records.4 He 
completed several Navy qualification courses, and he is an excellent shot. Letters lauding 
his duty performance and potential for contributions to the Navy included letters from a 
colonel, two commanders, two lieutenant commanders, several commanding officers, 
several colleagues with impressive credentials, and a rear admiral. The rear admiral 
recommended his promotion and assignment to “the Navy’s most demanding duties.” 
Applicant received several decorations, medals, or ribbons: Joint Service Commendation 
Medal; Afghanistan Campaign Medal with Campaign Star; Overseas Service Ribbon; 
National Defense Service Medal; Global War on Terrorism Service Medal; and NATO 
Medal. His character evidence supports approval of his security clearance. 
 
Iran 
 
Iran has been designated as a State Sponsor of Terrorism since 1984, and 
“remained the foremost state sponsor of terrorism in 2016.” In 2016, Iran continued its 
support of “Hizballah, Palestinian terrorist groups in Gaza, and various groups in Syria, 
Iraq, and throughout the Middle East. Iran used the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps-
Qods Force (IRGC-QF) to implement foreign policy goals, provide cover for intelligence 
operations, and create instability in the Middle East.” 
 
Iran “remains an enduring threat to U.S. national interests because of Iranian 
support to anti-US terrorist groups and militants, the Asad regime [in Syria], Ruthi rebels 
in Yemen, and because of lran’s development of advanced military capabilities.” The U.S. 
Government has imposed sanctions on Iran due to its “nuclear program, sponsorship of 
terrorism, and human rights record.” Although some sanctions were lifted under the terms 
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which was implemented in January 
2016, other sanctions remain, including sanctions that broadly prohibit U.S. persons from 
engaging in transactions or dealings directly or indirectly with Iran or its government.  
 
On July 18, 2017, The U.S. State Department announced that, “[i]n response to[] 
continued Iranian threats,” eighteen additional entities and individuals that support (1) 
Iran’s ballistic missile program, (2) Iran’s military procurement, or (3) Iran’s Islamic 
Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) have been added to the sanctions list. 
 
“Despite Supreme Leader [Sayyid Ali Hosseini] Khamenei’s conditional support for 
the JCPOA nuclear deal .  .  . he is highly distrustful of U.S. intentions. Iran’s leaders 
remain focused on thwarting U.S. and Israeli influence and countering what they perceive 
as a Saudi led effort to fuel Sunni extremism and terrorism against Iran and Shia 
communities throughout the region.”  
 
“The current Iranian government still has not recognized Israel’s right to exist, has 
hindered the Middle East peace process by arming militants, including Hamas, Hizballah, 
                                            
4 The supporting documentation for this paragraph includes various character letters, certificates, 
recommendations, Navy Fitness Report and Counseling records, endorsements, and orders. AE D; AE F. 
 
7 
                                         
 
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and continues to play a disruptive role in sustaining 
violence in the region, particularly Syria.” 
 
In 2016, Iran continued to “leverage cyber espionage, propaganda, and attacks to 
support its security priorities, influence events and foreign perceptions, and counter 
threats-including against U.S. allies in the region. Iran has also used its cyber capabilities 
directly against the United States. For example, in 2013, an Iranian hacker conducted an 
intrusion into the industrial control system of a U.S. dam, and in 2014, Iranian actors 
conducted a data deletion attack against the network of a US-based casino.” 
 
The State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of travel to Iran. Among 
other issues, “the Iranian government does not recognize dual nationality and will treat 
U.S.-Iranian dual nationals solely as Iranian citizens,” subject to Iran’s laws and 
requirements. Additionally, “Iranian authorities continue to unjustly detain and imprison 
U.S. citizens, particularly Iranian-Americans, including students, journalists, business 
travelers, and academics, on charges including espionage and posing a threat to national 
security.” 
 
In December 2015, President Obama signed into law the “Visa Waiver Program 
and Terrorist Travel Protection Act of 2015.” As implemented, the Act restricted citizens 
of (and foreign visitors to) Iraq, Syria, Iran, Sudan, Libya, Somalia, and Yemen from the 
benefits of an existing Visa Waiver Program in what it called an effort to address “the 
growing threat from foreign terrorist fighters.” The seven countries were excluded from 
the Visa Waiver Program because they were determined to have repeatedly provided 
support for acts of international terrorism, and/or because the Secretary of Homeland 
Security deemed that visitation to or habitation in the specified countries by a foreign 
national increased the likelihood that the foreign national will represent a credible threat 
to the national security of the United States. 
 
*  *  * 
 
In 2016, the “most significant human rights (HR) problems were severe restrictions 
on civil liberties, including the freedoms of assembly, association, speech, religion, and 
press. Other HR problems included abuse of due process combined with use of capital 
punishment for crimes that do not meet the requirements of due process, as well as cruel, 
inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment; and disregard for the physical integrity 
of persons, whom authorities arbitrarily and unlawfully detained, tortured, or killed.” 
 
“Other reported human rights problems included politically motivated violence and 
repression; disappearances; limitations on citizens’ ability to choose their government 
peacefully through free and fair elections. Of additional concern were harsh and life 
threatening conditions in detention facilities, including lengthy solitary confinement, with 
instances of deaths in custody. Also of concern were arbitrary arrest and lengthy pretrial 
detention, sometimes incommunicado; continued impunity of the security forces; denial 
of fair public trial; the lack of an independent judiciary; arbitrary interference with privacy, 
family, home, and correspondence. Additionally there were severe restrictions on 
academic freedom; restrictions on freedom of movement; official corruption and lack of 
 
8 
                                         
 
government transparency; constraints on investigations by international and 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) into alleged violations of human rights; legal and 
societal discrimination. There was also violence against women, ethnic and religious 
minorities, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) persons. Lastly, 
there were significant problems with trafficking in persons and severe restrictions on the 
exercise of labor rights. The government took few steps to investigate, prosecute, punish, 
or otherwise hold accountable officials, in the security services or elsewhere in 
government, who committed these abuses. Impunity remained pervasive throughout all 
levels of the government and security forces.” 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
9 
                                         
 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; and 
 
 
10 
                                         
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply because of Applicant and his spouse’s 
relationships with her family members, who are citizens and residents of Iran. There is a 
rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, their 
immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 
94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection and obligation to his 
spouse. “[A]s a matter of common sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable 
presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family 
members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is the basis 
of AG ¶ 7(e).  
 
Indirect influence from Applicant’s in-laws living in Iran could result in a security 
concern. Relationships with his wife’s family living in Iran are sufficient to create “a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” 
These relationships create a concern about Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive 
information or technology” and his desire to help her relatives who are in Iran. For 
example, if entities in Iran wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert 
pressure on his wife’s relatives in Iran. Applicant would then be subject to indirect coercion 
and classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with relatives or in-laws living in Iran is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant or his 
spouse has such a relationship with even one person living in a foreign country, this factor 
alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result 
in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially in 
the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA 
LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
  
A nation’s government’s relationship with the United States and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. In ISCR Case No. 12-08412 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Sept. 11, 2015), the Appeal Board affirmed the denial of a security clearance for an 
applicant with connections to in-laws residing in Iran stating:    
 
11 
                                         
 
In Foreign Influence cases, the nature of the foreign government involved, 
the intelligence gathering history of that government, and the presence of 
terrorist activity are important considerations. See, e.g., ISCR Case 05-
03250 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007). There is a rational connection between 
an applicant’s family ties in a hostile country and the risk that the applicant 
may fail to protect classified information. See, e.g., ISCR case No. 10-07436 
at 3, n. 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2011). 
 
See also ISCR Case No. 15-00647 (App. Bd. June 1, 2017) (affirming denial of security 
clearance because of connections to Iran); ADP Case No. 15-04852 (App. Bd. May 25, 
2017) (holding same); ISCR Case No. 13-01297 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2015) (holding same); 
ISCR Case No. 12-09989 (App. Bd. Nov. 18, 2013) (holding same); ISCR Case No. 11-
12659 (App. Bd. May 30, 2013) (holding same). The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. See ISCR 
Case No. 03-24933 at 8 (App. Bd. Jul. 28, 2005) (There is no good reason to assume 
that a foreign country with an authoritarian government that has been identified as being 
involved with state-sponsored terrorism would have compunctions about exerting 
influence or pressure on its citizens just because they lack prominence or live modest, 
ordinary lives). 
 
“An Applicant with foreign familial ties to a country that is hostile to the United 
States bears a very heavy burden to show that neither he nor his family members in that 
country are subject to influence by that country.” ISCR Case No. 11-01888 (App. Bd. June 
1, 2012) (emphasis added; citing ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007) 
and reversing grant of security clearance because of connections to Iran). Iran’s hostility 
to the United States and its support for terrorists places a very heavy burden of persuasion 
on Applicant to demonstrate that his and his spouse’s relationships to his spouse’s 
relatives living in Iran do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed in a 
position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a 
desire to assist her family living in Iran.  
 
Applicant and his spouse’s communications with her family living in Iran are 
sufficiently frequent to demonstrate affection for family living in Iran. Concern for family is 
a positive character trait that increases trustworthiness; however, it also increases 
concern about potential foreign influence. Department Counsel produced substantial 
evidence of possible foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. Further inquiry is 
necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
 
12 
                                         
 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the in di victual ‘ s sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant and/or his spouse have 
frequent communications5 with her family living in Iran, and his spouse is presumed to 
                                            
5 See ADP Case No. 05-17812 at 2, 3 n.2 (App. Bd. Jun. 11, 2007) (finding contacts with siblings 
in PRC “once every two or three  months” not to be casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 2, 
4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s parents and sisters a total of about 20 times 
 
13 
                                         
 
have a close relationship with her parents, brother, and sister-in-law living in Iran. The 
amount of contacts between an applicant or the applicant’s spouse and relatives living in 
a foreign country are not the only test for determining whether someone could be coerced 
or exploited through their relatives. Because of connections to his wife’s family living in 
Iran, Applicant is not able to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that 
[he and his spouse’s relationships with relatives who are residents of Iran] could create a 
risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” Visits to or from family provide additional 
evidence of concern for family and obligation to family welfare.    
 
Applicant has “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He 
has strong family connections to the United States. Applicant and his child are citizens 
and residents of the United States. His spouse is a U.S. permanent resident, and she 
intends to become a U.S. citizen. He received his bachelor’s and master’s degrees in the 
United States, has lived in the United States more than 20 years, and he served a combat 
tour in Afghanistan. Applicant has never been an Iranian citizen or visited Iran.     
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by relationships with family living in Iran. There is no 
evidence that terrorists, criminals, the Iranian Government, or those conducting 
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his family in Iran for classified or 
sensitive information. There is evidence that Applicant’s in-laws may have come to the 
attention of the Iranian Government during protests, and it is possible that the Iranian 
Government is monitoring them. While the Government does not have any burden to 
prove the presence of such evidence, if compelling evidence exists that Iran has targeted 
his in-laws in Iran, Applicant would have a heavier evidentiary burden to overcome to 
mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United 
States’ negative relationship with Iran, Iran’s human rights violations, and most 
importantly Iran’s support for terrorism and the diplomatic conflicts between Iran and the 
United States.      
 
In sum, the primary security concern is Applicant and his spouse’s relationships 
with her family, who are residents and citizens of Iran. Those family members living in 
Iran are readily available for coercion. Iran has a history of hostility towards the United 
States and support for terrorism. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he 
might be forced to choose between his obligations as a security clearance holder and the 
welfare of his in-laws living in Iran. Foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                            
per year not casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding 
contacts with applicant’s siblings once every four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
14 
                                         
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 
2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG           
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions. 
 
  AG ¶ 20 lists three mitigating conditions that are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,6 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) apply. Applicant’s finances were harmed by his first 
divorce, unemployment, and underemployment. These circumstances are partially or fully 
beyond his control. The SOR alleged one delinquent debt, which he settled. There was 
evidence that he fell behind on his alimony payments. When he became employed, he 
paid his alimony debt. The Appeal Board explained that a history of delinquent debts is 
not necessarily a bar to having access to classified information stating: 
 
                                            
6 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
15 
                                         
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required 
to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly given 
his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, 
accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a 
serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant acted responsibly by 
paying his debts. Applicant took reasonable actions to resolve his debts, establishing 
some good faith.7 Based on Applicant’s credible promise to pay his debts and his track 
record of paying them, future new delinquent debt is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are clear 
indications that his financial problems are resolved and his finances are under control. 
Applicant assures he will conscientiously endeavor to maintain his financial responsibility. 
He has mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
                                            
7 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).  
 
16 
                                         
 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior . . . ; (3) a pattern of . . . rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or 
group. Such conduct includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
could affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
The amended SOR alleges Applicant’s relationship with Ms. A (¶ 3.a) and cross-
alleges his relationship with Ms. I in SOR ¶ 1.a. (¶ 3.b) Applicant engaged in romantic 
relationships with Ms. A and Ms. I. In April 2014, he married Ms. A, a citizen and resident 
of Afghanistan. She returned to Afghanistan where she said she was arrested. Applicant 
knew that his marriage to Ms. A risked her arrest in Afghanistan for apostasy. He sent her 
nude pictures of himself, and the pictures were returned to him in a possible extortion 
attempt. He lacked sufficient information about Ms. A and her family before he urged her 
to join him outside of Afghanistan and to marry him, and his decisions relating to Ms. A 
demonstrated poor and impulsive judgment. AG ¶ 16(c) does not apply because there is 
sufficient information as discussed in the foreign influence section for an adverse security 
clearance determination. The evidence establishes SOR ¶ 3.a and AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) 
apply to SOR ¶ 3.a. The personal conduct concern alleged in SOR ¶ 3.b is more 
appropriately addressed under the foreign influence guideline and will not be further 
discussed under the personal conduct guideline.   
 
AG ¶ 17 lists two conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security concerns: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur. 
 
17 
                                         
 
AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) are established. Applicant’s showed questionable judgment 
in his relationship with Ms. A. However, his relationship with Ms. A “happened under such 
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on [his] reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant divorced Ms. A, and when the extortion was 
attempted, he reported the extortion attempt to DOD law enforcement. He acknowledged 
his conduct, and his disclosure of it has “alleviate[d] the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that contributed to untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and 
such behavior is unlikely to recur.” It is unlikely that Applicant will ever communicate with 
Ms. A or meet with her. Applicant married Ms. I, and he has learned from his mistakes. 
Personal conduct security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration” 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines B, F, 
and E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) 
were addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old budget integration analytics manager and defense 
contractor. In 1995, he entered the United States at the age of 24 on a student visa. He 
received bachelor’s and master’s degrees in the United States. In 2009, he joined the 
U.S. Navy Reserve. Applicant received excellent Navy performance evaluations. He 
completed Navy qualification courses, and he is an excellent marksman. He provided 
multiple letters lauding his duty performance and potential for contributions to the Navy. 
A rear admiral recommended his promotion and assignment to “the Navy’s most 
demanding duties.” His character evidence supports approval of his security clearance. 
 
Applicant has strong connections to the United States, including his residence in 
the United States for more than 20 years, his Navy service, his U.S. citizenship, the U.S. 
citizenship of his child, and the U.S. permanent residence of his spouse.    
 
 
18 
                                         
 
Applicant’s service in the conflict in Afghanistan increases the probability that 
Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist 
group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 
(App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). His past honorable Navy service in Afghanistan weighs towards 
approval of his security clearance. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 
2008) (affirming grant of security clearance and noting the importance to national security 
when an “Applicant put[s] his life in danger on at least one occasion to protect American 
lives and interests in Afghanistan.”). 
 
In May 2016, Applicant married Ms. I. She was born in Iran; she immigrated from 
Iran to the United States in 2014; and she now resides in the United States. Ms. I most 
recently traveled to Iran in September or October 2015, and she retains an Iranian 
passport. Ms. I’s parents, brother, uncle, and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Iran. She frequently communicates with her parents, brother, and sister-in-law. Her sister 
and her uncle are politically active. Ms. I’s uncle was imprisoned in Iran for about two 
years because of his political statements. Her father is retired and receiving a pension 
from the Iranian Government. Her parents demonstrated against the Iranian regime.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Iran must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.8 Iran violates human rights, supports terrorism, 
and is hostile to the United States. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns are mitigated; 
however, foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent 
with the interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 3.a and 3.b:   For Applicant 
                                            
8 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
19 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
