 
1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03181 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his financial situation. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 2, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial 
considerations guideline. Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
 
 On January 16, 2018, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held. 
Applicant testified at the hearing and the exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into 
the administrative record without objection. (Government Exhibits 1 and 2; Applicant’s 
Exhibits A and B.) Applicant’s request to submit evidence post-hearing was granted. He 
timely submitted Exhibits C – G, which were also admitted into the record. The transcript 
(Tr.) of the hearing was received on January 23, 2018.1  
 
  
                                                          
1 Scheduling correspondence, the case management order, and other administrative documents, if any, 
were marked and are attached to the record as Appellate Exhibit I. Post-hearing correspondence is 
attached as Appellate Exhibit II. 
 
2 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 61, is employed as a federal contractor. He was hired by his current 
employer in approximately February 2013 as a temporary employee. In approximately 
September 2013, his employer offered him a full-time time position. Applicant submitted 
a security clearance for his job in March 2015. In response to questions about his financial 
history, Applicant reported he had a number of delinquent debts, notably, student loans 
totaling approximately $16,000 and past-due state income taxes for the 2008 tax year 
totaling about $5,200. The December 2016 SOR lists these two debts as a security 
concern. As of the January 16, 2018 hearing, Applicant had not paid the debts nor made 
payment arrangements with his creditors. Both debts remain unresolved. 
 
Applicant explained that his financial problems began after he left a previous job 
to work on a book. When Applicant re-entered the workforce in 2008, he was unable to 
find full-time, gainful employment in wake of the recession. He primarily worked for 
temporary job placement agencies from 2008 to 2013, when he was hired by his current 
employer. (Tr. 17-18, 21) 
 
Applicant earns an annual salary of approximately $44,000, while his wife earns 
about $61,000. (Tr. 18-19) Applicant testified that after many years of less than full-time 
employment, his financial situation remains poor. He has not obtained financial or credit 
counseling. He provided a personal financial statement (PFS) showing that, after paying 
recurring expenses, including repaying a $4,000 personal loan that he obtained from his 
bank in 2016, he has approximately $660 left over each month. The PFS also reflects 
bank savings totaling $130. (Exhibits C, E) 
 
As for the student loan debt, Applicant explained that he initially incurred the debt 
in the early 1990s for his education. He started repaying his student loans after graduating 
from school, but sometime in the early to mid-2000s he began receiving notices that he 
had defaulted on his student loans. He was aware of the student loan debt when he 
decided to quit his former job in 2005 or 2006 to write a book. At the time, Applicant states 
his family’s financial situation was good. He did not anticipate an issue getting a job after 
taking a year or so off to work on his book.  
 
In November 2012, Applicant received a collection notice about his student loans, 
informing him that he owed a total of about $16,000. The notice also included an offer of 
assistance in establishing a repayment plan. Over the years, Applicant has entered into 
repayment agreements to resolve his student loan debt, but always stopped making the 
required monthly payments. A payment history for his student loans reflects that he has 
made irregular payments on his accounts through the years, with a last payment on the 
accounts occurring in August 2013. (Tr. 14-18, 23-31) 
 
Applicant stated in his March 2015 security clearance application that he would 
enter into a 10-month repayment agreement to rehabilitate his student loans. (Exhibit 1 
at 34-35) He did not follow through with this promise and his student loans remain in 
default status. (Exhibit B) Shortly before the hearing, Applicant contacted the creditor 
holding his student loans and submitted the necessary paperwork to enter into a new 
 
3 
repayment plan. (Tr. 16-17) He plans on bringing the student loans out of default by the 
end of 2018. (Exhibit G) 
 
As for the state tax debt, Applicant explained that in 2008 his former employer did 
not deduct state income taxes from his wages. He was unable to pay the $5,200 that he 
owed in state income taxes. The state placed a tax lien against him in 2011, but it has 
since been removed. (Exhibit 1 at 33, 35) Applicant states that he is having his employer 
take out an additional $200 in taxes to pay down this debt. (Tr. 20-21, 28-29; Exhibit G) 
He did not provide his earning statement or other independent documentary evidence to 
corroborate his claim. In May 2017, Applicant’s $2,300 federal tax refund was intercepted 
to offset his state tax debt. (Exhibit A) Applicant is unaware of the balance remaining for 
the state tax debt, but is “certain that the remaining balance will be paid off in the coming 
months, once [his] 2017 tax returns have been filed.” (Exhibit G)  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 
2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards). 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
 
 
4 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.2 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), ¶ E.4. Additionally, 
the Supreme Court has held that responsible officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18.) 
 
The security concern here is not limited to a consideration of whether a person 
with financial issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in 
other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances 
giving rise to delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other 
qualities essential to protecting classified information. See generally ISCR Case No. 11-
05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the applicable disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
                                                          
2 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case No. 14-
05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises a 
security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
5 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem . . . and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free. They 
are also not required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present evidence 
to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their circumstances, to include 
the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of showing that they 
manage their finances in a manner expected of those granted access to classified 
information.3 Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof and persuasion. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are, in part, attributable to matters beyond his 
control. Specifically, unstable employment and underemployment for a long stretch of 
time. However, his decision to quit his former job and, in the process, disregard his 
student loan debt raise unmitigated questions about his judgment and reliability. 
Moreover, Applicant has been gainfully employed since 2013 and, despite making past 
promises to address and resolve his student loan debt, took no action to address this 
long-standing debt until shortly before his hearing. He also did not reach out and try to 
resolve his state tax debt. Instead, only through involuntary enforcement action has a 
payment toward this debt recently occurred.  
 
Accordingly, I find that the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 19(a) through 
19(c) apply. None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Overall, the record evidence 
regarding the manner in which Applicant has handled his personal financial obligations 
leaves me with doubts and concerns about his ability and willingness to follow rules and 
regulations for the proper handling and safeguarding of classified information.4 
  
                                                          
3 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 15-02585 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 20, 2016) (“It is reasonable for Judges to expect applicants to present documentation about the 
satisfaction of individual debts.”)  
 
4 In reaching this adverse decision, I considered the whole-person concept, including the honesty Applicant 
showed in reporting the adverse information. See generally AG ¶ 2. However, this and the other favorable 
record evidence are insufficient to mitigate concerns raised by his financial circumstances. I also considered 
the exceptions listed in SEAD 4, Appendix C, but none are warranted in this case.  
 
6 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:        Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
