1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )    ADP Case No. 16-00206 
   ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations eligibility concerns.  Eligibility 
for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On August 10, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct, explaining 
why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for 
access to a public trust position. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On September 8, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the allegations 
under Paragraph 1 and denying all of the allegations pled under Paragraph 2. The case 
 
2 
 
was assigned to me on April 7, 2017. On June 1, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals issued a notice of hearing, scheduling Applicant’s case for June 29, 2017. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. I received five Government exhibits (GE 1 – GE 5), and I 
considered Applicant’s testimony. At the close of the hearing, I left the record open, at 
Applicant’s request, to allow him to submit additional exhibits. He did not submit any 
exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 10, 2017. 
 
While the case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing national Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to hold a sensitive position. 
The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines implemented in September 2006 and are 
effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AG 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant is a 38-year-old single man with three children, ages 16, 11, and 2. He is a 
high school graduate who has earned some college credits. He works for a government 
contractor as a customer service representative. (Tr. 13) 
 
 Applicant has eight delinquent debts totaling approximately $5,900, including a 
child-support delinquency (subparagraph 1.a), two medical bills (subparagraphs 1.b and 
1.c), a delinquency stemming from an unemployment compensation insurance judgment 
(subparagraph 1.d), two phone bills (subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f), a bill owed to a music 
club (subparagraph1.g), and a credit card (subparagraph 1.h). Applicant contends that 
subparagraph 1.a through 1.c are either satisfied or up to date, but did not provide proof. 
Subparagraphs 1.d through 1.h remain outstanding. He has no concrete plans to begin 
resolving the delinquent debts.  
 
 Applicant failed to file his 2012 state and federal income tax returns (subparagraphs 
1.i and 1.j). To date, he has yet to file them. Applicant attributes his financial problems to 
an 18-month period of unemployment between 2007 and early 2009. (Tr. 29) 
 
 By November 2014, when Applicant completed his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (E-QIP), the debts alleged in subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c, and 
1.e through 1.f had been assigned to collection agencies, and a judgment had been 
entered in favor of the creditor alleged in subparagraph 1.d. Applicant did not list these 
debts on his E-QIP, as required. Applicant contends the omissions were unintentional. He 
did note his failure to file his income tax returns on the E-QIP, as required.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security. When 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
3 
 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. (AG ¶ 2(b)) In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a 
favorable public trust decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 
18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
4 
 
 Applicant’s outstanding delinquencies and his failure to file his 2012 federal and 
state income tax returns trigger the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” and 
AG ¶ 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.” 
  
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving financial counseling for 
the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service,  and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Although Applicant’s financial problems were caused by a lengthy unemployment 
between 2007 and 2009, he provided no evidence that he has paid any of his outstanding 
delinquencies or organized payment plans to begin satisfying them. Most important, he has 
yet to file his 2012 state or federal income tax returns. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable 
with respect to circumstances beyond Applicant’s control contributing to his financial 
problems, but none of the remaining mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information.” (AG ¶ 15) Applicant’s responses to questions about his finances on his 2014 
E-QIP raise the question whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
5 
 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” applies. Upon reviewing the record, I 
conclude Applicant’s omissions of financial information from his E-QIP is indicative of 
neglectful financial management, but not dishonesty. Applicant did not intentionally omit 
financial information from his 2014 E-QIP. AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).1 I considered the whole-person factors in my evaluation of the 
Guideline F disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and they do not warrant a favorable 
conclusion. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant clearance. Eligibility for 
access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
