 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02410  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
January 29, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B.  The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 31, 2016.  He requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.)  
On June 26, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 7 Items, was mailed 
to Applicant, and received by him on July 6, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he 
had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant responded to the FORM 
on August 1, 2017 and submitted a 115 page submission.  Applicant did not object to 
 
2 
 
Items 1 through 7, and they were admitted into evidence.  Applicant’s response to the 
FORM was also admitted into evidence.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
the countries of South Korea and Russia.  Department Counsel provided a 5 page 
summary of the facts, supported by six Government documents pertaining to South 
Korea, identified as Government Exhibit 6.  She also provided a ten page summary of 
the facts supported by 20 government documents pertaining to Russia, identified as 
Government Exhibit 7.  The documents provide elaboration and context for the 
summary.  Applicant had no objection.  I took administrative notice of the facts included 
in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not 
subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted each of the allegations in the SOR.  After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is 21 years old and unmarried.  He is currently a full time college 
student at an American university in South Korea.  He is applying for a security 
clearance in connection with his employment with a defense contractor.  He hopes to 
work for the same defense contractor as does his father and brother.  
  
 Applicant is a United States citizen who was born in 1995 in the United States.  
He is currently a resident of South Korea as a  military and contractor dependent.  He 
has been living in the Republic of Korea, since 2001.  He is currently working for a 
defense contractor under an A-3 Visa pursuant to the United States-Republic of Korea 
Status of forces Agreement (SOFA).  Applicant graduated from Seoul American High 
School in 2014.  He is now a full-time student at the University of Maryland University 
College, Asia.  Both are located on the U.S. military installation in South Korea.  
 
3 
 
Applicant’s father, brother, and some acquaintances whom Applicant listed on his e-QIP 
are U.S. citizens and residents of the U.S., are serving or working for the United States 
Armed Forces and the U.S. Federal government in Korea on A-3 Visas.  His step-
mother and step-sister are Russian citizens and also residents of Korea on A-3 Visas.     
 
  Applicant’s close family members living in South Korea include his mother, 
father, brother, stepmother and stepsister.  Several of his family members are citizens 
and residents of South Korea, while two of his family members are citizens of Russia, 
living in South Korea.    
 
 Applicant’s father is a U.S. citizen who has served in the United States military 
for over 19 years.  He was honorably discharged in 2007.  He is currently working for a 
U.S. defense contractor located on the military installation from which he retired.  With 
his retirement pay and current income from the defense contractor, he files his annual 
U.S. income tax returns to the Internal Revenue Service and does not pay taxes to 
South Korea.    
 
 Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of South Korea.  She is and always 
has been a homemaker.  She took care of Applicant growing up during her marriage to 
Applicant’s father.  She is no longer married to Applicant’s father.  She does receive a 
portion of his father’s military retirement due to her 17 years of marriage to him.  She 
uses that money to live on.  She does not work for any U.S. and or Korean corporation, 
institution or government.     
 
 Applicant’s brother is a United States citizen, and a resident of South Korea.  He 
was born and raised on the U.S. military base in South Korea.  He has been exposed to 
the American environment on base and has received the same education as Applicant.  
He currently works for the same defense contractor as the Applicant’s father.  He has 
no financial or political interest in South Korea.     
 
 Applicant’s step-mother and step-sister are Russian citizens and residents of 
South Korea.  They are lawful permanent residents of the U.S. and Russian citizens 
staying in South Korea with the A-3 Visas.  They obtained their status by his step-
mother being married to a U.S. citizen, namely the Applicant’s father.  Applicant’s 
stepmother is a housewife.  His stepsister is a sophomore at a Korean University.  Once 
his stepsister completes her degree, she aspires to get a good paying job in the United 
States.  Applicant’s father plans to apply for his stepmother’s and stepsister’s U.S. 
citizenship.    
 
 I have taken administrative notice concerning the country of South Korea and the 
country of Russia.  South Korea, officially the Republic of Korea is a self-governing state 
located in the southern part of the peninsula of Korea.  The United States and South 
Korea share a long history of friendship and cooperation based on shared values and 
interests.  The two countries work together to combat regional and global threats and to 
strengthen their economies.  South Korea is now the United States’ sixth-largest trading 
partner with a trillion-dollar economy.  The longstanding relationship between the U.S. 
 
4 
 
and South Korea has brought positive rewards to the U.S. economy including more job 
opportunities for American. 
 
 South Korea and Russia are two of the seven most active countries engaged in 
foreign economic collection and industrial espionage against the United States.  
Although South Korea is considered an ally, they have been the unauthorized recipient 
of technology controlled under U.S. export control laws, including material that could be 
used in missile delivery/reentry systems, encryption software, optics and prism data and 
infrared detectors and camera engines.  Industrial espionage remains a high profile 
concern relating to South Korea and South Korean companies.  In July 2014, a South 
Korean chemical company agreed to pay a criminal penalty of over 2 million dollars to 
resolve an investigation into the company’s attempted theft of a U.S. company’s trade 
secrets regarding a meta-aramid fiber used in protective fabrics, electrical insulation, 
and lightweight structural support for aircraft.  Sources have also reported that South 
Korea may have attempted to compromise protected technology of U.S. F-15 fighters 
that it purchased.  
 
 Russian intelligence services also continue to target U.S. and allied personnel 
with access to sensitive computer network information.  Russia seeks data on advanced 
weapons systems and proprietary information from U.S. companies and research 
institution that deal with energy, finance, the media, defense, and dual use technology.  
Russia remains one of the top two most aggressive and capable collectors of sensitive 
U.S. economic information and technologies in cyberspace.  Two trends that may 
increase Russia’s threat over the next several years is that (1) many Russian 
immigrants with advanced technical skills work for leading U.S. companies may be 
increasingly targeted for recruitment by the Russian intelligence services, and (2) a 
greater number of Russian companies affiliated with the intelligence services will be 
doing business in the United States.  Russia is assuming a more assertive cyber 
posture based on its willingness to target critical infrastructure systems and conduct 
espionage operations even when detected and under increased public scrutiny.  
Russian cyber operations are likely to target U.S. interests to support several strategic 
objectives: intelligence gathering to support Russian decision making the Ukraine and 
Syrian crises, influence operations to support military and political objectives, and 
continuing preparation of the cyber environment for future contingencies.   
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
 
5 
 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for use will be 
resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the 
record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
 
6 
 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
 (b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 
  Applicant’s foreign family members include his mother and brother, who are 
citizens and residents of South Korea, and his stepmother and stepsister who are 
citizens of Russia, but reside in South Korea.  They do not threaten or influence 
Applicant’s choice of interest as a United States citizen.  Applicant is an American 
citizen by birth, who grew up as a U.S. military dependent.  Since 2001, he has been 
living overseas with his immediate family. He is an American citizen who strongly 
expresses his interest in dedicating himself to his country, either by serving in the 
military, like his father, or working as a civilian in Government service, also like his 
father.  He has indicated that his short term goal is to finish his college education. Once 
completed, he aspires to continue his education at the graduate level in the United 
States and work in the field of computers and networking for the U.S. government or the 
U.S. military in some capacity.  Under the particular circumstances here, Applicant’s 
contacts with his family in South Korea do not create a security risk.  Applicant is not 
subjected to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal conflict of 
interest from his connection to his family in South Korea or his family from Russia.  
However, the evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
 
7 
 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
 The nature of the relationships with his family do not pose a security risk.  There 
is no conflict of interest.  No one in his family is associated with the South Korean 
government, nor do they show any interest in the Applicant or his work.  Applicant is a 
United States citizen and his relationship with his family does not result in a divided 
allegiance.  There is nothing here that may manipulate or induce the Applicant to help a 
foreign person or government in a way that is inconsistent with the U.S. interests.  
Applicant’s father has served his entire life working for the U.S. government.  Applicant 
expresses a strong desire to begin his career and develop a deep and long-standing 
relationship and loyalty to the United States.  Based upon this history, he will always 
resolve any situation in favor of the United States.  Full mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), 8(b), 
and 8(c), has been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
 
8 
 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
As a child of a veteran of the United States armed forces, and now the child of a  
civilian employee for the U.S. Defense Department, Applicant has displayed loyalty and 
a commitment to the U.S. with hopes to provide valuable service to the U.S. in the 
future.  Applicant has no history of misconduct or security violations.  His South Korean 
connections do not pose a risk to the U.S. government.  Applicant obviously has the 
level of judgment required to access classified information as evidenced by his 
longstanding commitment to our country.     
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influences security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
