 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02760 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 9, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 5, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). On October 30, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines G, and J. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on November 21, 2016, and 
requested a decision based on the administrative record, without a hearing before an 
administrative judge. On January 11, 2017, Department Counsel amended the SOR, 
adding security concerns under Guideline E. Applicant answered those additional 
concerns on January 27, 2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
 
2 
 
The case was assigned to me on January 31, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on February 7, 2017. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on February 28, 2017. The Government offered Government 
Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on March 10, 2017. 
The record was left open for the receipt of additional evidence. On March 27, 2017, 
Applicant submitted a Closing Statement, but no exhibits. The record closed on March 
28, 2017. 
 
The SOR and the amended SOR in this case were issued under the adjudicative 
guidelines that came into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security 
Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(December 10, 2016), implements new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. 
All national security eligibility decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be 
decided using the new National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position 
(AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative 
guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. 
My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is 
issued pursuant to the new AG promulgated in SEAD 4. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in the SOR and the amendments to the 
SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (SCA at page 5.) He 
has been employed with the defense contractor since August of 2014. (TR at page 18 
lines 12~15.) He is single and currently does not have a security clearance. (TR at page 
17 line 1 to page 19 line 13.) 
 
Guideline G – Alcohol Consumption & Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
  
 1.a. and 2.a. In September of 2014, Applicant was arrested for, and subsequently 
charged with, Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol. (TR at page 19 line 14 to page 35 
line 12, GX 2 at page 5, and GX 3.) He “consumed 10 to 14 beverages” at a birthday 
party to the point he “blacked out.” (TR at page 26 line 8 to page 27 line 1.) He decided 
to drive home from the party, despite the protestation of the owner of the house where 
the party was being held. (TR at page 27 line 2 to page 32 line 13.) She alerted the 
police; and as a result, Applicant was arrested. (Id.) 
 
 In June of 2016, Applicant pled guilty to “a wet reckless charge.” (TR at page 32 
lines 1~12.) As a result of his conviction, he was fined and placed on probation for three 
                                                          
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
3 
 
years, until about June of 2019. (TR at page 32 to 35 line 12, GX 2 at page 5, and GX 
3.) 
  
 Applicant’s past drinking pattern was on weekends, “maybe six to 10 drinks over 
the course of the night.” (TR at page 22 line 14 to page 23 line 1.) His drink of choice 
was “mostly beer.” (Id.) He no longer consumes alcohol, ceasing said consumption in 
June of 2015,” about two years ago, and plans no future consumption. (TR at page 34 
line 1 to page 35 line 5.) 
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct  
 
 3.a., and 3.b. Applicant used marijuana about 50 times from February 2009 until 
2012. (TR at page 35 line 13 to page 37 line 21, and GX 2 at pages 4~5.) As a result of 
his usage, Applicant was expelled from a private high school in 2009. (TR at page 15 
line 18 to page 16 line 20, and at page 37 line 22 to page 39 line 24.) 
 
 3.c. From about June of 2010 to June of 2014, Applicant used Hallucinogenic 
drugs about six times while attending college. (TR at page 39 line 25 to page 46 line 4.)   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
4 
 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
  
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 22 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Two conditions may apply: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder.  
 
 Applicant has an alcohol-related incident in June of 2014. And is still on probation 
until about June of 2019. He was also a very heavy drinker, binge drinking on 
weekends. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 23 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Two conditions may apply: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
Applicant is still on probation as a result of his DUI, was a very heavy binge 
drinker, and only cease the consumption of alcohol about two years ago. The evidence 
does not establish the above two mitigating conditions. 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets forth the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and  
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation.  
 
Applicant was convicted of his September 2014 DUI in June of 2016. He is still 
on probation until about June of 2019. The evidence establishes the above two 
disqualifying conditions. 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate the above security concerns 
raised in this case: 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
6 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
Sufficient time has not passed since Applicant’s June 2016 conviction to 
establish trustworthiness or rehabilitation. Furthermore, he is still on probation as a 
result of that conviction. The evidence does not establish mitigation under either of the 
above conditions.  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; 
 
 
7 
 
  Applicant illegally used marijuana and hallucinogenic drugs. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise this disqualifying condition.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 including: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s drug usage was limited, experimental, and ceased about three years 
ago. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has offered no evidence, apart 
from his testimony, to show that his clear alcohol abuse and related Criminal Conduct 
will not be repeated in the future. As a result, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
8 
 
For these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Alcohol Consumption and 
related Criminal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
