 
1 
  
                       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01046 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on July 1, 2016, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. On August 
4, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided without a 
hearing. On September 1, 2016, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (Sept. 1, 2006 AG) effective 
within the DoD on September 1, 2006, and as amended on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
(FORM). The FORM contained seven attachments (Items). On September 14, 2016, 
Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to object to 
the Government’s evidence and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. He had 30 days from his receipt of the FORM to 
submit any additional information in response to the FORM. The response was due on 
October 14, 2016. No additional information was received from Applicant. On August 8, 
2017, I was assigned the case.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the 12 delinquent obligations set 
forth in the SOR. His SOR answer provided no additional information on the debts. I 
incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old machinist who has worked for a defense contractor since 
February 2014, and he seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 3) In his Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), completed in March 2015, he 
indicates from December 1997 through December 2001, he served honorably on active 
duty with the U.S. Marine Corps. (Item 3) However, on his e-QIP he lists the date of 
discharge as December 2005. (Item 3) He indicated he was discharged in December 
2005 following four years of being part of the inactive reserves. 
 Applicant is married, has one son age 13 and two stepsons ages 16 and 20. (Item 
3) He was unemployed from June 2012 to July 2012. (Item 4) 
 In Applicant’s March 2015 e-QIP, he listed $8,000 due following the voluntary 
repossession (SOR 1.a, $11,648) of a 2012 automobile. He indicated he planned to 
resolve his debts as “soon as possible.” (Item 3) In his October 2015 Enhanced Subject 
Interview, he stated he had not received any correspondence from the creditor following 
the repossession. (Item 4) He indicated he experienced financial difficulties when his 
hourly rate of pay was reduced from $23 per hour to $18 per hour. (Item 4) This reduction 
in pay occurred sometime between March 2013 and February 2014. He did not indicate 
the extent as to how long the reduction occurred.  
                                                          
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
 
3 
 During Applicant’s subject interview, all of the SOR delinquent obligations were 
discussed except the $103 collection debt3 (SOR 1.g). He acknowledged owing the $103 
telephone service debt (SOR 1.j) and the $283 telephone provider debt (SOR 1.k). He 
stated the educational debts (SOR 1.b $2,210; SOR 1.c, $1,876; SOR 1.f, $565) were 
tuition expenses that he believed should have been covered by his G.I educational 
benefits. The medical obligations (SOR 1.d, $1,275; SOR 1.e, $789; SOR 1.l. $236) 
resulted from a surgery he had. He believed his medical insurance should have paid the 
debts. (Item 4)  
 Applicant did not know why the $840 judgement (SOR 1.h) was so large when his 
credit card limit was only $200. (Item 4) He thought he had paid a different credit card 
debt (SOR 1.i, $1,737) that had been placed for collection. (Item 4)  
 During Applicant’s October 2015 subject interview, he also stated he planned on 
obtaining a credit report “as soon as possible to begin to research the educational and 
credit card” accounts and “plans to try to pay off the arrearages of his other accounts as 
soon as possible.” (Item 4)  
No response to the FORM was received from Applicant. He provided no 
documentation showing payment of any of his delinquent obligations. He did not set forth 
what efforts he undertook to pay, contract his creditors, or otherwise resolve his 
delinquent debts, nor did he provide any documentation as to payment on or current 
status of his delinquent debts. 
 
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudication process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weight of a 
number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the whole-person concept.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
                                                          
3 The collection obligations in SOR 1.g and SOR 1.j are both $103 and may be the same obligation, but no 
documentation was provided establishing the two debts are the same obligation. 
 
4 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide 
by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information . . . An individual who is financially overextended is at 
greater risk of having to engage in illegal acts or other questionable acts to 
generate funds. 
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed upon 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
 
5 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, 
but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
any may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts” and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). Applicant has 12 delinquent accounts 
totaling more than $21,000. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶E3.1.15) An applicant 
has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never 
shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 
2005))  
 
 Five of the seven Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 During Applicant’s October 2015 interview, all of Applicant’s delinquent obligations 
were discussed except for one $103 debt. At that time, he intended to obtain a credit 
report and intended to pay off his arrearages as soon as he could. He acknowledged 
owing the one of the $103 debts and the $283 debts during the interview. He has provided 
 
6 
no documentation showing that even the three smallest delinquent obligations of less 
than $300 each have been paid.  
 
 Applicant’s debts remain unpaid and were not occur under unusual conditions. 
There is not showing the failure to timely pay those obligations was an unusual condition 
unlikely to recur. Sometime before February 2014, his hourly pay had been reduced from 
$23 to $18 per hour. This reduction occurred more than three and a half years ago. He 
provided insufficient information to show how the pay reduction affected his finances at 
the time or any adverse effect on his current finances. He provided insufficient evidence 
to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. His delinquencies continue 
to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
In 2012, Applicant was unemployed for two months. Unemployment is a 
circumstance beyond his control that impacted his ability to maintain financial stability. 
However, he has been full-time employed since February 2014, and the delinquent 
obligations have yet to be addressed. He provided no evidence of what responsible steps 
he took to pay or resolve his debts. The second prong of AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
  
  There is no evidence of financial counseling or clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
There is no showing of Applicant having made good-faith payments towards his 
delinquent obligations, or evidence to establish that he is executing a reasonable ongoing 
plan to pay or resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant asserted his G.I. Education benefits should have paid his tuition debts 
and his medical insurance should have paid his medical expenses. He did not provide 
documentation showing these debts were paid or that he disputed these debts. AG ¶ 
20(e) does not apply because he has not provided documented proof substantiating the 
basis of the dispute over these debts. AG ¶¶ 20(f) and (g) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I have considered Applicant’s service in the U.S. Marine Corps on active duty. His 
military service merits considerable respect. 
 
Applicant has been aware of the Government’s security concern about his 
delinquent debts since his October 2015 interview when he was specifically confronted 
about his delinquent accounts. Additionally, the July 2016 SOR and September 2016 
FORM put him on notice of the Government’s concern about his delinquent accounts. 
There is no evidence he has contacted his creditors. He provided no information 
regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debt and has failed to show 
documentation he has established repayment agreements to address the delinquent 
debts. There is no documentation that even the smallest of his delinquent obligations 
have been paid. 
 
In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on only 
the limited response in his SOR Answer, the financial considerations security concerns 
remain.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all the delinquent obligations have been paid—it 
is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
clearance. (See AG & 2(e)) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:  Against Applicant  
 
 
 
  
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
