 1 
       
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 16-00512 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), 
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
raised by his history of alcohol abuse and marijuana use. Applicant’s failure to 
appropriately list derogatory information on his security clearance application was 
unintentional, and his 2012 termination from employment is mitigated by time. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on August 14, 2014. 
On June 14, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines E, G, H, and J. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
 2 
Applicant answered the SOR June 28, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on August 17, 2016. On August 19, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM,) which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3, was sent to Applicant, 
who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on August 26, 2016, and 
his Response was received by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
within the allotted 30 days and admitted without objection. The case was assigned to me 
on May 3, 2017. On November 13, 2017, I reopened the record to allow both parties to 
submit any additional evidence. Applicant submitted additional documents which I 
admitted into the record collectively as Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, without objection.  
 
The SOR was issued under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The DOD 
implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. This 
decision will be decided based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Under Guideline G, the SOR alleges that Applicant consumed alcohol to the point 
of intoxication from about January 2009 to at least June 2014, and that this excessive 
consumption resulted in four arrests for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI), an 
arrest for underage purchase or possession of alcohol, and alcohol-related treatment for 
a condition diagnosed as alcohol dependence. Applicant denies one of the DUI arrests, 
and admits the other allegations. The SOR further alleges that Applicant tested positive 
for alcohol while enrolled in a treatment program, and that despite his diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence, he continued to consume alcohol. Applicant denies that he tested positive 
for alcohol, but admits that he continued to consume alcohol after being diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent.  
 
Under Guideline H, the SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana with varying 
frequency between about October 2003 and September 20131, including while holding a 
security clearance, that Applicant was arrested in about May 2012 for charges including 
possession of marijuana, and that he was arrested in June 2012, and charged with 
possession of marijuana. Applicant admits that he used marijuana at varying times during 
the alleged time span, but denies he was ever arrested for possession of marijuana. The 
SOR cross-alleges under Guideline J, the alcohol-related arrests and the hit-and-run 
alleged under Guideline G, and the Guideline H allegations. Applicant neither admits nor 
denies the Guideline J allegations. However, he addresses the underlying conduct in his 
admissions and denials in response to the Guidelines G and H allegations. 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline E that Applicant intentionally falsified his e-QIP 
by failing to list his arrests for possession of marijuana, and that Applicant was terminated 
from employment in 2012 after being arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol in 
a company vehicle. Applicant denies that he intentionally falsified his e-QIP. He also 
                                                          
1 While the SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana until September 2013, and Applicant admits this allegation, the 
record evidence as a whole establishes that Applicant's last marijuana use was in August 2013. 
 3 
denies the allegation about his 2012 termination of employment, however, he admits the 
termination and its cause. 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old network administrator employed by a defense contractor 
since February 2015. He was previously employed in the same position by another 
defense contractor beginning in August 2014. He served on active duty in the U.S. Marine 
Corps from September 2007 until September 2011. He deployed for two combat tours, 
and received a General under Honorable Conditions discharge. He has held a security 
clearance since approximately September 2007. Applicant is married and he and his wife 
have two young children. (GX 2.)  
 
Most of the SOR allegations arise from Applicant’s abuse of alcohol, use of 
marijuana, and his conduct while under the influence of these substances. Applicant 
began drinking alcohol, sometimes to the point of intoxication, on weekends in high 
school. After enlisting in the Marine Corps in 2007, Applicant would drink to the point of 
intoxication about one weekend a month, despite the fact that he was underage. After 
Applicant returned from his deployment to Iraq in September 2009, he was 21 and able 
to purchase alcohol for himself. For a period of approximately two weeks following his 
return, he drank to the point of intoxication daily. He then started drinking to the point of 
intoxication each weekend. Applicant consumed excessive amounts of alcohol, in part, to 
control his stress, depression, and night terrors that he began experiencing after his 
deployments. (GX 2; GX 3.) 
 
Applicant was arrested and charged with his first DUI in October 2009. He was 
court-ordered to complete an alcohol assessment and attend a Substance Abuse 
Rehabilitation Treatment Program (SARP), which he did from approximately February to 
March 2010, but did not complete. Applicant admits in his answer that he was diagnosed 
with alcohol dependence. His court date was repeatedly continued, and Applicant was 
not convicted until he pled guilty in April or May 2011. He did not drink for a few months 
following the arrest, but then resumed drinking to the point of intoxication every weekend. 
(GX 3.) 
 
Applicant attended pre-deployment training from June 2010 to August 2010, where 
he only consumed alcohol on one or two occasions. In August 2010, Applicant deployed 
to Afghanistan where he did not consume any alcohol. He returned from deployment in 
March 2011, but did not consume any alcohol. Beginning in mid-April 2011, Applicant and 
a fellow Marine with whom Applicant had deployed twice were both nearing discharge, 
and began heavily consuming alcohol on a daily basis. After his discharge, Applicant went 
back to drinking to intoxication each weekend. In May 2011, Applicant was charged with 
providing alcohol to underage people at a party. He pled guilty and was sentenced to 
community service. (GX 3.) 
 
Applicant’s pattern of drinking to the point of intoxication only on the weekends 
continued until he became involved with his former girlfriend. Applicant and his girlfriend 
drank to the point of intoxication on a daily basis. On June 16, 2012, Applicant and his 
girlfriend began drinking alcohol after they awoke. At approximately 11:00 that night, 
 4 
Applicant drove his girlfriend and another friend to a bar. After consuming alcohol in the 
bar, Applicant got lost while trying to drive back to the bar to pick up his girlfriend and 
friend. He was arrested and charged with DUI. He pled guilty to DUI in September 2012. 
Following his arrest, Applicant continued drinking alcohol every weekend. (GX 3.) 
 
While Applicant’s June 2012 DUI charge was still pending, he accepted a job and 
moved to another state in August 2012. He consumed alcohol “constantly because he felt 
sorry for himself and he was having a hard time dealing with having broken up with” his 
girlfriend. (GX 3.) On August 24, 2012, after consuming alcohol for several hours at a bar, 
Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI, while driving a company-owned vehicle. 
He was immediately terminated from his employment. He returned home, hired an 
attorney, pled guilty to the out-of-state DUI, and was court-ordered to have an interlocking 
device installed on his vehicle. (GX 3.) 
 
Applicant pled guilty to the June 2012 DUI in September 2012. He was placed on 
probation for one year, required to attend an educational program about alcohol abuse, 
and court ordered into counseling. The counseling program required Applicant to 
participate in two group therapy sessions and one individual session each week. He was 
also required to remain abstinent, and was subjected to random urinalysis. He did not 
consume any alcohol between September 2012 and June 2013, when he began 
consuming alcohol to the point of intoxication every two or three days. His frequent 
intoxication ultimately resulted in his being fired from his job. In August 2013, while 
intoxicated at a party, Applicant used marijuana. Later that month, he failed a random 
urinalysis for marijuana, and was arrested for violating his probation. He did not consume 
alcohol following the arrest until November 2013, when he again began consuming 
alcohol to the point of intoxication each weekend. Applicant continued to consume alcohol 
each weekend until about June 2014. (GX 3.) 
 
Between June 2014 and July 2015, Applicant only consumed alcohol on a few 
occasions, and not to the point of intoxication. In about August 2014, Applicant moved to 
his current state of residence. In doing so, he changed his social surroundings and 
friends. He drank alcohol on New Year’s Eve 2014, and on July 4, 2015, while visiting 
home and attending a baseball game. On each of these two occasions, he only had two 
beers. (GX 3; Response.) 
 
Applicant has completely abstained from alcohol use since August 2015. He 
initially sought assistance through the Department of Veterans Affairs, and by attending 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings. He continues to participate in AA, and has recently 
begun treatment with a counselor to address the underlying issues that led to his alcohol 
abuse. (AX A.) He acknowledges the devastating role that alcohol played in his life, and 
is remorseful. He accepts full responsibility for his actions while under the influence of 
alcohol. He is committed to his family, his job, and his sobriety. He has completed several 
computer certification programs and completed 20 college-credit hours since October 
2015. He has no intention of drinking alcohol in the future. (Response; AX A.) 
 
 5 
Applicant began occasionally using marijuana recreationally in high school. He did 
not use marijuana while on active duty between 2007 and 2011. Beginning in September 
2011, after his discharge from the Marine Corps, he began to use marijuana two to four 
times per week, in an effort to control his depression, stress, and night terrors. At the time, 
Applicant was working in a frozen yogurt/delicatessen. His marijuana use continued while 
he was dating his former girlfriend, and working as a bank teller. (GX 2; GX 3.) 
 
In May 2012, Applicant was pulled over for a traffic violation, the police officer found 
marijuana in Applicant’s car, and Applicant received a summons for possession of 
marijuana. He went to court, the officer did not appear, and the case was dismissed. (GX 
3.) In June 2012, Applicant hit a vehicle parked in front of its owner’s house. He stopped 
to assess the damage, and the owner came out of her house. She went back inside to 
call the police, and Applicant, who believed there was no damage to the other vehicle, 
sped away from the scene. A police officer witnessed Applicant’s rapid departure and 
pulled him over. The police officer found marijuana in Applicant’s car, which Applicant 
claims belonged to his passenger, Applicant’s former girlfriend’s sister, and issued a 
summons for possession of marijuana and hit-and-run. When Applicant appeared in 
court, the possession of marijuana charge was dismissed due to insufficient evidence. He 
was found guilty of hit-and-run and fined. Applicant stopped regularly using marijuana in 
July or August 2012 in anticipation of beginning new employment.  
 
Applicant last used marijuana on a single occasion in August 2013 at a party, while 
intoxicated. He has never used any other illegal drugs, and he no longer associates with 
anyone who uses marijuana, including his former girlfriend. Applicant stated, in writing, 
his intent to completely abstain from any future use of marijuana, and his recognition that 
any such use is grounds for revocation of his security clearance. Applicant never used 
marijuana while working as a defense contractor. (GX 2; Response.) 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline E that Applicant intentionally falsified his e-QIP 
by failing to list a May 2012 and a June 2012 arrest for possession of marijuana, as 
alleged under Guideline H. Applicant denies the falsification allegation, asserting that he 
was never arrested or convicted for possession of marijuana. Applicant listed his 
marijuana use and other derogatory information on his e-QIP, and discussed his 
marijuana use, including the two summonses for possession of marijuana with the 
background investigator during his personal subject interview (PSI), before being 
confronted. (GX 2; GX 3.) 
 
The SOR also alleges under Guideline E that Applicant was terminated from his 
employment in August 2012, following his arrest for DUI in a company-owned vehicle. 
Applicant disclosed both the DUI arrest and the job termination on his e-QIP, and openly 
discussed these events during his PSI. (GX 2; GX 3.) 
 
Following his two deployments, Applicant suffered from anxiety and depression, 
which he attempted to self-medicate with alcohol in marijuana. Applicant stopped 
regularly using marijuana in 2012 after his relationship with his former girlfriend ended, 
and last used it one time in 2013, while intoxicated. He began drastically reducing his 
 6 
alcohol consumption in 2014, and has maintained complete sobriety for over two years. 
He has recently entered counseling to address the underlying issues of his alcohol abuse. 
He has not had any alcohol-related or other legal incidents since 2013. Applicant 
acknowledges his conduct and takes full responsibility for his actions. (GX 2; GX 3; 
Response.) 
 
Since achieving sobriety, Applicant has taken many positive steps. He and his new 
wife now have a second child, and Applicant purchased a home. Applicant’s employment 
is a tremendous source of pride for him, and he largely credits his motivation to maintain 
sobriety on his dedication to his job. He was promoted to a network administrator over a 
year ago, and is currently in line for a second promotion. He has continued to take college 
courses and is pursuing a bachelor’s degree. He has had his full driving privileges 
restored, and is no longer under the jurisdiction of any court. (AX A.) 
 
Applicant’s direct supervisor from about July 2014 until August 2016 states that 
Applicant is a hard worker, dependable, and driven to improve himself both professionally 
and personally. He further states that his “observations of the last three years are that 
[Applicant] is a changed man, trying to make amends for past mistakes.” (AX A.) 
 
Applicant’s second-level supervisor since August 2016 states that Applicant is 
professional, stable and a contributing member of the work team. He further states that 
Applicant is “a competent young veteran making a successful transition to civilian life.” A 
coworker and friend states that Applicant “demonstrated a thirst for knowledge, a 
tenacious work ethic, and a determination for advancement and self-improvement.” (AX 
A.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 7 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
  
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include: 
 8 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, 
or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; 
 
AG ¶ 22(b): alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or 
duty in an intoxicated or impaired condition, drinking on the job, or 
jeopardizing the welfare and safety of others, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder;  
 
AG ¶ 22(d): diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health 
professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed 
clinical social worker) of alcohol use disorder; 
 
AG ¶ 22(e): the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed; 
 
AG ¶ 22(f): alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(g): failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive 
alcohol use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; 
 
AG ¶ 23(c): the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment 
program, has no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making 
satisfactory progress in a treatment program; and 
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed a treatment program 
along with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and 
 9 
established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance 
with treatment recommendations. 
 
Applicant began drinking, sometimes to the point of intoxication, while in high 
school, and continued to do so after enlisting in the Marine Corps. When Applicant 
returned from his second combat deployment in 2011, he began frequently drinking to the 
point of intoxication, in an effort to deal with his stress, depression, and night terrors. At 
some point, he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He participated in court-ordered 
alcohol education and treatment, but resumed a pattern of drinking to the point of 
intoxication following the programs. His drinking resulted in DUI arrests, and other 
alcohol-related charges. This conduct gives rise to AG ¶¶ 22(a) through 22(f).  
 
In 2014, soon after moving to another state and beginning work with his current 
employer, Applicant completely stopped drinking to the point of intoxication. In about 
August 2015, Applicant stopped consuming any alcohol whatsoever, and has been 
abstinent since that time. He continues to participate in AA, and is now engaged in 
counseling to address the issues that led to his alcohol abuse. He has not had any 
alcohol-related arrests or other incidents since 2013. He has changed his environment, 
is now married, and has two children he is committed to his sobriety, his family, and his 
job. Applicant acknowledges his alcohol dependence and has completely abstained from 
use since August 2015. AG ¶¶ 23(a), 23(b), and 23(d) apply. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances . . . can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations.  
 
The following disqualifying conditions apply under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any substance misuse;  
 
AG ¶ 25(b): illegal possession of a controlled substance; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(f): any illegal drug use while granted access to classified 
information or holding a sensitive position. 
 
The following mitigating conditions may also apply: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
 
 10 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment were drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed a statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from October 2003 until August 
2013. He did not use marijuana between 2007 and 2011, while on active duty. He has 
continuously held a security clearance since 2007, however, he did not ever use 
marijuana while having access to classified information or working in a sensitive position. 
He began using marijuana again after his discharge in 2011. His marijuana use continued 
while dating his former girlfriend. He was charged with possession of marijuana twice in 
2012. He stopped regularly using marijuana in 2012, and he last used marijuana in August 
2013. This conduct invokes AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(f).  
 
Illegal involvement with a controlled substance(s) after being granted a security 
clearance raises heightened concerns about a person’s judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness, and requires a judge to closely scrutinize any claim of reform and 
rehabilitation. See ISCR Case No. 16-02005 at 3 (App. Bd. June 2, 2017)  
 
While Applicant’s marijuana use while holding a clearance raises heightened 
concerns, it must also be viewed in the context of his alcohol abuse and overall mental 
and emotional state at the time he was abusing substances. Applicant was suffering from 
anxiety, depression, and night terrors as a result of his two combat tours. He attempted 
to self-treat these symptoms through the use of alcohol and marijuana. While Applicant 
technically held a clearance between 2011 and 2013, he was not working in the defense 
industry, and specifically did not use marijuana during his brief employment with a federal 
contractor in 2012. Applicant recognized the actual and potential impact that substance 
abuse, primarily alcohol abuse, was having and could have on his life. He stopped using 
marijuana regularly in 2012, coincident with the end of his relationship with his former 
girlfriend, and his last one-time use, while intoxicated, was in August 2013.  
 
The Directive does not define “recent,” and there is no “bright-line” definition of 
what constitutes “recent” conduct. ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006). 
The Judge is required to evaluate the record evidence as a whole and reach a reasonable 
 11 
conclusion as to the recency of an applicant’s conduct. ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 
(App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006).  
Applicant no longer associates with his former girlfriend or anyone else who uses 
marijuana. He moved to another state, started a family, continued pursuing higher 
education, and dedicated himself to his employment. He has declared in writing that he 
has no future intent to ever use marijuana again. Applicant’s marijuana use is not recent, 
happened under circumstances that are unlikely to recur, and does not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
The following disqualifying conditions apply under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would 
be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence . . . of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(d): violation or revocation of parole or probation, or failure to 
complete a court-mandated rehabilitation program. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s arrests, charges, and other questionable conduct occurred while he was 
in the height of his alcohol abuse. He is not had any arrests or charges since 2013, and 
has not used marijuana since that time. Applicant has been completely sober since August 
 12 
2015. He has completed all court requirements, and has had his driving privileges fully 
restored. He is dedicated to his job, has received one promotion, and is scheduled for 
another one. He is pursuing his bachelor’s degree. His past conduct does not cast out on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(b) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes . . . 
 
The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(c):  credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate 
the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur. 
 
  
 13 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government has 
the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant fully disclosed and discussed his marijuana use on his e-QIP, and with 
the background investigator during his PSI. In denying the Guideline H SOR allegations 
about his arrest for possession of marijuana, Applicant asserts that he was never 
arrested. In denying the Guideline E SOR falsification allegation, Applicant reasserts that 
he was never arrested for possession of marijuana. There is no record evidence 
supporting the allegation that Applicant intentionally falsified his e-QIP. 
 
 Applicant’s termination from employment in August 2012, for driving under the 
influence of alcohol in a company-owned vehicle, is mitigated by time. This past conduct 
does not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment and is 
unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 17(c) applies. 
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines G, H, J, and E in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, 
but I have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant has met his high burden of persuasion.  He served in the Marine Corps 
for four years, including two combat deployments. After his discharge, Applicant began 
abusing alcohol and marijuana, primarily in an effort to alleviate his depression, stress, 
and night terrors he began experiencing following his deployments. Applicant has taken 
positive steps, including cessation of marijuana use since August 2013, and alcohol use 
since August 2015. He has sought ongoing support for his sobriety by attending AA, and 
is now also treating with an individual counselor. He has clearly demonstrated his 
commitment to reform and rehabilitation. He is respected and trusted by his supervisors, 
has been promoted to network administrator, and is in line for a second promotion. He is 
pursuing a bachelor’s degree. He accepts responsibility of his past conduct, and is 
committed to his sobriety, his family, and his job.  
 
 Applicant candidly disclosed derogatory information about his alcohol abuse, 
alcohol-related arrests, and his marijuana use. His voluntary disclosures of adverse 
 14 
information and his positive behavioral changes are a testament to his trustworthiness, 
reliability, and good judgment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions 
or doubts about Applicant’s present eligibility for a security clearance. 
  
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines G, H, 
J, and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his conduct. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H (Drug Involvement)  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 4.a – 4.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
