 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01131 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 27, 2015. 
On July 4, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F.1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 8, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of 
hearing on March 8, 2017, and the hearing was convened on April 4, 2017. Government 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence. Applicant testified and, after the 
hearing, submitted exhibits that were marked and admitted as (AE) A. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 13, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old systems and software engineer employed by a defense 
contractor since May 2016. He was previously employed with another contractor from 
October 2015 to May 2016. He was unemployed from August to October 2015 and 
September 2013 to July 2014; and he did not receive payment due to him for work he 
performed in 2009. He was awarded a master’s degree in business administration in 
1987. He is currently unmarried, and was previously divorced in 1998 and 2006. He has 
two adult children. He previously held a DOD security clearance and public trust position. 
 
The SOR alleges 16 delinquent debts totaling over $143,000, including about 
$138,000 in delinquent Federal and state tax debts. In addition, he is alleged to have 
failed to file his 2009 Federal income tax return. Applicant admitted the Federal tax 
delinquencies, but denied the debts owed to a state tax authority and the remaining debts 
alleged in the SOR. He also claimed he filed his 2009 Federal income tax return despite 
the allegation to the contrary. No evidence was presented to support the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 1.q, and is resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Applicant asserted that he has filed all Federal income tax returns and is currently 
up-to-date. He failed to pay Federal income taxes owed from 2006 to 2008 because he 
invested a total of $200,000 in overseas mortgage-backed securities that failed to pay the 
expected return. This resulted in the IRS filing tax liens in 2007, 2008, and 2009. 
Applicant’s substantial investment losses were not deductible since they were incurred 
from an overseas investment. As a result, he did not have sufficient money to pay his 
taxes when due. 
 
In 2013, Applicant sought advice from a tax-relief attorney, but disagreed with the 
cost of service after consulting her, and disputed a charge made on his credit card. The 
account is currently in a collection status (SOR ¶ 1.p) for $1,002. He timely notified the 
attorney and disputed the charge with his credit card company. Applicant also sought the 
assistance from a professional tax advocate, who determined that, as of 2014, he owed 
$158,687 in unpaid taxes, interest, and penalties to the IRS. After the IRS involuntarily 
recovered about $16,000 from his bank account and withholding income tax refunds, his 
IRS debt was placed in a “currently not collectable” (CNC) status. A CNC designation is 
not a permanent status, but is reviewed by the IRS as a taxpayer’s income status 
changes. Applicant stated his intent not to file an offer-in-compromise to resolve his debts 
as they are currently uncollectable, and he can allow the statute of limitations to expire in 
order to avoid paying anything further. 
 
In 2013, Applicant suffered two heart attacks. His employer’s health insurance plan 
paid the majority of the medical bills, but he incurred several small charges that he did 
not pay. The debts appear on his credit report as unpaid and in a collection status. (SOR 
 
3 
 
¶¶ 1.h – 1.o) Applicant disputed these debts in his answer to the SOR and after issuance 
of the SOR, sent letters of dispute to the respective creditor. He largely claimed in his 
answer that he was unaware of amounts owed to an ambulance company and hospital, 
however during the hearing, he acknowledged the debts and stated he would pay them. 
He also disputed debts owed to collection companies for phone and credit card accounts 
after issuance of the SOR. (SOR ¶¶ 1.f – 1.g) No documentary evidence of good faith 
payments, answers to written disputes, or other debt resolution solutions were submitted. 
 
A state tax authority filed tax liens in 2008 and 2010 for unpaid income taxes. 
Applicant testified that he paid the tax debts through state tax refund withholdings. After 
the hearing, Applicant inquired with the state tax authority and provided evidence that the 
state tax liens were issued in error, and withdrawn. 
 
Applicant submitted a personal financial statement with his answer to the SOR, 
showing a salary of about $75,000 (2016), a monthly net remainder of $709, and an IRA 
valued at $14,000. Applicant testified that his current income is about $85,000 and his 
IRA is worth about $6,500. He received financial counseling in 2016. A counseling report 
submitted with his answer to the SOR showed a surplus income of $2,200; however, at 
the hearing, he admitted that the surplus was largely applied toward additional expenses. 
In 2004, Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy, claiming liabilities of $343,189. The 
bankruptcy was discharged in October 2004.2 
 
Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, on June 8, 2017. The revised guidelines are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
                                                     
2 The bankruptcy was not alleged in the SOR, but may be considered when evaluating Applicant’s history 
of financial responsibility and in the whole-person analysis. 
 
4 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
5 
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant’s admissions, testimony, and the documentary evidence are sufficient to 
establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent and numerous, and there is insufficient 
evidence to determine that they were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely 
to recur. Applicant claims he has insufficient income to pay his debts, and has chosen to 
allow his IRS debts to remain unpaid. He lost income due to periods of unemployment 
and the failure of an employer to pay him in 2009, but his IRS debts were largely incurred 
from poor investments of funds he needed to pay income tax obligations. In addition, he 
 
6 
 
has not shown that he has satisfactorily resolved the remaining medical, phone, and credit 
card debts, despite his assertions during the hearing. 
 
Applicant has a long history of financial irresponsibility, and had significant debt 
discharged in 2004 through bankruptcy. Despite a recently steady employment history, 
he did not responsibly address his delinquent debts and failed to show an intent to fully 
resolve his Federal tax obligations. He obtained advice from professionals in an attempt 
to resolve his tax debts, but has not taken satisfactory action to resolve them after finding 
steady employment in 2015. He also received credit counseling in 2016, but his budget 
figures were controverted at the hearing. I find no mitigating condition fully applies except 
that Applicant’s state tax debts were resolved, and his debt with a tax relief attorney has 
been legitimately disputed. His controverted medical and credit-card debts were not 
shown to be legitimately disputed or otherwise resolved. No evidence was presented to 
show that Applicant failed to file his 2009 Federal tax return, and Applicant refuted the 
allegation. 
 
Overall, Applicant’s unresolved debts, especially his delinquent Federal tax 
obligations and the circumstances in which they were incurred, reflect poorly on his 
financial management decisions and personal financial responsibility. His finances are in 
a precarious position due to a lack of funds to pay debts, despite being steadily employed 
since October 2015. His financial stability, decisions, and financial integrity raise 
significant concerns. I am not convinced Applicant is financially responsible, makes good 
financial decisions, or is currently financially stable. These factors do not demonstrate the 
high degree of judgment and reliability required for access to classified information. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Applicant has not shown that he is now financially stable and able to adequately 
address his past financial delinquencies. Additionally, his decisions with regard to 
investing money in risky investments instead of paying Federal tax obligations, 
demonstrate a lack of financial responsibility. Despite his steady employment since 2015, 
he has not adequately addressed his delinquencies. Accordingly, I conclude he has not 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national security 
interests of the United States to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.d, 1.p, and 1.q:  For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.e – 1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
