 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00381 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant currently owes a substantial child support arrearage that he 
accumulated over the years and either could not, or chose not to, repay or successfully 
dispute.  Applicant was also charged with 11 crimes from 1989 to 2017, to include 
several charges of violent conduct. One count of criminal conduct occurred after the 
SOR was issued and is pending jury trial. He failed to demonstrate rehabilitation and 
overall use of good judgment. The resulting security concerns were not mitigated. 
Based upon a review of the testimony, pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility 
is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On March 17, 2015, Applicant completed and signed his security clearance 
application (SCA). On December 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 
 
 
 
 
2 
2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs). The SOR set forth security concerns arising under the 
financial considerations guideline and criminal conduct guideline.1  
 
On January 4, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. He submitted two character reference letters 
with his answer, which I marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and B. On March 21, 
2017, Department Counsel requested to amend the SOR by adding eight allegations 
under paragraph 2 (SOR ¶¶ 2.c through 2.j). In addition, Department Counsel requested 
adding paragraph 3 containing one allegation (SOR ¶ 3.a.) under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). Applicant did not respond to the request to amend the SOR. On October 11, 
2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of Hearing, 
setting the hearing for November 1, 2017. On October 17, 2017, the case was assigned 
to me.  
 
During the hearing, Department Counsel asked that his request to amend the 
SOR be granted. Applicant had not answered the amended SOR, which was sent to 
him in March 2017, at his former address, and again on October 12, 2017, at his current 
address. Applicant stated that he had received the SOR amendment as well as the 
exhibits from Department Counsel in October 2017. After determining that sufficient 
time had passed for Applicant to answer the SOR amendment, I granted the 
Government’s request to amend the SOR. Applicant then admitted ¶¶ 2.d. through 2.i, 
and denied ¶¶ 2.c, 2.j and 3.a. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 11 into evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, 
and offered one additional document (AE C) into evidence during the hearing. AE A, B 
and C were entered into evidence without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to 
leave the record open until December 1, 2017. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on November 8, 2017. I allowed Applicant to submit his post-hearing documents 
after the deadline. On January 8, 2018, he submitted AE D through P, which were 
admitted without objection. The record closed on January 9, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact:  Applicant is 46 years old, never 
married, and the father of four children, ages 23, 13, 11 and 7. He completed two years 
of college, but did not earn a degree. He received some computer programing 
certifications. He is employed by a DoD contractor since January 2015. He currently 
holds a security clearance that he has continuously held since approximately 2008. (Tr. 
36-40; AE C) 
 
 The SOR alleges three past-due child support accounts totaling about $15,500, 
and a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case filed in February 2014, with liabilities totaling over 
$200,000. The debtor was discharged in May 2014. (GE 7) Applicant admitted all of the 
                                            
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
3 
Guideline F allegations. SOR paragraph 2 (Criminal Conduct) alleged that he was 
arrested on ten occasions from 1989 to 2010. He denied SOR ¶¶ 2.c and 2.j, and 
admitted ¶¶ 2.a., 2.b, and 2.d through 2.i. SOR paragraph 3 (Personal Conduct) alleges 
that all of the arrests cited under Paragraph 2 are also security concerns under 
Guideline E. Applicant denied ¶ 3.a.  
 
 Applicant states his financial issues were the result of a low-paying job, 
overwhelming child-support payments, and a period of unemployment. He has worked 
consistently since January 2007, with a period of unemployment from September 2014 
to January 2015. He testified that he currently pays approximately $1,900 per month for 
his three minor children, and he is left with about a $2,600 monthly net remainder. He 
also testified that he was awarded a settlement of approximately $10,000 in 2015 that 
he saves for emergency. He does not have a written budget, and other than taking the 
required credit counseling from filing bankruptcy in 2014, he has never enrolled in any 
other form of credit counseling. He testified that his child-support arrearage listed in the 
SOR would not be reduced from the amounts listed in the SOR, despite paying $1,900 
every month. (Tr. 40-49, 51; 54; AE C, E, F, G)  
 
 Applicant provided no budget information from which to predict his future 
solvency. The documentation he did provide actually showed that he owed over 
$19,000 in delinquent child support. (AE E, F and G) He claims that the total 
outstanding amount listed on AE G, a printout from the state’s child support 
enforcement agency, was incorrect. He did not obtain a corrected record from this 
agency or provide other evidence to substantiate his claim.  
 
 Applicant was arrested in 1989 and charged with unlawful possession and two 
counts of unlawful manufacture of a controlled substance. (¶ 2.j) He was arrested in 
1990 and charged with distribution of cocaine. (¶ 2.i) He was arrested again in 1990 and 
charged with theft: $300 plus value. (¶ 2.h) In 1992, Applicant was arrested for three 
counts of assault with intent to murder, two counts of reckless endangerment, and three 
counts with use of a handgun while committing a crime. (¶ 2.g) He was arrested again 
in 1992 and charged with malicious destruction of property. (¶ 2.f) In January 1993, he 
was charged with trespassing on private property. (¶ 2.e) He was arrested in February 
1993 and charged with battery. (¶ 2.d) He was arrested in 2001 and charged with two 
counts of assault, one count of theft, and one count of unlawful use of a livestock 
vehicle. (¶ 2.c) In September 2010 he was arrested for violation of a protective order, 
and he was arrested in October 2010 and charged with assault, reckless 
endangerment, and malicious destruction of property. (¶¶ 2.a., 2.b) The criminal arrests 
are supported by his admissions and GE 9, 10 and 11. 
 
 During the hearing, Applicant testified that he was arrested again in about June 
2017 for malicious destruction of property – value $1,000. He stated that he was found 
guilty of this charge and sentenced to jail for six months and ten days, with six months 
suspended. He was also ordered to make restitution to his ex-girlfriend. He denied 
being on probation, and he stated that he had appealed the court’s ruling.  
Documentation provided by Applicant showed that a jury trial for his June 2017 charge 
 
 
 
 
4 
is set for the end of this month. (AE K) The documentation provided is incomplete as 
well as insufficient to show that the case was appealed by Applicant, or that any charge 
in this case had been dismissed. (Tr. 57- 63; AE K, L) Although this information was not 
alleged under Guideline J, I have considered it as probative to Applicant’s showing of 
rehabilitation.  
 
 Applicant stated in his January 2017 answer that his criminal charges were 
mistakes that occurred in the past, and with counseling and support, he has been able 
to change and become a better person. He is involved with speaking to young men and 
women about making good life choices and domestic violence issues. He provided a 
letter from a former ex-girlfriend indicating that since 2010, she had observed positive 
changes in the Applicant. She stated that they now have a healthy co-parenting 
relationship with their son. In addition, a letter from Applicant’s licensed clinical therapist 
dated May 13, 2011, stated that Applicant had attended weekly counseling sessions for 
the past eight months to address anger management and domestic violence issues. 
She stated that Applicant had learned to identify triggers, and how to use better 
strategies for leading a violence-free lifestyle. Applicant also had several character 
references stating that he is dependable, hard-working, and an asset to the community. 
(AE A, B, H, I and J) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
 
 
5 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for 
access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant incurred numerous delinquent debts, totaling more than $200,000. He 
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2014 while he was employed full time. The debts 
included in his bankruptcy were discharged in 2014, yet his child support arrearage to 
 
 
 
 
6 
his three minor children remains significant and not fully resolved. Therefore, substantial 
delinquent debt remains, concerning which he demonstrated neither a long track record 
of progress toward resolution nor a legitimate basis for dispute. These facts establish 
prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to 
Applicant to mitigate the resulting security concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes six conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant continues to owe a substantial child-support arrearage that he incurred 
over the years to his three minor children. His only period of unemployment occurred 
from September 2014 to January 2015. Applicant provided documentation of the court-
ordered payments taken from his paycheck for the past six months. The documents 
provided by Applicant actually showed more money owed for the child-support 
arrearage than what was listed in the SOR. Applicant marked on AE G that the amount 
recorded was incorrect, but he failed to supply a corrected record from the state. 
Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish complete mitigation of security concerns 
arising from his financial irresponsibility under any of these conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 30, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 31, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
Applicant has a long pattern of criminal conduct. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from criminal conduct. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
There is evidence of additional misconduct since Applicant was charged with a 
criminal offense in June 2017, after the SOR was issued. With his long pattern of 
arrests over the years, I am not satisfied that his criminal conduct is unlikely to recur. 
AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply. Applicant’s most recent charge is pending jury trial and is 
unresolved. He failed to provide evidence to show that he is fully rehabilitated. AG ¶ 
32(d) does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
8 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. . . .  
 
Applicant’s criminal conduct was addressed under the specific guideline, as cited 
above. The same issues were cross-alleged under the personal conduct guideline. No 
specific personal conduct allegations were raised beyond what was raised under the 
appropriate guidelines. I have previously addressed the criminal conduct and to do so 
under personal conduct is redundant and unnecessary. I find against Applicant 
regarding personal conduct concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for the decisions that led to a substantial child-support arrearage he 
did not pay in a timely manner. He continues to owe substantial delinquent child support 
debt that he accumulated over the years and either could not, or chose not to, repay or 
successfully dispute. He has engaged in criminal conduct repeatedly over the years, 
and he was charged again for similar criminal conduct after he answered his SOR in 
January 2017. This criminal charge is still pending. A past coworker, family and friends 
 
 
 
 
9 
provided strong character references. However, there is insufficient evidence of 
rehabilitation, or an indication that his criminal behavior is unlikely to recur. Overall, the 
evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the guidelines for financial considerations, criminal conduct, and personal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.j:   Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information or to occupy a sensitive position. National security 
eligibility is denied. 
                                        
         
 
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
