 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03315 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 17, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 5, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under 
Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available 
to the government, DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR on January 5, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (RSOR.) The case was assigned to me on February 7, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
February 8, 2017, setting the hearing for March 21, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were 
admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented two 
documents, which were identified and entered into evidence without objection as 
Exhibits A and B. The record was left open until April 14, 2017, for receipt of additional 
documentation. Additional documents were timely received and have been entered into 
evidence without objection as Exhibits C and D. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (TR) on March 29, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, as described 
above, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of 
fact:  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old.  He is married, and he has two adult children. Applicant 
graduated high school and attended two years of college. Applicant has been employed 
by a defense contractor as a Mechanic Technician Composite, and he seeks a DoD 
security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 The SOR lists nine allegations (1.a. through 1.i.) regarding financial difficulties, 
specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. All of the SOR allegations 
were admitted by Applicant on his RSOR. The debts will be discussed below in the 
order they were listed on the SOR: 
 
 1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $7,223. No evidence has been submitted to establish that this debt has been 
resolved or reduced.    
 
 1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $1,651. No evidence has been submitted to establish that this debt has been 
resolved or reduced.   
 
 1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $1,159. No evidence has been submitted to establish that this debt has been 
resolved or reduced.    
 
 1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $1,281. No evidence has been submitted to establish that this debt has been 
resolved or reduced.    
            
 
3 
 
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $838. No evidence has been submitted to establish that this debt has been resolved 
or reduced.   
 
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $474. No evidence has been submitted to establish that this debt has been resolved 
or reduced.   
  
 1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $456. No evidence has been submitted to establish that this debt has been resolved 
or reduced.   
 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $456. No evidence has been submitted to establish that this debt has been resolved 
or reduced.   
  
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $278. No evidence has been submitted to establish that this debt has been resolved 
or reduced.   
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that for the last four years he has been trying to 
catch up to pay all of his overdue debts, but he has been unable to do so. Four years 
ago, his company could not get a new contract, and so the employees voluntarily cut 
the amount of hours they would work. He claimed that he lost about one week each 
month, and this lasted approximately three and a half to four years. In January 2016, his 
company won a new contract, and he is now back to working a full schedule. He 
explained that he was not a good money manager, so he was not able to reduce his 
debts, even though he was now working full-time. He was referred to a credit counseling 
company from his employer, but they required that he sign a contract and pay a fee 
before they would tell him how they would help him, so he decided against using their 
services.  (Tr at 28-33.)  
 
In November 2016, he engaged the services of a bankruptcy attorney, and on 
January 13, 2017, the attorney filed a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy on behalf of Applicant and 
his wife. (Tr at 33-37.) Exhibit A is a Notice of Bankruptcy Meeting of Creditors.  Exhibit 
B is an email from the bankruptcy attorney to Applicant, in which he writes that the 
trustee filed a “Report of No Distribution”, indicating that there did not appear to be any 
problems with the bankruptcy.  
 
No documentation was offered into evidence by Applicant to show which debts 
were included in the bankruptcy. The record was left open to allow him to get from the 
attorney a copy of the completed bankruptcy form to show what creditors were listed on 
the bankruptcy. Applicant was also provided additional time to submit a brief letter from 
the bankruptcy attorney in which he would explain the status of the bankruptcy. While 
Applicant did submit post-hearing documents, he never submitted anything to establish 
which creditors were listed on the bankruptcy, nor did he offer a letter from the attorney. 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant did submit two Certificates of Debtor Education forms, showing that 
Applicant and his wife each completed a personal financial management course. 
(Exhibit C.) He also submitted a personal financial statement for him and his wife, 
showing their monthly income is $4,718 and their monthly expenses are $4,647, leaving 
a net monthly remainder of $71. (Exhibit D.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
 
5 
 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; 
 
 
6 
 
(g) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that are inconsistent with known 
legal sources of income; 
 
(h) borrowing money or engaging in significant financial transactions to 
fund gambling or pay gambling debts; and 
 
(i) concealing gambling losses, family conflict, or other problems caused 
by gambling. 
 
  Applicant has had several delinquent debts for several years. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions (a) and (c) are in this case  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquencies to the diminution of his income for a four 
year period. This is a circumstance beyond his control, and he has attempted to resolve 
 
7 
 
his financial delinquencies with the legal remedy of bankruptcy. However, when he was 
provided the opportunity to submit documents establishing that the SOR delinquent 
debts were listed on the bankruptcy, and would thereafter be discharged in bankruptcy, 
he failed to do so. He also failed to establish the status of the bankruptcy. Therefore, 
insufficient evidence was submitted to show the overdue debts are in the process of 
being resolved, so I do not find that he has acted reasonably or responsibly with respect 
to his debts. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not been established. Nor do I find that 
any of the other mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are applicable in this case.  
Therefore, Guideline F is found against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns 
under the whole-person concept.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
