 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 16-00595 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Available information is not sufficient to overcome the security concerns raised 
by the Government’s adverse information about Applicant’s financial problems and 
personal conduct. Applicant’s request for eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On February 15, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information 
as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
 
2 
 
determine that it was clearly consistent with the interests of national security for 
Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
 
On August 15, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).2 At the time the SOR was written, the DOD CAF 
applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new 
set of AGs, effective for all security clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 
8, 2017. I have based my decision in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.3  
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On October 17, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)4 in support of 
the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on October 26, 2016, and had 30 days from the 
date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in response to the FORM.5 Applicant timely responded to 
the FORM and the record closed on January 10, 2017.  
 
 I received this case on October 1, 2017. Owing to the passage of time since 
Applicant responded to the FORM, I re-opened the record on November 21, 2017 to 
allow the parties to update the information presented in the FORM and Applicant’s 
response thereto.6 This case was ready for decision on December 8, 2017, after I 
received submissions from Department Counsel and Applicant.7 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes 
$30,656 for seven delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.g); and that he failed to 
file, as required, his federal income tax returns for tax years 2005 through 2010, but that 
he filed those returns in 2011 (SOR 1.h). Applicant admitted, with explanation, the debt 
alleged at SOR 1.e. He denied, with explanations, the remaining Guideline F 
allegations. Additionally, the Government alleged under Guideline E that Applicant 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on five enclosed exhibits (Items 
1 – 5). 
5 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
6 See Order of Administrative Judge, dated November 21, 2017, included as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1. 
 
7 In response to my order, Applicant submitted a one-page statement reiterating his position that he 
should continue to have access to classified information. It is included without objection as Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AX) A. 
 
3 
 
deliberately omitted the SOR 1.a – 1.g debts from his e-QIP (SOR 2.a). Applicant 
denied, with explanation, this allegation. (FORM, Item 1) 
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has 
worked since February 2015. His job site is in State A, and when he is not working 
there, he and his wife of nearly three years reside in State B. Applicant bought a house 
in State B in May 2015. Applicant previously was married between 1991 and 2005, and 
between 2006 and 2009. Both marriages ended in divorce. Applicant has two adult 
children. (FORM, Items 2 and 3) 
 
 Applicant served in the United States Navy from December 1976 until retiring as 
a senior chief petty officer in 1998. He held a security clearance for most of his military 
career. After retiring from the Navy, Applicant worked in jobs unrelated to the defense 
industry until he started working for his current employer. (FORM, Item 2) 
 
 Applicant did not list any adverse financial information in his e-QIP. During the 
ensuing background investigation, a credit report obtained in March 2015 reflected all of 
the debts listed in the SOR. The debts at SOR 1.a and 1.e arose after car loans he co-
signed for one of his adult children went unpaid. In response to the SOR, Applicant 
claimed the debt at SOR 1.a was resolved in late 2014 when the creditor cancelled the 
debt and issued an IRS Form 1099-C. Applicant stated this was reflected “against the 
appropriate income tax returns.” He did not provide any documentation to support his 
claims in this regard. Applicant stated he is negotiating a settlement to resolve SOR 1.e, 
but he did not corroborate his claim with any documentation. (FORM, Items 1 and 2) 
 
 The debt at SOR 1.b is for a delinquent sanitation services account. Applicant 
was aware of the account but claimed it was not his responsibility. Instead, he insisted it 
belonged to a company for whom he worked in 2006 and 2007. He did not support his 
claim with any documents; however, the debt does not appear on a credit report 
obtained in October 2016. Applicant denied the SOR 1.d debt because he has never 
heard of that creditor. (FORM, Items 1, 4 and 5) 
 
 Applicant claimed he hired a lawyer in about October 2014 to resolve his debts 
so he could qualify for financing to buy a house. He stated that the debts at SOR 1.a, 
1.c (a delinquent utility account) and SOR 1.f (a delinquent cell phone account he 
claims belongs to his second wife) were all resolved through the efforts of the law firm. 
He also claimed that the aforementioned debt at SOR 1.e is also being negotiated by 
the law firm. Applicant did not support his claims with any documentation. A credit report 
obtained in October 2016 still listed the debts at SOR 1.d – 1.f as delinquent and 
unresolved. (FORM, Items 2, 4, and 5) 
 
 On October 21, 2015, a government investigator interviewed Applicant as part of 
his background investigation. During that interview, Applicant discussed all of the debts 
in the SOR. He also volunteered that he had not filed his 2005 income tax returns 
because he was involved in an accident in 2006 that hindered his ability to meet such 
obligations. He also stated that he filed his 2006 – 2010 returns on time, but had to 
resubmit them in 2012 through an accountant after the IRS placed a lien against him for 
 
4 
 
past-due taxes totaling about $32,000. The lien was satisfied in April 2012. (FORM, 
Items 1, 3 and 4) 
 
 Applicant did not list any of his delinquent debts on his e-QIP in February 2015. 
He explained his omissions based on his claim that, in October 2014, he had hired a 
law firm to negotiate with his creditors and clean up his debts because he was trying to 
buy a house. He bought that house in May 2015. At the time he submitted his e-QIP in 
February 2015, he claims he believed that, except for the debt at SOR 1.e, all had been 
resolved. He did not explain his reasoning for not listing his SOR 1.e debt. (FORM, 
Items 1 – 3) 
 
 Applicant has not obtained any financial counseling, and did not provide any 
information about his current finances. In response to the FORM, Applicant provided 
information showing he is paying off a state tax debt not alleged in the SOR. The debt 
arose in July 2016, when the state placed a lien against Applicant. (FORM, Item 5) 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,8 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest9 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
                                                 
8 See Directive, 6.3. 
9 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 
 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.10 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.11 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information. A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.12 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s denials established those allegations as controverted issues of fact. 
Accordingly, the Government was required to produce substantial reliable information to 
support those allegations. Applicant’s admission to SOR 1.e, and the information 
contained in FORM, Items 3 – 5, are sufficient to establish the Guideline F allegations. 
The facts thus established reasonably raised the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 
18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts date back to 2008. The most recent credit report 
available no longer lists SOR 1.a – 1.c. Despite Applicant’s claims that, except for SOR 
1.e, he resolved all of his debts through a law firm in 2014, the remaining debts are still 
                                                 
10 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
11 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
12 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
unresolved. This information requires application of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶¶ 
19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).  
 
The disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or 
local income tax as required) does not apply. The same information that supports the 
allegation that Applicant did not timely file his income tax returns between 2005 and 
2010, also supports that part of the allegation that he filed those returns in 2011. 
 
 I have also considered whether the record supports application of any of the 
following AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
  
 Only the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(g) applies. Otherwise, Applicant did not 
present any information that supports any of these mitigating conditions. The 
Government established its case through FORM Items 1 – 5. As a result, it was 
incumbent on Applicant to present sufficient reliable information to refute the allegations 
or support application of the mitigating conditions. He did not do so. Despite making 
several claims in response to the SOR and the FORM, Applicant did not avail himself of 
his opportunity to document his efforts to resolve his debts. Accordingly, available 
 
7 
 
information is not sufficient to mitigate the security concerns established by the 
Government’s information. 
 
 
 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant deliberately tried to hide adverse 
information about his finances when he submitted his e-QIP. Such information raises 
the following security concern addressed at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or 
polygraph examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 More specifically, to be disqualifying, Applicant’s omissions must have been 
made intentionally. If Applicant intended to omit his debts, the disqualifying condition at 
AG ¶ 16(a) would apply: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 I conclude from all available information probative of this issue that Applicant 
knowingly and willfully omitted his debts from his e-QIP. At that time (early 2015), 
Applicant was in the process of trying to resolve his debts so he could buy a house. 
Even though some of his debts may have been resolved at the time (something 
Applicant has not documented), he still was required to disclose delinquencies within 
 
8 
 
the seven years preceding the e-QIP. Failure to disclose due to mistake or inadvertent 
error is not disqualifying; however, Applicant’s unexplained failure to disclose the 
unresolved SOR 1.e debt, or to give any indication of his financial problems, 
undermines any claim of mistake. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. I also considered the following 
pertinent AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 A review of the summary of Applicant’s subject interview with a government 
investigator shows that he was confronted with the debts he omitted from his e-QIP. 
Had he volunteered that information as he had his income tax filing discrepancies, AG ¶ 
17(a) might apply. Further, Applicant did not establish that he sought or received 
qualified advice regarding his e-QIP responses. Finally, Applicant’s conduct in this 
regard is fundamentally at odds with the Government’s compelling interest in having the 
information needed for a proper assessment of suitability for access to classified 
information. This is not a minor matter. On balance, Applicant’s response did not 
mitigate the security concerns raised by the Government’s information. 
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and F, I have reviewed the record before me in 
the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). I have considered 
Applicant’s honorable service to the country. Nonetheless, Applicant’s information did 
not resolve the doubts about his suitability for access to classified information that were 
raised by his financial problems and by his omission of information from his e-QIP. 
Because protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, 
any remaining doubts must be resolved against the individual. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
9 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
