  1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
  
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 16-03113  
      ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate financial 
security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 1, 2016, Applicant submitted his latest Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. (Item 3)1 Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator 
from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on August 9, 2016. (Item 4, Personal 
Subject Interview (PSI)) After reviewing the results of the background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue 
a security clearance. 
 
 On January 26, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
                                            
1 Applicant also submitted an e-QIP on August 22, 2014. (Item 2) 
  2 
 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD 
on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective 
for decisions issued after that date.2  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 23, 2017. He admitted two and denied 
one of the three allegations of delinquent debt with explanation. Applicant initially 
requested the case be decided after a hearing. On May 26, 2017, Applicant requested 
that the matter be decided on the written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s written case on June 28, 2017. (Item 7) Applicant received a complete 
file of relevant material (FORM) on July 29, 2017. He was provided the opportunity to file 
objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. Applicant responded to the FORM providing additional information. (Item 9) 
Department counsel had no objection to consideration of the additional material. (Item 
10) I was assigned the case on October 23, 2017.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the PSI (Item 4) was not 
authenticated and could not be considered over his objection. He was further advised that 
he could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear 
and accurate, and could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by 
a Government witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the 
summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the 
admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant timely responded to the FORM, but he did 
not raise any objection to consideration of the PSI. Since there is no objection by 
Applicant, I will consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings 
of fact. Applicant is 42 years old, and a June 1994 high school graduate. He was first 
married in September 1997, and divorced in June 2001. He has one child from a previous 
relationship. He married again in August 2014. He was employed as an information 
technology systems installer and operator for private and defense contractors in the 
United States. He was first granted eligibility for access to classified information in August 
2009. 
  
 Applicant was employed as a foreign disclosure officer for a defense contractor in 
2011. He served in Afghanistan in this position from February 2012 to May 2012, from 
January 2013 to June 2013, and from September 2014 to December 2014. He has been 
selected again as a foreign disclosure officer and is waiting for an updated security 
clearance to assume his job. While waiting to assume his new assignment, he has been 
                                            
2 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case were considered under the previous AGs.  
  3 
 
employed as a project manager for a hardware and plumbing company. (Item 2, e-QIP, 
dated August 22, 2014; Item 3, e-QIP, dated March 1, 2016; Item 4, PSI, dated August 9, 
2016)  
The SOR alleges and credit reports (Item 5, dated September 12, 2014; Item 6, 
dated May 13, 2016, Item 7, dated March 23, 2017) confirm the following delinquent debts 
for Applicant: a mortgage account past due for $8,778 with a loan balance of $154,186 
(SOR 1.a); a charged off home equity loan for $16,216 (SOR 1.b); and a dental account 
in collection for $739 (SOR 1.c). The total amount of the delinquent debt is approximately 
$25,000.  
In March 2007, Applicant and his then girlfriend purchased a condominium 
together for approximately $128,000. Neither of them could afford the mortgage alone so 
they had to be co-owners and co-mortgage holders. They also obtained a $16,000 home 
improvement loan to work on the residence. The condominium lost value in the real estate 
downturn in 2009, and is presently valued at approximately $80,000. Applicant and his 
girlfriend separated in 2009. Neither could afford the mortgage payments on their 
individual income. They tried to sell the condominium but to no avail.  
Applicant contacted the mortgage creditor and proposed various methods of 
resolving the mortgage including a short sale. Applicant tried to contact his former 
girlfriend and make arrangements to resolve the issue but she did not answer his 
correspondence. In November 2010, Applicant’s girlfriend filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
petition. Applicant could not proceed with any action on the condominium since it was 
included in the girlfriend’s bankruptcy. The girlfriend’s debts, including the mortgage, were 
discharged by bankruptcy in March 2011. (Item 9, Response to FORM, Bankruptcy 
Documents) 
Applicant’s efforts to dispose of the property and resolve the mortgage continued 
to be unsuccessful. The mortgage was sold numerous times pending a foreclosure. 
Applicant advised his employer that he was facing a foreclosure. Different creditors 
attempted to foreclose on the property but were delayed because of the pending 
bankruptcy. The foreclosure documents were sent to Applicant at a hotel at a remote site 
where he was living temporarily. Applicant had moved when he received another 
assignment. He kept in contact with the mortgage company to inform them of his new 
location. Applicant did not receive the foreclosure documents and was unaware of the 
foreclosure procedure. The property was finally foreclosed in June 2016 and purchased 
by the mortgage creditor. The mortgage creditor is now trying to sell the property. (Item 
9, Response to FORM, Service of Process Documents) 
The present mortgage holder intends to sell the condominium to satisfy the 
mortgage loan. The home equity loan was charged off. Applicant and his creditors for the 
mortgage and home equity loan are waiting for the condominium to sell to determine the 
amount of Applicant’s liability, if any, for the two debts. The amount of Applicant’s debt 
will be based on the sale price of the condominium. (Item 4, PSI, at 4-6, Item 9, Response 
to FORM) 
  4 
 
 In the PSI, Applicant reported that he thought the debt at SOR 1.c was an old 
dental bill. Applicant was never contacted about the bill or debt, and it is listed as closed 
or charged off on a credit report. He contacted the listed credit card company for the debt 
asked for information on the debt and informed them that he is not the owner or borrower 
on the debt. He has not received a response. (Item 9. Response to FORM)  
 Applicant presented a July 2017 credit report with a credit score of 680. The credit 
report shows only six debts and all are paid as agreed. There are no collection actions or 
other delinquencies reported. The three SOR debts are not listed on the credit report. 
(Item 9, Credit Report) 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
  5 
 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified and sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) The 
financial security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about an 
individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security clearance 
adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly 
or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave 
in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with their creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent with 
the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her finances 
in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
 
Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Credit reports confirm the SOR delinquent 
debts. This information is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts, and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant’s failure to pay debts may show an inability and history of not meeting 
his financial obligations. Once the Government has established adverse financial issues, 
the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. The available evidence 
presented by Applicant shows that the debts may have been resolved. The debts are no 
longer listed on his credit reports, and the property is in foreclosure. While Applicant has 
not paid the debts, he has taken action to have the debts resolved. I considered the 
information and documents Applicant provided as mitigation in response to the SOR and 
FORM. Applicant has raised the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
  6 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible sources, such as a non-profit credit counselling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) apply. Applicant and his 
then girlfriend purchased a condominium together in 2007 because neither could afford 
the mortgage payment on their salary. They also co-signed a home equity loan for the 
property. The condominium lost value in the real estate downturn of 2009, and they were 
unable to sell the condominium. The couple separated in 2009. Applicant’s girlfriend filed 
a bankruptcy petition in 2011, and her liability for the debts was discharged.  
 
 These were isolated financial circumstances that are not likely to recur. The 
downturn in the housing market, the separation from his girlfriend, and the bankruptcy 
discharge of her debts were conditions beyond Applicant’s control. Applicant acted 
responsibly and in good-faith to resolve the debts. Good faith means acting in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. All that 
is required is that Applicant act responsibly given his circumstances. He must have a 
reasonable plan to resolve financial problems, and he must take significant actions to 
implement that plan. Applicant’s plan must show a systematic method of handling debts.  
 
 Applicant contacted the creditors and tried to develop a way, such as a short sale, 
to resolve the debts. The property has now been foreclosed and sold. Applicant’s credit 
report does not list any debt owed for this property. Applicant presented documents to 
show his attempt to correspond with the creditors to establish maintenance of contact, 
copies of debt disputes, evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, and other 
evidence of attempts to show progress or resolution of the debts. He did not hide the fact 
he was facing a foreclosure but kept his employer apprised of the foreclosure action. 
There is evidence indicating that his debt problems have been resolved, so his finances 
are under control. There is sufficient evidence to establish that Applicant was unable to 
make greater progress resolving his debts. He established his good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. 
 
  7 
 
 Applicant’s reasonable and responsible actions towards his finances is a strong 
indication that he will protect and safeguard classified or sensitive information. He 
presented information to show a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. Applicant presented 
sufficient information to mitigate financial security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access 
to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s years of service 
in the defense industry, particularly his service as a civilian in a combat zone. I considered 
that he successfully had eligibility for access to classified information since 2009.  
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, he supplemented the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding his financial circumstances, adequately articulate his positions, and provided 
facts to mitigate the financial security concerns. In short, the file contains sufficient 
evidence to establish that he made every effort to pay, settled, compromised, disputed, 
or otherwise resolved his delinquent accounts. The record shows corroborating or 
substantiating documents and details to explain his finances. Applicant’s appropriate 
management of his finances, and his actions to resolve financial issues, are firm 
indications that he will adequately safeguard classified information. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me without questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. He established his suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising from his financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
  8 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified 
information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
