 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 16-02652 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Peter G. Irot, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct, 
and the related cross-allegations under Guideline F, financial considerations. He 
acknowledged his wrongdoing and showed significant changed circumstances since the 
events at issue. His security-significant behavior is unlikely to recur. He established that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security that he be granted access to 
classified information. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in February 2015, in 
connection with his employment in the defense industry. (GE 1) On February 17, 2017, 
following a background investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct, and Guideline J, 
 
2 
 
 
criminal conduct. Some of the Guideline E concerns were also cross-alleged under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.1 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 8, 2017, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on May 12, 2017. On October 27, 2017, a Notice of Hearing 
was issued scheduling the hearing for November 17, 2017. The hearing convened as 
scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel submitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 3. Applicant appeared with counsel. A document attached to the answer was 
marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. All exhibits were admitted without objection. 
Applicant and five other witnesses testified.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
The new AGs became effective on June 8, 2017, for all adjudicative decisions on or 
after that date.2 Any changes resulting from the implementation of the new AGs did not 
affect my decision in this case.  
 
Amendments to the SOR 
 
 At the start of the hearing, the Government moved to withdraw the Guideline J 
allegation (SOR ¶ 2.a). The Government later moved to withdraw the reference to SOR 
¶ 1.d, as cross-alleged under SOR ¶ 3.a. The motions were granted without objection. 
(Tr. 12, 205-206) 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 In his answer, Applicant admitted all the allegations, with explanations. His 
admissions and explanations are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He and his wife have been married for 20 years. They 
have two children, ages 7 and 12. Applicant works for a defense contractor providing 
audio-visual production services for the U.S. Army. He has worked in his current 
position since February 2015. This is his first application for a security clearance. (Tr. 
11-12, 22-23, 92, 109; GE 1; AE A) 
 
Applicant attended college and graduate school at a large state university 
(“University”). He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1998 and a master’s degree in 2006. 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 Applicant’s counsel confirmed that he received the new AGs before the hearing. (Transcript (Tr.) 7). 
 
 
3 
 
 
While in college, he worked as a scholarship student in the video office of the 
University’s athletic department. After graduating, he was hired as a full-time employee, 
and he remained there until he resigned in April 2014. By the time he left, he led the 
athletic department’s video and broadcast office. (Tr. 23-25, 33; GE 1, 2, 3)  
 
The SOR alleged that in November 2012, Applicant received a written reprimand 
from the University for inappropriate behavior in the workplace (SOR ¶ 1.h) and was 
counseled for having inappropriate boundary issues with students, including females, 
and for abusing his authority over subordinates. (SOR ¶ 1.i) These allegations relate to 
an investigation for possible violation of University sexual harassment and workplace 
policies.  
 
In fall 2012, Applicant and other video office employees travelled, on University 
business, to another city for a football game. While at local bars with fellow employees, 
Applicant purchased alcoholic drinks for a female student to celebrate her 21st birthday, 
and he had several beers himself. During the evening, Applicant touched the female 
student on her back and arm. He was also observed “spending a lot of time and paying 
an inordinate amount of attention” to her. She later indicated to University interviewers 
that the level of his attention made her uncomfortable. (GE 3 at 2-3; Answer)  
 
During the University investigation, the female student and others who reported 
to Applicant in the video office told investigators that he treated female students 
differently than males. He reportedly made “gender tinged” or sexist comments towards 
the female students, such as constantly calling them “spoiled,” putting them down, and 
criticizing them. At other times, he was observed treating females more favorably than 
males. He was often observed getting too physically close to them. (GE 3 at 5) 
 
Applicant’s actions towards the female student on the business trip did not 
constitute sexual harassment under University policy. However, his workplace conduct 
did violate University policy, as it “unreasonably interfered with the work performance of 
his female students, and created a work and learning environment that is hostile and 
intimidating.” The matter was referred to University legal counsel and human resources, 
but there is no documentation of any further action. (Tr. 84-88, 126-130; GE 3 at 5-6)3 
 
Applicant stated in his answer that he “discontinued attending events like this 
with students entirely” and also stopped drinking. Applicant testified that he later went 
through training, and learned not [to fraternize] with employees as a supervisor. (Tr. 
128; Answer) 
 
In about 2003, Applicant set up his own video production company with another 
University employee.4 The SOR alleges that between about 2007 and 2014, Applicant 
                                                          
3 Applicant did not reference a “written reprimand” in either his answer or his testimony, and there is no 
record evidence that he received one, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. Applicant testified that he went through 
training after the investigation, but it is not clear if he was “counseled,” as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. (GE 3)  
  
4 Tr. 27-31, 64-65, 98-100. The other employee relinquished his ownership interest in 2009. (GE 2 at 3) 
 
4 
 
 
misused significant University athletic department resources, facilities and employees, 
to further his own business. His company improperly received about $331,000 for this 
work, resulting in about $187,000 in improper personal profit to Applicant. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.b) There are also allegations of double-billing (SOR ¶ 1.e), preparation of 
improper timesheets (SOR ¶ 1.g), and improper use of University computers and e-mail 
to run his business (SOR ¶ 1.f). Some or all of this conduct was alleged to represent a 
conflict of interest under University policy. (SOR ¶ 1.c) Applicant also allegedly failed to 
fully report his outside income to the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), as 
required. (SOR ¶ 1.d). Four of these personal conduct allegations (¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c and 
1.e) are also cross-alleged as the financial security concerns. (SOR ¶ 3, as amended).5 
 
 These allegations stem from the findings of a University investigation concerning 
Applicant’s use of university resources for his own private company for work “closely 
related to the work he performed for the university.” He also did not “clearly and cleanly 
separate the personal financial aspects of his personal business from his activities and 
responsibilities” as a University employee. The University also found that Applicant did 
not disclose his personal business to the University, as required, for a determination of 
whether it posed a conflict of interest. (GE 2 at 1) 
 
 Through his company, Applicant hired University employees, working under his 
supervision, to perform film and video services for his business. Their work was within 
the scope of their university duties. Applicant made no effort to separate these duties. 
The salaried University employees took no leave for the work they did for Applicant’s 
company. They recorded their time on University timesheets the Applicant approved. He 
was therefore found by the University to have “in effect” approved falsified leave and 
timesheet records. (GE 2 at 2) 
 
As part of his University employment, Applicant would handle contacts from the 
media to set up satellite interviews of University student-athletes, coaches and staff. 
These interviews were conducted in an athletic department studio, with university 
cameras. Applicant’s company billed the media organizations for this work. The only 
related expense his company incurred was paying the employees for filming the 
interviews. Through his use of University employees, equipment and facilities, this 
resulted in a financial gain to Applicant of just under $30,000. (GE 2 at 3-4) Applicant 
testified that University officials knew the interviews were taking place. He also said he 
did not have the University’s written permission to conduct them while working for his 
company. (Tr. 100-101,122-126; GE 2 at 3-4)  
  
 In connection with the interviews, Applicant’s company also invoiced outside 
media organizations for “satellite uplink” connection fees. In fact, the University paid the 
satellite fees because of the publicity the interviews brought to the athletic department. 
Applicant testified that the video company invoices he initially prepared had an all-
inclusive “flat fee.” At the media companies’ request, Applicant later “broke out” the 
satellite fees separately. He acknowledged at hearing that he made up the figure in the 
                                                          
5 The Government withdrew SOR ¶ 2.a, concerning a 2010 arrest for driving under the influence.  
 
 
5 
 
 
satellite fee line item in these invoices, though he said the flat fee amount always 
remained unchanged. He failed to reimburse the University for most of the funds he 
received. He stated he was inexperienced in preparing these invoices, and denied any 
“malicious intent.” He now understands the need for proper documentation. (SOR ¶ 1.e) 
(Tr. 65-78; 101-104, 120-122; GE 2 at 3-4; Answer) 
 
Applicant’s company invoiced the University’s athletic conference for filming and 
broadcasting certain conference championship events held on campus. Of the $24,800 
Applicant’s company received from the conference for this work between 2009 and 
2013, Applicant paid $7,200 to University employees and students for their work on the 
camera crews. This resulted in $17,600 in improper personal gain to Applicant. He also 
instructed student workers to record their time for these events on University 
timesheets. He used University cameras and equipment to broadcast these events. (Tr. 
26-39, 52-55; GE 2 at 4) 
 
Similarly, the University participated in a conference-wide “subscription service” 
by which viewers could watch a wide variety of conference sporting events. The 
conference’s television providers paid conference schools to film such events on 
campus. The providers also provided filming equipment and a server, so the events 
could be “live-streamed” online. Applicant also filmed these events with his company. 
Related payments were deposited into Applicant’s company account. He then paid 
University employees and student workers for their work filming these events without 
reimbursing the University. (Tr. 26-39; 110-118; GE 2 at 4)  
 
Applicant often videotaped football practice as part of his University job. He 
therefore had frequent interaction with the University’s head football coach. The coach 
had a television show, and he asked Applicant to film commercials for the show’s 
sponsors. Applicant and three other university employees did the work, using university 
cameras. Applicant testified that he did this for about a dozen years. He testified that 
“[the football coach] and other full-time administrators knew about this. It didn’t occur to 
me that it was an issue.” (Tr. 40-47; GE 2 at 4-5) 
 
The University’s investigation found that between 2007 and 2013, the coach’s 
business paid Applicant’s company over $213,000 for the commercials. Applicant paid 
the other employees over $74,000 for their work. Neither Applicant nor the other 
employees recorded leave while filming these commercials for the coach. Thus, “in 
effect, [they] received dual compensation.” Applicant received a personal gain of over 
$138,000 from these commercials. (GE 2 at 5) This represents the bulk of the $187,320 
Applicant was found to have gained through diversion of his services to his company. 
(GE 2 at 1) (SOR ¶ 1.b) 
 
Applicant and his company also used University employees or scholarship 
students to film football players’ pre-draft workouts for pro team scouts. The workouts 
were arranged by the athletic department and occurred on University property. 
Applicant invoiced each pro team for copies of workout films, compensated employees 
through his company, and did not require that they take leave from the university while 
 
6 
 
 
doing this work. Since they did not record leave, the University found that they “in effect 
received dual compensation.” (Tr. 119-120, 130-133; GE 2 at 4-5) 
 
As the head of the video office, Applicant hired people to videotape football 
games on game days. He prepared timesheets and invoices at the start of the season, 
for the workers to initial in advance. Sometimes workers did not work all the games they 
were scheduled to. Once this came to light, the University financial office requested that 
Applicant prepare timesheets on game day, not in advance, and he complied. (SOR ¶ 
1.g)(Tr. 79-84; Answer)6 
 
As an athletic department employee, Applicant was required, under NCAA 
bylaws and University policy, to report outside income and benefits to the NCAA on an 
annual disclosure form. Applicant testified that he understood that he was to report 
income he received from the University’s apparel contract, and income he received from 
coaches’ camps and clinics. Applicant did not report income earned through his video 
production company. He was informed by the University that the information he reported 
on the NCAA form was incomplete. (SOR ¶ 1.d) (Tr. 55-62; GE 2 at 6; Answer)  
 
Applicant testified that he misunderstood what sources of income were to be 
reported: “I didn’t think that was what they were looking for.” He believed he had to 
report outside income which might be considered a recruiting violation, and did not 
consider that his company’s income should have been included. He stated that he did 
not intend to mislead the University or the NCAA. There is no record evidence of any 
NCAA annual financial disclosure form Applicant prepared. The University’s 
investigation concluded that the matter should be referred to appropriate athletic 
department authorities for possible self-reporting to the NCAA. There is no record 
evidence of what actions were taken by the athletic department. (Tr. 55-62; GE 2 at 6; 
Answer)  
 
At times, Applicant used his University e-mail account for personal purposes. He 
said this was due to working long hours, often seven days a week. Twenty company 
invoices were found on his University computer. (SOR ¶ 1.f)(Tr. 78-79, 105; GE 2 at 2-
3)) 
 
Applicant did not recall any formal training that he received when he became a 
University employee. He attended annual conferences regarding the University’s 
television contract, and other matters related to his University position. During the 
University auditor’s investigation. Applicant was made aware of the faculty handbook, 
and his responsibility to follow it. He acknowledged that there should have been some 
“separation” between his company and his University employment. He also stated, “I do 
think it should have [fallen] on me, somewhere in there, to go and review [the 
handbook]. I think that is a big thing that has changed in my mindset, from working at 
[the University] until now, is that it should have been my responsibility.” (Tr. 48) 
Applicant testified that he has read a similar handbook related to his current position, 
                                                          
6 There is no record evidence that Applicant received a “written reprimand” concerning preparing 
timesheets in advance, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h, nor did he reference one in his answer or testimony.  
 
7 
 
 
and acknowledged responsibility for knowing it and following it. (Tr. 48-52; 90, 104-105, 
110, 126, 133-135)  
 
The University found that Applicant “unilaterally” referred the videography for 
numerous athletically-related university events to his personal company. He was 
essentially unsupervised. He had no routine meetings with his supervisor, and she was 
unaware of his personal business. They had no discussion about whether the athletics 
department should provide certain services and receive compensation for expenses. 
(GE 2 at 3, 5)  
 
The University also found Applicant both prepared invoices on University 
letterhead to media companies and received payments from them. This represented an 
“inadequate separation of duties in billing and collecting receivables.” (GE 2 at 5-6)  
 
The University found that Applicant failed to disclose his personal business to the 
University, as required by the University policy, and the faculty handbook. The lack of 
disclosure prevented university administrators from determining whether his personal 
business was a prohibited conflict of interest, or, if not, how it should have been 
monitored. (GE 2 at 1) 
 
The University concluded that Applicant’s business “is essentially a personal for-
profit business activity that competed with the University to perform athletically-related 
video services and likely would not have been approved by management, if disclosed.” 
(GE 2 at 1) The University further found that Applicant’s diversion of this work to his 
company “likely constitutes an individual conflict of interest under university policy” 
because his allegiance to the university was “unquestionably compromised.” (GE 2 at 
2)(quoting University policy) (SOR ¶ 1.c), 
 
Applicant resigned from his university employment in April 2014. He disclosed on 
his SCA that he was told he would be fired “due to allegations of embezzlement.” (GE 1 
at 13-15) Applicant also closed his video company. Although the University referred the 
matter to university police, no criminal charges were brought against him as a result of 
his conduct. (Tr. 87; 189-191; GE 2) 
 
Applicant testified that he is a different person since he worked at the University. 
He and his wife have a stronger marriage, and a better family life. Religion has taken on 
greater importance in his life. He has curtailed or ended his drinking. He is active in 
church youth activities and volunteers in his local community. (Tr. 88-98; 106-108, 110) 
 
Applicant’s wife testified that he is a more attentive husband and father since 
they moved away from the university town, in summer 2014. Before, he worked long 
hours and socialized with much younger college students. For some of that time, he and 
his wife were living apart. Now, he is more involved in their family, community and 
church life. He has also curtailed or ended his drinking. (Tr. 139-146) 
 
 
8 
 
 
A student pastor at Applicant’s church testified that Applicant is a regular 
participant and group leader mentoring youth members since about 2015. He is an 
excellent communicator and mentor. The witness considers Applicant to be committed, 
dependable and trustworthy. (Tr. 149-58) 
 
One of Applicant’s current co-workers testified. He has worked for many years in 
the defense industry. He testified that he could not do his job without Applicant. They 
travel together on business trips and are a “good team.” This witness was involved in 
interviewing and hiring Applicant. Applicant is punctual, responsive, and provides the 
Army a valuable service. Applicant’s family is important to him. (Tr. 160-169) 
 
Applicant’s immediate supervisor, a retired Army officer, testified that Applicant is 
trustworthy, dedicated, and willing to “go above and beyond” to get the job done. 
Applicant has never given any reason to doubt his trustworthiness or suitability for a 
clearance. (Tr. 171-177) 
 
Applicant’s final witness was the former director of the office where Applicant 
now works. He had recently retired from federal service.7 Applicant has worked in the 
office for almost three years. The witness attested to Applicant’s integrity and the fact 
that he never turned down an assignment. As the office director, he had final authority 
to sign off on Applicant’s work product for the government. Applicant was an excellent 
performer, and the witness never questioned his judgment, trustworthiness or reliability. 
Applicant also has good record-keeping habits. He also testified that he would “almost 
trust [Applicant] with my life.” (Tr. 179-188) 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by 
the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”8 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
                                                          
7 This witness also drove from several hours away, very shortly after having a medical procedure, so he 
could testify for Applicant. 
 
8 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
9 
 
 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
 This is an employment misconduct case, albeit one which might be covered in 
the sports section as well as the business section of the newspaper. While employed in 
the film and video office of the athletic department of his employer (and alma mater), 
Applicant set up his own private company which essentially competed with the 
University for videographic business. He did so without his employer’s knowledge or 
permission, and in direct violation of University policy. He used university employees, 
equipment and facilities in furtherance of his business, on university time. He was found 
to have diverted or misappropriated funds for his own use, through his business. 
Applicant acted unilaterally, with no direct or indirect supervision from university 
employees. He put his own interests ahead of his employer’s interests on numerous 
occasions.  
 
This case lies at the heart of the classified information process because the 
system counts on those granted the privilege of access to classified information to act in 
the nation’s best interest, and not in one’s own best interest. It’s also what one does 
when no one else is looking that counts more than anything. And that is the crux of this 
case.  
 
10 
 
 
 As to SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i, there is no record evidence of a written reprimand. 
SOR ¶ 1.h also does not detail any specific “inappropriate behavior in the workplace.” 
Applicant’s answers to these two allegations are almost identical. I find that SOR ¶ 1.h 
is duplicative of SOR ¶ 1.i, and, to the extent that it is not, is it is too vague to tell. 
Similarly, Applicant’s conduct on the road game business trip is an outgrowth of, and is 
also similar to, his general workplace behavior towards females and subordinates. It is 
therefore not sufficiently separate to constitute an independent allegation. 
 
 Through his company, Applicant received about $331,000 for videography 
services performed using University resources between April 2007 and January 2014. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b) Once he paid his employees, he received a personal profit of about 
$187,000. (SOR ¶ 1.a) These dollar figures are part of the same set of circumstances. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are therefore duplicative. Two other allegations (SOR ¶ 1.e 
(double-billing) and ¶ 1.f (computer and e-mail misuse) are essentially subparts of 
Applicant’s pattern of conduct, all of which fits under the umbrella of diverting university 
resources to his own business, and profiting from it (which is fully set forth in ¶ 1.b).  
 
 Finally, much of what Applicant did constituted at least a “likely” conflict of 
interest under University policy. No formal determination was made by University 
reviewers at the time, precisely because Applicant failed to disclose his conduct to 
proper authorities, as required. That said, whether or not Applicant’s conduct constituted 
a “conflict of interest,” as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, is essentially a factual or legal 
conclusion, which stems, again, from the same set of circumstances alleged elsewhere 
in the SOR’s personal conduct allegations. As such, it, too, is duplicative.9  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that 
is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
                                                          
9 When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2005) (same debt alleged twice).  
 
 
11 
 
 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may 
not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . . 
 
                     (2) any disruptive . . . or inappropriate behavior;  
 
  (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations;  
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of . . . [an] employer’s time or 
resources; and  
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment.  
 
 The conflict of interest (SOR ¶ 1.c) shown by Applicant’s misuse of university 
resources, misappropriation of university funds, double-billing, and improper 
timekeeping (¶¶ 1.a, 1.b (taken together), 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g) all satisfy AGs ¶¶ 16(c), ¶ 
16(d)(3) and (4). Applicant had a responsibility to follow the university’s written policies 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f) and did not do so. AG ¶ 16(f) therefore applies to that conduct.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 (f) also applies to SOR ¶ 1.i. Applicant’s conduct in 2012 towards female 
students and subordinate employees in the video office also constitutes “disruptive or 
inappropriate behavior,” under AG ¶16 (d)(2) 
 
AG ¶ 17 sets forth potentially applicable mitigating conditions under Guideline E:   
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
 
12 
 
 
 Applicant’s conduct towards students and subordinate employees as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.i occurred in 2012, about five years before the hearing. Applicant was later 
trained and counseled. There is no indication that Applicant engaged in any subsequent 
inappropriate behavior towards university students or other athletic department 
employees while he worked there. He stopped drinking and stopped inappropriate 
socializing with students and subordinates. There is no indication that he has current 
problems with treating females or subordinate employees properly. Applicant also 
moved to another part of the state with his family, and no longer works in a university 
environment. Several current co-workers and supervisors testified credibly in his favor. 
SOR ¶ 1.i is mitigated under AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d).  
 
 The other allegations, concerning Applicant’s video business and its relationship 
to his university job, all occurred more recently and over a longer period of time. That 
conduct is therefore more difficult to mitigate. 
 
 That said, Applicant cooperated with the University’s investigation into his 
actions. He acknowledged his wrongdoing and accepted responsibility for his actions. 
The University, too, acknowledged in its report that Applicant was allowed to act 
unilaterally in his own interests, with essentially no supervision. While that does not 
excuse Applicant’s conduct, that factor likely meant Applicant’s actions continued for 
longer than they otherwise might have. 
 
 But the issue here is Applicant’s mitigation, not the University’s. Applicant 
credibly established that he has undergone significant changes in his life since he 
resigned in 2014. He closed his business. He recommitted to his wife and his family. 
They moved away from the university town, to another part of the state. He has stopped 
or curtailed his drinking. He volunteers in his community, and his religious life is 
important to him. His work-related character witnesses offered strong, consistent, and 
credible testimony on his behalf, both as to his character and his professional skills. 
Applicant testified credibly that he has learned his lesson and will not engage in his 
security significant behavior again. For those reasons, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 
17(d) apply to the remaining Guideline E allegations.10  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
                                                          
10 As addressed above, several of the Guideline E allegations are duplicative and over-lapping, as they 
largely stem from the same set of circumstances. Even if they weren’t, they would still be mitigated under 
the same rationale.  
 
 
13 
 
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.11 
 
 The Government cross-alleged four personal conduct allegations (¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c 
and 1.e) as financial security concerns. (SOR ¶ 3, as amended). As addressed in 
Guideline E, above, several of these allegations are duplicative or at least overlap. 
 
Unlike most Guideline F cases, there is no allegation here of delinquent debt. 
The only potentially applicable disqualifying condition is ¶19(d) “deceptive or illegal 
financial practices such as embezzlement, employee theft, . . . and other intentional 
financial breaches of trust.” 
 
 Applicant stated on his SCA that he was told he would be fired “due to 
allegations of embezzlement.” However, that is the only place in the record evidence 
where that term is used. Embezzlement is a specific legal term, and a specific crime. I 
cannot find on the basis of that reference alone that “embezzlement” has been shown.  
 
 Applicant was found by the University to have misappropriated funds, and to 
have improperly diverted significant university resources to his own business. In doing 
so, Applicant was found to have violated University policy. As a University employee, he 
had a fiduciary duty to act in the University’s best interest. Applicant’s actions 
constituted an “intentional financial breach of trust,” and AG 19(d) applies. 
 
The Guideline F mitigating conditions include AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment”). AG ¶ 20(a) applies for the same reasons set forth 
under Guideline E, above.  
 
 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
14 
 
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. I have also considered the total 
pattern of Applicant’s behavior and poor judgment, not just in a piecemeal fashion as a 
series of unrelated incidents.12 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i:  For Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Withdrawn 
  
 Paragraph 3: Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant    
    
                                                          
12 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-22563 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (regarding the need to avoid a 
piecemeal analysis). 
 
15 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
