 1 
     
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 16-03408 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts, criminal 
activity, and his failure to appropriately disclose derogatory information as required on his 
security clearance application. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on March 22, 2016. 
On December 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines E, F, and J. The DOD acted 
under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR January 20, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on August 17, 2016. On August 19, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
 2 
(FORM,) which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 9, was sent to Applicant, 
who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on April 22, 2017. He 
requested and was granted an extension to file a response to the FORM by May 31, 2017. 
He did not file a response.1 The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
The SOR was issued under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The DOD 
implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. This 
decision will be decided based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges 13 debts totaling $19,915. Applicant admits 
the $182 cable debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, and denies the remaining 12 debts. Under 
Guideline J, the SOR alleges that was charged with open container in June 2011 and 
operating a motor vehicle under the influence or impaired, and several other charges. 
Applicant admits these two allegations with explanations. The SOR further alleges that 
Applicant was charged with domestic violence in June 2010, assault in 2000, and rape 
and attempted rape in September 1998. Applicant denies these charges, stating that each 
was dismissed. The SOR also alleges that Applicant was charged in November 2009 with 
cheating at gambling. Applicant neither admits nor denies this allegation, however he 
states that the charge was “settled.” Under Guideline E, the SOR alleges that Applicant 
materially falsified his e-QIP by failing to disclose his two alcohol-related arrests, and the 
rape and attempted rape charges. Applicant denies this allegation. Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor since 
February 2016. He has been married and divorced three times, and has one adult and 
two minor children. (GX 3.)  
 
 The 13 debts alleged in the SOR consist of 11 delinquent medical accounts 
totaling $19,663, a $70 collection account owed to a hotel/casino, and a $182 cable 
account. Applicant denies each of the medical debts, stating that he had medical 
insurance at the time the debts were incurred. Applicant denies owing the $70 
hotel/casino debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l, stating that he stayed at the hotel, but paid his 
entire bill. The hotel/casino debt and the medical accounts appear on Applicant’s credit 
bureau reports from 2016. (GX 7; GX 8.) Applicant has not provided any documentation 
to support his denial of financial responsibility for the delinquent accounts. These debts 
remain unresolved. 
 
                                                          
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated March 17, 2017, and Applicant’s receipt 
is dated April 22, 2017. However, Department Counsel received an email from Applicant's employer indicating that 
while Applicant had received the FORM, and signed the receipt, Applicant was out of the country until May 15, 2017 
and requested an extension of time to file a response. Department Counsel agreed to an extension until May 31, 2017. 
Both the DOHA transmittal letter and Department Counsel's emails informed Applicant that he had the opportunity to 
submit information, and that any such information must be submitted by the specified deadlines.  The DOHA transmittal 
letter, receipt, and emails are marked as Administrative Exhibit 1. 
 3 
Applicant admits owing the $182 cable account debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. He 
stated on both his e-QIP and in his Answer that he intended to resolve this debt. However, 
Applicant has not provided any documentation showing that this debt has been paid. This 
debt remains unresolved. 
 
In 1998, Applicant was arrested and charged with rape and attempted rape, both 
felony charges, against his then girlfriend. He spent two weeks in jail, and ultimately, the 
charges against him were dismissed because his then girlfriend failed to appear in court. 
In June 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with domestic violence and assault 
against his then girlfriend. He spent one day in jail, appeared in court, and the charges 
were dismissed because his then girlfriend failed to appear. (GX 4; GX 5; GX 9.) There is 
no record evidence that supports that Applicant was charged with assault in 2000 (SOR 
¶ 2.e), accordingly, this allegation is resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
 
In 2010, Applicant was charged with cheating at gambling. A security camera at 
the casino showed applicant moving a losing chip onto a winning spot after the game had 
ended. He was placed in a deferral/diversion program, the conditions of which were: 24 
months’ probation; 24 months no contact with the casino; and 17 hours community 
service. The charge was dismissed with prejudice in June 2012. (GX 4; GX 6.) 
 
In July 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with operating a vehicle under 
the influence of alcohol; open container in a moving vehicle; hit skip - public street; failure 
to control; and, seatbelt violation. He was found guilty and sentenced to 731 days’ 
probation, his license was suspended for 92 days, and he was fined. (GX 4; GX 6.) 
Applicant was charged with open container in June 2011, and was fined approximately 
$300. (GX 4; GX 6.) 
 
When Applicant completed his e-QIP in March 2016, in response to questions 
concerning his police record, Applicant listed a February 2012 domestic violence charge 
that was dismissed. He failed to disclose as required, the 1998 felony charges, the 2010 
conviction for operating under the influence of alcohol and other charges, and the 2011 
open container charge. (GX 3.) In his Answer, Applicant states that his failure to disclose 
his police record was “simply a type-o-error.” However, when questioned about any 
contact with police during a counterintelligence-focused security screening, Applicant 
stated that he had a few moving violations in his entire life, and omitted all other criminal 
conduct and police contact. (GX 4.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
 4 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
  
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 5 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information…. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
The record evidence establishes two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”).  
 
Of the $19,915 in delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant admits owing 
one debt for $182. While $19,663 of the total SOR debt is for delinquent medical bills, 
which could have arisen from an unexpected medical emergency, Applicant has failed to 
pay or otherwise resolve these debts. Applicant states that he is not responsible for the 
medical debts because he had health insurance when the debts were incurred. However, 
he has taken no action to responsibly dispute or address these delinquent accounts. None 
of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
The following disqualifying conditions apply under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would 
be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence . . . of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted. 
 6 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
Applicant’s most recent charges were for open container in 2011, and operating a 
motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol and related charges in July 2010. His most 
serious charges, two felonies, were in 1998. While significant time has passed since 
Applicant has been charged with any criminal conduct, he continues to minimize his 
culpability, including specifically denying the 2010 domestic violence charge because it 
was dismissed. His failure to accurately disclose his police record on his e-QIP in 2016 
further illustrates his failure to accept responsibility for his actions. This ongoing 
minimization and denial of responsibility casts doubt about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. It further negates evidence of successful 
rehabilitation. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes . . . 
 
The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government has 
the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An 
 7 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
Applicant denies that he intentionally falsified his 2016 e-QIP, claiming he 
erroneously omitted the requisite information about his police record. However, given the 
record evidence as a whole, and specifically Applicant’s previous omission of his criminal 
conduct and police contact, as well his denial and minimizing of his criminal conduct in 
his Answer, I find that Applicant lacks credibility. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).  
 
 I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) and incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F, J, and E in my whole-person analysis. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guidelines F, J, and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
raised by his conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.d and 2.f:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.e:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     Against Applicant 
 8 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
