KEYWORD:  Guideline G; Guideline J
DIGEST:   Applicant’s arguments for a “piecemeal analysis” of the evidence are not persuasive. 
Applicant has not identified any harmful error likely to change the outcome of this case. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 16-02069.a1
DATE: 01/11/2018
DATE:  January 11, 2018
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-02069
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
F. Dean Morgan, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 7, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On October 3, 2017, after considering the record,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall, Jr.,
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant, who is 69 years old, was cited or arrested for five alcohol-related driving charges
between 1981 and 2015.  Military authorities resolved the first incident by suspending his driver’s
licence and directing him to attend alcohol awareness classes.  In 1987, he was stopped for erratic
driving and had a blood-alcohol content (BAC) of .193%.  He pled guilty to a related drinking and
driving charge, spent 24 hours in jail, and was sentenced to outpatient counseling.  
In 1991, Applicant was cited for driving under the influence (DUI).  After pleading guilty
to DUI, he was given a disposition of probation before judgment and was ordered to attend
outpatient counseling.  In 1992, he told investigators that he no longer drove after consuming
alcohol.  After driving his car into a tree in 2010, Applicant was found guilty of DUI and was
sentenced to 12 months of probation.  In 2015, Applicant was stopped for crossing driving lanes and
a blood test revealed he had a BAC of .116%.  He was found guilty of DUI and given an accelerated
rehabilitative disposition.  He was sentenced to a period of incarceration and is appealing the
decision on a technicality.  
Applicant continues to consume alcohol periodically, usually at home.  He has not had any
adverse alcohol-related incidents since 2015 and states he has not been intoxicated since then. 
“Despite his most recent DUI, Applicant feels that, in the past 10 years, he has not been so
intoxicated that he did not know what he was doing.”  Decision at 3.
   
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant has a troubled history of driving while intoxicated.  His most recent citation was
two years ago and is still pending resolution.  He continues to drink alcohol and, while he states he
does not drink and drive, he made a similar claim in 1992.  Finding against Applicant on all of the
SOR allegations, the Judge concluded that none of the available mitigating conditions applied.    
Discussion
In his appeal brief, Applicant addresses each of the alcohol-related driving incidents by
highlighting facts favorable to him and arguing the security concerns arising from each incident are
mitigated for various reasons.  For example, he raises arguments about the legal sufficiency of his
arrest in 2015, but does not specifically dispute the underlying facts that he drove a vehicle with a
BAC of .116% on that occasion.  Overall, his arguments are not persuasive.  In essence, he is
advocating for a “piecemeal analysis” of the evidence, which the Appeal Board has long discounted
as an inappropriate way to analyze the evidence.  When weighing the evidence, the Judge must
consider the evidence as a whole and not view it in an isolated and piecemeal fashion.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No.  02-11489 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2003).  See also, Raffone v. Adams, 468 F. 2d 860,
866 (2nd Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate events may have a significance that is missing when
each event is viewed in isolation).   In this case, the Judge properly considered the evidence in its
entirety in analyzing the security significance of Applicant’s alleged misconduct.
  Applicant also challenges the Judge’s weighing of the evidence and his whole-person
analysis.  In his arguments, Applicant emphasizes such matters as his military service, his
compliance with court orders, and his completion of all assigned alcohol counseling.  The presence
of some mitigating evidence, however, does not compel the Judge to make a favorable security
clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide
whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or
reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 15-00650 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2016).  Applicant has not identified any harmful error
likely to change the outcome of this case. 
 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent
with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528
(1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being
considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  The
decision is sustainable on this record.  
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed:  Michael Ra’anan         
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy              
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
