 
1 
  
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03761 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has more than $33,000 
in delinquent obligations, which remain unpaid. He has failed to mitigate the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on January 20, 
2017, the DoD Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing financial considerations security concerns. On March 29, 2017, Applicant 
answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided without a hearing. On May 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (Sept. 1, 2006 AG) effective 
within the DoD on September 1, 2006, and as amended on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
14, 2017, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel (DC) 
submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM 
contained five attachments (Items 1-5), which were admitted into evidence. On May 22, 
2017, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to 
object to the Government’s evidence and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the potentially disqualifying conditions. He had 30 days from his receipt of the FORM to 
submit any additional information in response to the FORM. The response was due on 
June 21, 2017. No additional information was received from Applicant. On October 1, 
2017, I was assigned the case.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the 2007 bankruptcy filing and 
seven delinquent obligations set forth in the SOR totaling more than $33,000. He denies 
the $8,000 Federal tax obligation (SOR 1.i) stating the debt was “Paid in Full.” The 
delinquent obligations are shown in Applicant’s credit reports of January 2016 (Item 4) 
and May 2017 (Item 5). His SOR answer provided no additional information on the debts 
other than the claim his taxes were paid, which he failed to present documentation 
supporting that assertion. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) lead 
who has worked for a defense contractor since June 20143, and he seeks to obtain a 
security clearance. (Item 3) In September 2014, he separated from his wife and was 
divorced in April 2016. (Items 2 and 3) He has not served in the military. 
In Applicant’s December 2015 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), he listed owing approximately $8,000 in Federal and state taxes. 
(Item 2) In Applicant’s July 2016 personal subject interview, he stated he failed to pay his 
income tax from 2012 through 2014. He did not have taxes withheld from his wages as 
he needed money to meet his living expenses and other financial obligations. At the time 
of his interview, he stated he was current on a repayment plan with the Internal Revenue 
Service whereby he paid $100 per month. (Item 3) No documentation of the repayment 
                                                          
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
 
3 Applicant previously worked in the same position for a different government contractor. (Items 2 and 3) 
There was no break in his employment when the contracts changed. (Item 3) 
 
3 
plan was presented. In his SOR answer, he asserted he had paid his taxes, but provided 
no documentation supporting that assertion. 
Applicant acknowledged he owes money for three repossessed automobiles4 
(SOR 1.h), two repossessed motorcycles (SOR 1.d and 1.e), and credit card accounts. 
(Item 3). He stated he had originally been careless and irresponsible with his money. 
(Item 3) He indicated his financial problems started in 2011 when his then wife became 
unemployed and his financial difficulties continued during his separation and divorce. 
(Item 3) He stated he intended to pay off all his accounts. He was fixing up the home 
where he lived and hoped to sell the house by the end of 2016. (Item 3) He asserts the 
home is worth $100,000, on which nothing is owed.  
During Applicant’s interview, he agreed he had filed for bankruptcy protection in 
January 2007 and his debts were discharged in May 2007. (Item 3) He provided no 
information as to why he had to file for bankruptcy protection or any information 
concerning his finances leading up to the filing. He provided no information as to how 
much debt was discharged.  
 The FORM put Applicant on notice that his SOR answer had failed to provide 
information as to why he fell into debt and no evidence of extenuation or mitigation. 
Despite this notice, Applicant did not respond to the FORM. He provided no 
documentation showing what efforts he undertook to pay, contact creditors, or otherwise 
resolve his delinquent debts, nor did he provide any documentation as to payment on or 
current status of his delinquent debts. 
 
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudication process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weight of a 
number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the whole-person concept.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for the national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
                                                          
4 The SOR lists only one delinquent account for vehicle repossession. 
 
4 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding 
 
5 
classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides 
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed upon 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, 
but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern any 
may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts,” “(c) a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” and AG ¶ 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required,” apply. 
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). The SOR alleged more than $33,000 
owed on seven delinquent obligations. Additionally, although asserting he had paid his 
$8,000 tax obligation, he provided no documentation showing his taxes were current. He 
provided no documentation refuting the delinquent obligations that were listed in his 
January 2016 and May 2017 credit reports and admitted to in his subject interview and 
SOR answer. 
 
The burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
 Six of the seven Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue, and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 During Applicant’s July 2016 interview, all of Applicant’s delinquent obligations 
were discussed. At that time, he stated he was fixing up his home and hoped to sell it by 
the end of 2016, at which time he would pay his delinquent obligations. He provided no 
information as to any sale of his home or payment on his delinquent debts.  
 
 Applicant’s debts remain unpaid, accumulating the delinquent obligation did not 
occur under unusual conditions, and the failure to timely pay those obligations is not an 
unusual condition unlikely to recur. In September 2014, he separated from his wife and 
was divorced in April 2016. Other than stating his ex-wife’s loss of income in 2011 and 
his separation and divorce led to his financial problems, he failed to present 
documentation showing the effect of the unemployment, separation, or divorce on his 
finances. He provided insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are 
unlikely to recur. His delinquencies continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has been full-time employed since May 2010, and the divorce occurred 
a year and a half ago. He provided no evidence of what responsible steps he took to pay 
or resolve his debts. The second prong of AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
  
  There is no evidence of financial counseling or clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
There is no showing of Applicant having made good-faith payments towards his 
delinquent obligations or evidence to establish that he is executing a reasonable ongoing 
plan to pay or resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant indicated his tax obligation (SOR 1.h) was “Paid in Full.” AG ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply because he has not provided documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
dispute over this debt. 
 
Applicant provided no information as to why he had to file for bankruptcy protection 
in 2007. However, the filing and discharge of his debts occurred more than ten years ago. 
I do not find against him as to SOR 1.a. 
 
 
7 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant has been aware of the Government’s security concern about his 
delinquent debts since his July 2016 interview when he was specifically confronted about 
his delinquent accounts. Additionally, the January 2017 SOR and May 2017 FORM put 
him on notice of the Government’s concern about his delinquent accounts. There is no 
evidence he has contacted his creditors. He provided no information regarding his past 
efforts to address his delinquent debt and has failed to show documentation he has 
established repayment agreements to address the delinquent debts. 
 
In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on only 
the very limited response in his SOR Answer, financial considerations security concerns 
remain.  
 
 It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). At the 
same time, security clearance decisions are not intended as punishment for past 
wrongdoing, but rather involve an assessment of future risk that one may not properly 
handle or safeguard classified information.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all the delinquent obligations have been paid—it 
is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
 
8 
clearance. (See AG & 2(e)) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial considerations. 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b - i:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
