 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 . ) ISCR Case No. 16-01922 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 15, 2015, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 23, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H.1 The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines.   
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 29, 2016. He answered 
the SOR in writing, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request, and Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed on November 10, 2016, and I received the case assignment 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
2 
 
 
on August 14, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on September 28, 2017, and I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on December 8, 2017. The Government offered 
Exhibits 1, 2, and 3, which were received without objection. Applicant did not testify, but 
presented three witnesses. He submitted one Exhibit (AX A), without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 18, 2017. Based upon a review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegation in Paragraph 
1 of the SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional information to support his 
request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 35 years old, not married, and has no children. He graduated in 2012 
and obtained an undergraduate degree in information technology (IT). He has been 
employed as a network engineer with his current employer since 2011. (Tr. 15)  He has 
not held a security clearance. (GX 1) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 
September 2002 to approximately the summer of 2015. 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that his use of marijuana started when he was with 
college classmates. He recalled that his use was probably about once per year. 
Although he disclosed on his SF86, he listed three to four times a year. He said it is not 
something that he typically engages in, and was probably too aggressive in answering 
the question. It would usually occur in someone’s home party.  He added that he had 
stretches of time when he did not use marijuana. (Tr. 43) He recalled that from 2015 
until the present (December 2017), he has not smoked marijuana. He stated that he 
would give some money to the people who gave him some marijuana. He noted two 
friends who would provide the marijuana. He still sees them a few times a year, but 
Applicant’s girlfriend testified that when Applicant comes home after he has seen those 
two friends, there have been no indications of marijuana use. He7 has not been around 
them when they are smoking marijuana and does not know if they still smoke marijuana. 
(Tr.44) He has never tested positive from a drug test. He understands that this was 
illegal and that it is a serious responsibility to obtain and hold a security clearance. (Tr. 
32) He does not believe he is unfit to hold a security clearance.  He has no criminal 
record. 
 
 Applicant stated during his investigative interview that he used marijuana from 
September 2002 until January 2014. He explained that he started using it because 
people had it in social settings. He used it in social settings three to five times per year 
and does not intend to use it in the future. He compared it to social drinking. He stated 
that it is not a habit and his current social circle does not comprise illegal drug users. He 
stated that the effect was relaxing and made him sleepy.  He noted that he had been 
offered marijuana after he completed his security clearance application, but he refused 
 
3 
 
 
it. (GX 2) He has never used any other illegal drugs.  He submitted his driving record to 
show that he has no violations of any kind. He has never used marijuana at work or 
tested positive. 
 
 Applicant’s three witnesses testified that Applicant has never had any issues at 
work. Each witness was aware of the security concern concerning use of marijuana. His 
team leader testified that Applicant is one of the most exceptional members of his team. 
Applicant’s team lead believes he is trustworthy and reliable. (Tr. 19) He has never had 
any disciplinary issues. At outside work events, he has never witnessed any 
inappropriate behavior with drinking or drugs. (Tr. 21) He has known Applicant since 
2013. 
 
Another witness, who is a colleague of Applicant and has known him for six 
years, testified that Applicant is trustworthy and reliable. She and her friends also 
socialize with Applicant. She has never seen Applicant use marijuana. She holds a 
security clearance. She has gone to movies, restaurants, and activities with Applicant 
and other friends and has never met the two friends who Applicant received marijuana 
from in the past. (Tr. 28)  
 
Applicant’s significant other with whom he lives, testified that she has known him 
for over ten years. They have lived together for about one year. She has never seen 
him under the influence of marijuana or any other drug. She has never seen any 
addictive behavior concerning alcohol or drugs. She did meet one of the friends who 
smoked marijuana in the last year or so. She testified that Applicant sees him a few 
times a year. (Tr. 34) Applicant told his girlfriend about his prior use of marijuana when 
they met. She has no reason to believe that Applicant is using marijuana.   
 
 .     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
 
4 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Two conditions are established: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition). 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana with varying frequency from 2002 until 2015.  
Therefore, AG ¶ 25 (a) and (c) are established.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Two conditions may be applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
Applicant disclosed his use of marijuana on his security clearance 
application. He spoke about it during his investigative interview. He 
stopped smoking marijuana and does not intend to use any illegal 
drugs in the future. He has not used marijuana since 2015. He lives 
with his significant other and socializes with colleagues who do not 
use illegal drugs. He has excellent work references, and was 
forthright and candid when answering questions. He provided three 
witnesses to speak on his behalf. All of the mitigating conditions 
apply.  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(b) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant disclosed his use of 
marijuana on his security clearance application and discussed it in his investigative 
interview. The minor inconsistencies between what he reported on his application and 
later said during his  the clearance process  about his marijuana use was immaterial. It 
does not detract from the candor he showed in disclosing the information voluntarily and 
then discussing it in detail. The last marijuana use was in 2015. He is subject to random 
tests.  He was candid and reflective at the hearing. He appeared open and honest. He 
has every intention to remain responsible concerning the use of illegal drugs. There is 
nothing to diminish Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. His 
work references are excellent. He is now living with his girlfriend who does not use 
marijuana.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his use of marijuana.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
