 
1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02446 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gregory F. Greiner, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his drug use while holding a security clearance and after submitting his most recent 
security clearance application. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 7, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement and 
substance misuse) and Guideline E (personal conduct). Applicant answered the SOR and 
initially requested a decision on the written record. He subsequently requested a hearing.  
 
Applicant’s request for a hearing was granted. On November 16, 2017, a date 
mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held. Applicant testified at the hearing 
and the exhibits offered by both parties were admitted into the administrative record 
without objection. (Government Exhibits 1 – 5; Applicant’s Exhibits A – D.) The transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) was received on December 1, 2017.1 
 
  
                                                          
1 Correspondence, the notice of hearing, the case management order, and other administrative documents, 
if any, were marked and are attached to the record as App. Exh. I. 
 
2 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 31, is employed as a mechanical engineer by Contractor A, a major 
defense contractor. He holds undergraduate and graduate degrees in engineering. He 
graduated with top honors from top-flight schools. While attending graduate school, 
Applicant volunteered his time mentoring undergraduate engineering students, mostly 
those from groups who are underrepresented in the science, technology, engineering, 
and math fields. He is not married and has no children, but is in a serious relationship that 
he hopes will lead to marriage.2 
 
Applicant used marijuana from 2005 to 2015. He began using marijuana as a 
freshman in college. He used it in social settings, in part, to help cope with social anxiety 
issues. He stopped using marijuana in 2008, upon graduating from college and getting 
his first job with Contractor A. He submitted a security clearance application in connection 
with this job and reported his marijuana use while in college.3  
 
Applicant also discussed his past marijuana use during his initial security clearance 
interview, which took place in October 2008. He told a security clearance investigator that 
“he really did not like the feeling [marijuana] gave him and he stopped using marijuana . 
. . in September 2007.” He then told the investigator that “he has no intention of using any 
[illegal] drugs in the future.”4 He was subsequently granted a security clearance.  
 
Applicant worked for Contractor A from 2008 to 2012, when he was laid off due to 
economic conditions. He was under the impression that he no longer held a security 
clearance after he was laid off. At the time, Applicant was 26 years old and did not 
consider the possibility that he would one day work in the defense industry again.5 
 
Applicant was able to obtain a job with a private U.S. firm after being laid off by 
Contractor A. The toxic work environment at the firm and high pressure demands of the 
new job exacerbated Applicant’s underlying anxiety issues. He began using marijuana to 
cope with the stress. Applicant worked for the private firm from February 2012 to May 
2015. During this period, he used marijuana intermittently to deal with the stress of his 
job. In June 2015, Applicant was rehired by Contractor A.6 
 
In October 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application in 
connection with his new position with Contractor A. He reported on the application using 
marijuana between 2005 and 2014. In response to a question on the application, 
Applicant promised not to use marijuana in the future.7 About two months later, he used 
                                                          
2 Tr. 12-13; Exhibit 1; Exhibit A at 5; Exhibit D.  
 
3 Tr. 14-25; Answer; Exhibit 1; Exhibit 2 at 29; Exhibit A at 2. 
 
4 Exhibit 5 at 1. 
 
5 Tr. 14-25, 32, 38-39. 
 
6 Tr. 14-25; Exhibit 1; Exhibit A at 5; Exhibit D.  
 
7 Exhibit 1 at 36. 
 
3 
marijuana with his former roommate.8 The following month, Applicant sat down for a 
security clearance interview and revealed his marijuana use, including his most recent 
use a month earlier.9  
 
Applicant has not used marijuana since November 2015. Since then, he moved to 
and lives in a different state. He also obtained professional help to deal with his underlying 
issues and made a number of positive lifestyle changes to manage his anxiety and stress. 
He does not associate with those he used marijuana with in the past. His girlfriend and 
current friends do not use marijuana or other illegal drugs. He holds a good reputation for 
his hard work and reliability, and is considered a leader at work.10  
 
Applicant obtained a mental “health / substance abuse evaluation” by a clinical 
psychologist for this case. The psychologist, who interviewed Applicant over the course 
of two days in April 2017, opined that Applicant “does not presently manifest a substance 
abuse problem and has made strides with respect to managing tension.”11 The same 
psychologist conducted a follow-up examination about a month before the hearing. The 
psychologist was impressed with the positive lifestyle changes Applicant had made 
supportive of his stated desire to remain drug free.12 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 
2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards). 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 22, 25. 
 
9 Exhibit 4. 
 
10 Tr. 25-29, 38; Exhibit C. 
 
11 Exhibit A at 5. 
 
12 Exhibit B . 
 
4 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.13 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4), ¶ E.4. Additionally, 
the Supreme Court has held that responsible officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
Applicant’s past marijuana use raises the security concern set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
                                                          
13 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
5 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all applicable disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any substance misuse;  
 
AG ¶ 25(f): any illegal drug use while granted access to classified 
information or holding a sensitive position;  
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence. 
 
 Applicant’s illegal drug involvement establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG 
¶¶ 25(a) and 25(f). Once disqualifying conditions are established, the burden shifts to an 
applicant to present evidence demonstrating extenuation or mitigation sufficient to 
warrant a favorable security clearance decision.14 Illegal involvement with a controlled 
substance(s) after being granted a security clearance raises heightened concerns about 
a person’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness, and requires a judge to closely 
scrutinize any claim of reform and rehabilitation.15  
 
Applicant last used marijuana a little over two years ago, when he was 29 years 
old. Since then, Applicant has obtained professional help to deal with underlying mental 
health issues and changed the toxic environment he was laboring under, which together 
contributed to his poor decision to resume using marijuana from 2012-2015. He has also 
made positive lifestyle changes supportive of his sobriety. His employment record over 
the past two years has been good. At the hearing, Applicant appeared remorseful for his 
past drug use and sincere in his desire to conduct himself, both in his professional and 
personal affairs, in the manner expected of all clearance holders.  
 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2016) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.15). See also ISCR Case 
No. 07-00029 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007) (when AGs were last revised, Board held that its prior decisions 
remained valid when they were “not dependent on the language of any specific guideline,” or “where the 
applicable language of the guideline is unchanged or the changes are not of sufficient magnitude to vitiate 
or overrule the substance of the precedent.”) 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 16-03451 (App. Bd. Dec. 26, 2017) (“The purpose of a clearance adjudication is to 
evaluate an applicant’s judgment and reliability. An applicant who has demonstrated an unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations regarding illegal drugs may be similarly unwilling to follow rules governing 
the protection of classified information.”) 
 
6 
Nonetheless, AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) have limited applicability and are insufficient 
to mitigate the heightened security concerns raised by Applicant’s use of marijuana after 
being granted a security clearance. Although Applicant was not working with classified 
information from 2012-2015, he resumed using marijuana after going through a prior 
security clearance investigation that, in part, focused on his past marijuana use. He was 
granted a clearance only after telling a security clearance investigator that he would not 
use marijuana in the future. Moreover, his most recent use of marijuana took place after 
he began working for his current employer, a major defense contractor, and just two 
months after he submitted his most recent security clearance application.16 In that 
application, Applicant stated under oath that he would not use marijuana or any other 
illegal drugs in the future. Applicant’s inability to keep the promises he made during the 
course of two separate security clearance investigations undercuts the mitigating value 
of the passage of time since Applicant last used marijuana and the other favorable 
evidence. Security concerns remain that similar security-significant conduct may recur.17 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s past drug use also raises the personal conduct 
security concern, which is explained at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Applicant’s past drug involvement directly implicates the overall personal conduct 
security concern. However, the security concern here is adequately addressed and 
covered under Guideline H. Moreover, Applicant’s honesty in reporting the adverse 
information and candor throughout the security clearance process weighs in favor of 
mitigating the Guideline E allegation. Accordingly, I find that Applicant presented sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the personal conduct security concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 16-00578 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2017) (in affirming denial, Board found that judge 
properly considered the fact major defense contractors are expected to follow and implement policies 
consistent with the Drug-Free Workplace Act); ISCR Case No. 16-02005 at 3 (App. Bd. June 2, 2017) (“an 
applicant’s use of illegal drugs after having completed a security clearance application raises substantial 
questions about his or her judgment, reliability, and willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.”)  
 
17 ISCR Case No. 15-06277 (App. Bd. July 19, 2017) (passage of five years since applicant last used 
marijuana insufficient to mitigate concerns raised by drug use over extended period of time and after 
granted a security clearance); ISCR Case No. 14-03522 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2016) (applicant’s use of 
marijuana to help him recover from a serious back injury and four years of abstinence were insufficient to 
mitigate heightened security concerns raised by his illegal drug use while holding a clearance); ISCR Case 
No. 11-12165 (App. Bd. Jan. 29, 2014) (passage of three years since applicant last used marijuana and 
other favorable record evidence of reform insufficient to mitigate concerns raised by marijuana use after 
granted a security clearance).  
 
7 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. AG ¶ 2. An administrative judge should 
consider the whole-person factors listed at AG ¶¶ 2(d) and 2(f). I hereby incorporate my 
above analysis and highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant presented a strong case in mitigation. He appears to have made positive 
and healthy lifestyle changes supportive of his stated desire to remain drug free. He was 
honest in reporting the adverse information at issue and fully cooperative throughout the 
security clearance process. This and the other favorable record evidence weigh in favor 
of granting him continued access to classified information. However, Applicant’s decision 
to use marijuana after being granted a security clearance and after making repeated 
promises that he would not engage in such conduct continues to raise doubts that similar 
security-significant conduct may recur. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
doubts as to Applicant’s present eligibility for a security clearance.18 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:          AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:        Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:          FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
18 Applicant’s case appears to present a clear-cut instance where the grant of a clearance on condition that 
he remain drug free, which would be monitored and independently verified by his employer through random 
drug screens, would be sufficient to mitigate the remaining doubts raised by the evidence. The authority to 
grant or, at a minimum recommend to the appropriate official, a conditional clearance in the proper case 
appears to have been granted to administrative judges by the implementation of the new guidelines. 
Specifically, in Appendix C. See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.3 and Appendix A, ¶ 2(h). However, even more than six 
months after the current guidelines became effective, questions remain as to the applicability of Appendix 
C to security clearance cases involving contractors and no implementation guidance has yet been issued. 
Accordingly, at this time, I decline to provide a formal ruling or recommendation on this issue.  
