 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01836 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Marcus Pacheco, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
November 18, 2015. On July 10, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 18, 2016, including documentary 
evidence in mitigation, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on March 9, 2017, 
and the hearing was convened on April 5, 2017. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, were 
admitted in evidence.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 51 year old system engineer for a defense contractor, employed 
since 2008, except for a three month period of unemployment in 2013 during 
sequestration. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 2004. She has been married since 
1994, and has three children and a grandchild. She has held a security clearance since 
2006. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2002, and a Chapter 
13 bankruptcy in 2010. It also alleges Applicant has a Federal tax lien filed in 2009, failed 
to pay 2009 and 2010 Federal income taxes on time, and 2009 state income taxes on 
time. Finally, it alleges she gambled excessively from 2002 to 2016 resulting in debts 
included in her 2010 Chapter 13 bankruptcy, and continues to gamble. 
 
Applicant married in 1994 and gained custody of her husband’s children in 1995. 
They lived on a single income, school loans and credit cards from 1995 to about 1998 
while she attended school. Applicant started gambling in 2001, and had about $3,000 in 
gambling losses when they declared Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2002. It was discharged in 
2002.  
 
Applicant stopped gambling from 2005 to 2007, but began again in late 2007 at an 
increased rate. Her husband had accumulated income tax debts because he was an 
independent contractor and did not have regular tax withholdings, and failed to file and 
pay two years of taxes when due. They also accumulated consumer and gambling debts, 
resulting in a Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing in 2010. Applicant accumulated about $33,643 
in gambling losses that were included in her Chapter 13 filing. They made payments as 
required under the Chapter 13 plan, but her husband lost his job in 2013 and remained 
unemployed for about nine months with health problems. By agreement with the trustee, 
they were able to modify their payments to increase their household funds. They 
successfully completed the Chapter 13 repayment plan in 2016 and received financial 
counseling. All tax returns have been filed. State taxes were paid in 2010, and delinquent 
Federal taxes were paid through a payment plan. The Federal tax lien was released in 
2016.  
 
Applicant sought professional counseling for gambling in 2010 and attended 
gambler’s anonymous meetings. Her husband monitors her cash withdrawals over $200. 
From 2012 to 2016, she significantly reduced her gambling to about five visits per year 
                                                     
3 The Government submitted Applicant’s “Personal Subject Interview” for identification and admission into 
evidence. Applicant objected to its admission as lacking authentication. The objection was sustained and 
the exhibit was not admitted. 
 
3 
 
risking no more than $100 per occasion and controlled her spending to ensure no funds 
needed to pay bills were used. By July 2016, she stopped all gambling and has abstained 
from gambling since. Applicant testified regarding her gambling recovery, setbacks, and 
complete abstinence since June 2016. Her counselor provided two letters in support of 
Applicant’s progress. She continues to attend counseling therapy and gambler’s 
anonymous meetings. 
 
Applicant and her husband now earn about $176,000 in gross pay, and have no 
credit card debts. They own their home and have savings and a retirement plan. Applicant 
is paying her student loans as required. Over the past seven to eight years, they 
maintained a positive financial status, pay their financial obligations on time, and 
Applicant is no longer gambling and has learned to effectively address the triggers that 
caused her gambling problems in the past. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, effective on June 8, 2017. These AGs are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
 
4 
 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The relevant disqualifying conditions include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
5 
 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; and 
 
(h) borrowing money or engaging in significant financial transactions to fund 
gambling or pay gambling debts. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence supporting the SOR 
allegations are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and  
 
 
6 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant incurred delinquent debts, including from excessive gambling, resulting 
in twice filing for bankruptcy protection. Most recently, she and her spouse addressed 
their financial problems through a Chapter 13 repayment plan which was successfully 
completed in 2016. Applicant also addressed her gambling problem through professional 
counseling and a 12-step program, which she continues. She ceased gambling since 
June 2016 and acknowledges her problem and uses tools to address the triggers that 
precede gambling. She has her gambling problem under control and is aided by financial 
oversight from her spouse. She and her spouse now have a significant income, no credit 
card debt, savings, and a retirement plan, and have maintained a positive financial status 
for a number of years. Their tax obligations were satisfactorily resolved and sufficient time 
has passed with no new delinquencies. The evidence suggests that Applicant has 
maintained satisfactory control of her finances and that additional delinquencies are 
unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b), (c) (d) and (g) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. (AG ¶ 2(e)). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
  Applicant’s resolved financial delinquencies took years of diligent work to make 
payments on debts and dedicated counseling to address her personal issues that 
triggered excessive gambling. Applicant’s current financial status leaves me without 
doubts about her overall financial condition and ability to meet her financial 
responsibilities in the future. Her past financial delinquencies and gambling issues no 
longer cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Applicant has taken sufficient action to resolve her debts and gambling problem, 
and is on a solid financial footing. Accordingly, I conclude she has carried her burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States 
to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is granted. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
