 
1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-00149 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his financial situation. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 11, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial 
considerations guideline. Applicant answered the SOR on December 26, 2016, and 
requested a determination on the administrative (written) record. 
 
 On March 13, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant a file of relevant material 
(FORM). With the FORM, Department Counsel forwarded to Applicant eight exhibits, pre-
marked Items 1 – 8, which the Government offers for admission into the record. Applicant 
received the FORM on March 30, 2017. (Appellate Exhibit I.) She was given 30 days to 
raise any objection to the material offered by Department Counsel and submit her own 
evidence in support of her request for a security clearance. She did not file any objections 
or submit a response. Without objection, Items 1 – 8 are admitted into the record.  
 
 On November 3, 2017, I was assigned the matter for decision. After receiving 
written confirmation that Applicant remains sponsored for a security clearance (Appellate 
Exhibit II), I reopened the record to allow both sides to supply updated information. 
(Appellate Exhibit III.) Both sides submitted documentary evidence, which were marked 
 
2 
Items 9 and 10. Without objection, Items 9 and 10 are admitted into the record. The record 
closed on November 20, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 31, holds a high school diploma. She has been gainfully employed since 
2006. Her past employments have included a job with a federal contractor and as an 
employee of a state correctional institution. In September 2015, Applicant submitted a 
security clearance application in connection with an offer letter for a job with a federal 
contractor. In response to questions on the application regarding her financial history, 
Applicant reported having over 20 delinquent accounts. She stated on the application that 
she would look into the debts and apply for a debt consolidation loan to resolve them. 
(Items 4, 8.) 
 
Over a year after submitting the security clearance application and shortly before 
submitting her Answer, Applicant paid or made partial payments on some of the 23 
delinquent debts listed on the SOR. Specifically, she resolved the debts listed in SOR 
1.a, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.k. She made partial payments toward resolving the debts in SOR 1.c 
and 1.e. She charged some of these payments to her credit card. She promised to 
continue making monthly payments on those debts she had agreed to pay and provide 
documentation showing that other SOR debts had been resolved. (Item 2.) Subsequently, 
Applicant became unemployed and was financially unable to continue making her agreed-
upon payments. (Item 9.) She provided no documentation to corroborate her assertions 
in her Answer that other SOR debts were resolved or that the dispute letters she filed 
were resolved in her favor. A recent credit report, Item 10, reflects that Applicant has 12 
collection accounts and numerous other past-due debts.   
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 
2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and 
standards).1 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
                                                          
1 Nonetheless, I have considered the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines and my ultimate 
decision in this case would have been the same.  
 
3 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.2 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4), ¶ E.4. Additionally, 
the Supreme Court has held that responsible officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
                                                          
2 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
4 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18.) 
 
The security concern here is not limited to a consideration of whether a person 
with financial issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in 
other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances 
giving rise to delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other 
qualities essential to protecting classified information. See generally ISCR Case No. 11-
05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012). 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the applicable disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem . . . and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free. They 
are also not required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present evidence 
to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their circumstances, to include 
the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of showing that they 
 
5 
manage their finances in a manner expected of those granted access to classified 
information.3 Applicant failed to meet her burden of proof and persuasion. 
 
Even before Applicant’s recent unemployment, the record evidence reflects that 
she had a history of not paying her debts. She was aware of the extent of the problem 
when she submitted her security clearance application in September 2015. She promised 
then to take action to address and resolve her delinquent debts. However, she took no 
action for over a year and then only in response to the SOR. She then charged some of 
the payments to a credit card. Although, due to their age, some of the SOR debts are no 
longer listed on her credit report, the record evidence does not support a finding that 
Applicant’s financial situation is under control. To the contrary, it appears that her financial 
situation has gotten worse. Accordingly, I find that the disqualifying conditions listed at 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Overall, the 
record evidence regarding the manner in which Applicant handles her personal financial 
obligations leaves me with doubts and concerns about her ability and willingness to follow 
rules and regulations for the proper handling and safeguarding of classified information.4 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.k:       For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.f, 1.i, 1.j, 1.l – 1.w:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 15-02585 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 20, 2016) (“It is reasonable for Judges to expect applicants to present documentation about the 
satisfaction of individual debts.”)  
 
4 In reaching this adverse decision, I considered the whole-person concept, including the honesty Applicant 
showed in reporting the adverse information. See generally AG ¶ 2. However, her honesty is insufficient to 
fully mitigate concerns raised by her financial circumstances. I also considered the exceptions listed in 
SEAD-4, Appendix C, but none are warranted in this case.  
