 
1 
 
  
                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ADP Case No. 16-02315 
  ) 
  )  
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a public trust position to work in the defense industry. Applicant owed more than 
$22,000 on four delinquent student loans and more than $2,000 on four additional 
collection accounts. No documentation was presented showing payment on any of the 
delinquent obligations. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and 
exhibits, eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his eligibility 
for a public trust position. Acting under the relevant DoD Directive,1 the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) on January 7, 2017, detailing financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
                                                          
1 Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
On March 14, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided 
without a hearing. On April 26, 2017, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM). The FORM contained seven attachments (Items). On May 15, 2017, Applicant 
received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to object to the 
Government’s evidence and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. He had 30 days from his receipt of the FORM to 
submit any additional information in response to the FORM. The response was due on 
June 14, 2017. No additional information was received from Applicant. On October 1, 
2017, I was assigned the case.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the eight delinquent debts and stated 
he had been unemployed before obtaining his current job. He asserted he was working 
to rehabilitate his student loans. He also asserted he had hired a company to “clean up 
and pay off my debts.” (SOR Answer) I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After 
a thorough review of the pleading and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old and is working in system configuration for a defense 
contractor since June 2013, and seeks to obtain a public trust position. (Item 1) From 
December 2005 through April 2007, he was unemployed. (Item 3) 
 
 In Applicant’s December 2015 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), he indicated he owed approximately $17,000 on his student loans 
and had enrolled in a credit repair service. (Item 3) A check with the company indicated 
Applicant had sought the company’s assistance in May 2014, had two meetings with 
Applicant, and last action occurred in August 2014. The company’s employee stated the 
company does not provide financial counseling or negotiate with creditors on individuals’ 
behalf. (Item 7) The company provides deletion notice service for which they charge $50 
to $100 for each notice. (Item 7)  
 
                                                          
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
  
 
3 
 
In 2007, Applicant had obtained approximately $34,000 in student loans and had 
made $200 monthly payments on the loans until January 2010. His mother paid half the 
student loan debt. He is currently delinquent on student loans of $22,625. (Items 5 and 
6) 
 
 Applicant owes four delinquent non-student loans totaling $2,315. Those four 
obligations were in the amounts of $383, $422, $628, and $882 and appear on his 
January 2016 and April 2017 credit reports. (Items 5 and 6)  
No response to the FORM was received from Applicant. He provided no 
documentation showing payment of any of his delinquent obligations. He did not set forth 
what efforts he undertook to pay or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts, nor did he 
provide any documentation as to payment on or current status of his delinquent debts. 
He provided no documentation showing what the credit repair service did for him, nor did 
he provide any documentation concerning the rehabilitation of his student loans. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” The 
standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available 
information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning 
the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security. 
The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of sensitive information is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive 
information] will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concerns relating 
to financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal acts or other 
questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding 
sensitive information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides 
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed upon 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a public trust position. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant owes eight delinquent obligations totaling approximately $25,000. 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history 
of not meeting financial obligations” apply.  
 
5 
 
 
 Five of the seven Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant provided no documentation establishing that any of the delinquent 
obligations have been paid. There is no documentation that even the two smallest 
delinquent obligations of approximately $400 each have been paid. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply because the delinquent debts remain unpaid, and because they remain unpaid, 
they cannot be considered as behavior that happened long ago. There is nothing in the 
record supporting that conditions under which the debts were incurred were unusual. 
Applicant provided no information concerning factors beyond his control in recent years 
that could mitigate his inattention to his delinquent debts. He has been employed by his 
current employer since June 2013. AG & 20(b) does not apply. 
 
From December 2005 through March 2007, Applicant was unemployed, which is 
a condition beyond his control. However, that unemployment ended more than ten years 
ago. He provided no evidence of what responsible steps he took to pay or resolve his 
debts. The second prong of AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. He had two meetings with a credit 
repair company, but failed to provide documented progress on addressing his delinquent 
accounts. 
 
  There is no evidence of financial counseling or clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
6 
 
There is no showing of Applicant having made good-faith payments towards his 
delinquent obligations or evidence to establish that he is executing a reasonable ongoing 
plan to pay or resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. Applicant admits the 
delinquent obligations. There is no documented proof substantiating the basis of a 
dispute. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant has been aware of the Government’s trustworthiness concerns about his 
delinquent debts since his February 2016 interview when he was specifically confronted 
about his delinquent accounts. Additionally, the January 2017 SOR and April 2017 FORM 
put him on notice of the Government’s concern about his delinquent accounts. He 
provided no information regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debts, that he 
has contacted his creditors, or established repayment agreements to address the 
delinquent debts. 
 
In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial trustworthiness concerns. He failed to 
offer evidence of financial counseling or provide sufficient documentation regarding his 
past efforts to address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in 
relying on only the very limited response in his SOR Answer, financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns remain.  
 
 
7 
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a public trust position. (See AG & 
2(a)) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a position of public trust. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a –1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
