                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
)
 )     ISCR Case No.16-03856
 )
` )
Applicant for Security Clearance                   )    
Appearances
For Government: Nicholas Temple, Esq. Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On January 27, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. Revised Adjudicative
Guidelines were issued on December 10, 2016, and became effective on June 8,
2017.1
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on September 26, 2017. A notice of hearing dated October 4, 2017,
In this case, the SOR was issued under Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department      1
on September 1, 2006. Revised Adjudicative Guidelines became effective June 8, 2017. My decision and
formal findings under the revised Guidelines F and E would not be different under the 2006 Guidelines.
1
scheduled the case for November 30, 2017. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-10 were
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant
Exhibits (AX) A-G which were admitted into the record. The transcript of the hearing
was received on December 8, 2017. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony,
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.a-f.
She agreed that she omitted information under SOR allegation ¶ 2.a. She provided
explanations with her responses.  
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is single with
no children. She obtained her undergraduate degree in 2005. She has been with her
current employer since October 2015. She completed her most recent security
clearance application (SCA) in December 2015. She has  held a security clearance for
almost seven years. (GX 1)
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges that Applicant has six delinquent debts, which total
approximately $60,000. The delinquent debts include student loans, collection
accounts, and medical accounts.
Applicant’s answer provided reasons for her delinquent accounts. She
acknowledged that she defaulted on her student loans after the period of deferment
due to the financial help she was providing for her ill mother who has a myriad of health
issues. (SOR 1.a) Applicant pays for all her medications, some utilities and rent. (Tr. 20)
She volunteered that she co-signed for a car loan for her mother. Her mother defaulted
and Applicant tried to pay the car loan. (Tr. 16) She was also making payments on her
own car note.  Applicant also turned over some of her income tax refund checks to help
her mother.  Applicant had some health issues and went to an emergency room, which
occurred a while ago. She had health insurance and was unaware it resulted in a debt.
(SOR 1.d) attributed to her because she paid a co-pay to her health insurance
company. 
Applicant acknowledged that while helping her mother, she was not minding her
own credit or taking responsibility for it. (Answer to SOR) She stated that her student
loans required a monthly payment of $600, and she did not have sufficient income to
pay the amount. After her graduation from college in 2005, she was unemployed  until
2007. Her latest SCA records unemployment in 2013 and from December 2009 to
March 2010. She moved to another state for better job opportunities. This exacerbated
her financial issues. She also admitted that she did not know how to manage her
money at the time. (Tr. 33) 
Applicant disclosed her financial issues in her 2010 SCA (GX 5) in detail (student
loans) and in her declaration of federal employment (GX 4), which was completed in
2
2013. Applicant stated credibly that she never intended to lie, fabricate, or not be
consistent about her financial issues. She has nothing to hide. (Tr. 16) The other
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR were either not known to her, or Applicant had
spoken to the investigator about them during the  security clearance process. 
Applicant submitted her latest SCA in December 2015. She did not report any
issues under the financial questions for the last seven years. She denied intentionally
falsifying the SCA. After considering all the evidence, I find insufficient evidence for a
determination that Applicant intentionally falsified the SCA. She noted that she had
been rushing and she had inattention to detail and a sense that no other questions
needed to be addressed because she had already made the information known to the
Government. (Tr. 48)
As to the student loans listed as SOR allegation 1.a, totaling $57,297, Applicant 
provided information from the company that allowed her to rehabilitate her student
loans. (AX D, F, and G) The loans have been completely rehabilitated with her nine
months of payments, and she has engaged with the new student loan holder who will
receive a monthly payment of $262.29 per month beginning in mid December 2017.
The student loans are considered in “green status.” (Tr. 24)
As to SOR 1.b, a cable account in collection for $909, Applicant has not paid the
account. She forgot to return a cable box. She is currently working with Lexington Law
Firm, a credit repair service. The delinquent amount is still showing on one credit report.
(Tr. 26) 
The debt alleged in SOR 1.c, a collection account in the amount of $522, was
settled for $313. (AX C) The document that Applicant submitted reflected a zero
balance.   
As to SOR allegation 1.d, a medical account for $437, Applicant disputes the
amount. She had health insurance and paid a co-pay of $100 to cover the costs. She
does not understand why it is on her credit report. (Tr. 28) She has not paid on the
account, and she is working with the credit repair service to have it removed from her
credit report.  
The SOR allegation 1.e, a credit account in the amount of $272, and 1.f, for 
$173 were overdraft fees and have been paid. (AX B) 
Applicant’s current salary is about $98,000. She stated that she uses a budget
and after her expenses tries to save money. She was using a financial counselor at one
point in time. In October 2017, she obtained the services of Lexington Law. (AX E) She
has a steady income and is current on her car loan. She has a retirement account. Her
2016 credit report listed many accounts that are “pays as agreed.” (GX 6)
Applicant submitted a notarized  letter of recommendation from her mother who
attests to her daughter’s constant financial help when she needed it. Applicant’s mother
3
stated that she can always be counted on. She stated that Applicant has nothing to be
ashamed of by taking care of her mother. (AX A) 
Applicant is an active member of her church and she helps in the community by
mentoring young girls who want to succeed in a career. She also assists in a homeless
shelter and helps the women with various activities. (Tr. 54)
 
   Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2( d)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance2
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
4
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An
individual who is financially over-extended is at a greater risk of having to
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including
espionage.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability to satisfy debts;
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
The Government produced credible evidence to establish the delinquent debts
and the delinquent student loan accounts.  Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to
raise disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear
5
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from a
legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling service; and
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
and
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant has had ongoing financial problems, but not due to overspending,
gambling or major irresponsibility. She went to college to better her employment
opportunities and when she graduated in 2005, she could not find a job until 2007. She
helped her ill mother financially and put herself and her own expenses second. She
realizes that is poor management. She was young and felt a responsibility to her mother. 
She also had other periods of unemployment. Her school loans (the bulk of her
delinquent debt) were in deferment. When she started to pay, she realized she did not
have the $600 a month that was required. She was always candid about her student
loans. She learned that she could rehabilitate the student loans and then return to a
payment plan with smaller payments. She completed  nine months of rehabilitation. She
stands ready to start the new plan.
Applicant now has a steady job with a good salary and does not give much to her
mother. She is credited for her acknowledgment that she did not take responsibility for
her credit after college.  Applicant has recently paid smaller debts and settled some
accounts. She worked with a financial counselor until she could not afford to do so. She
obtained the services of a credit repair company and is working with them. She disputed
one medical account because she had health insurance and paid the co-payment. She
has held a security clearance for seven years.  She understands the importance of
building her financial track record. Applicant had started payment plans after 2007, but
she had to default because she was unemployed and did not have sufficient income.
She has now paid those accounts. She initiated her rehabilitation program for her
student loans. She has made a good-faith effort to resolve the student loans. I believe
she will continue. She has presented sufficient information to mitigate security concerns.
MC AG ¶¶ 20 (a), (b), (c), and (d)  apply. She has  met her burden to alleviate the
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
6
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially
applicable:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement,
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant intentionally
falsified the SF 86 in 2015. AG 16 (a) has not been established. SOR 2.a is concluded
for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d).
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate
burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
 
Applicant is 35 years old. She is single and has no children. She decided to
attend college and obtain a degree for better job opportunities. She obtained student
loans. She did not find employment for almost two years. She helped her mother
financially. She has held a steady job for seven years with a security clearance. She has
rehabilitated her defaulted student loans and completed the nine-month plan. Her
student loans are now current and she stands ready to start her new payment plan. She
had tried in the past to pay accounts and had to default due to unemployment. She has
7
no criminal record. She accepts responsibility for her financial issues. She worked with a
financial counselor. She could have been more proactive with resolving the student
loans, but did not know the system and also felt it necessary to help her mother. That
does not detract from her suitability to hold her clearance. She provided documentation
about her delinquent accounts that have been resolved. I find that there are clear
indications that her financial issues are being resolved. As to personal conduct
falsification issues, she has refuted the concern under Guideline E.
 
         After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and
Guideline E, and evaluating all the record evidence in the context of the whole person, I
conclude that Applicant has  carried her burden. It is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant her continued eligibility for access to classified information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
8
