 
1 
 
 
                                                                 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01889 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
   
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Patrick Korody, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines J (criminal 
conduct), G (alcohol consumption), and E (personal conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 9, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On July 12, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant. 
The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
  
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines J, G, and E. The SOR 
detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
national security to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that 
his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be granted or denied. 
 
2 
 
 
On August 2, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR. On September 
15, 2016, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On November 8, 2016, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On 
November 8, 2016, DOHA issued a notice of the hearing, setting the hearing on 
November 16, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
received into evidence. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through Q, which 
were received into evidence. Applicant testified and called three witnesses. I held the 
record open until December 30, 2016, to afford Applicant an opportunity to submit 
additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE R and S, which were received into 
evidence. On November 29, 2016, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
On January 5, 2017, I e-mailed Department Counsel and Applicant’s counsel 
advising that I intended to issue a summary decision granting Applicant’s security 
clearance noting that Applicant had mitigated security concerns raised in the SOR. On 
January 6, 2017, Department Counsel notified me by e-mail that the Government 
objected to the issuance of a summary decision in this case.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all covered individuals 
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are 
effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs, as required.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, with explanations. After a thorough 
review of the record, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old ordinary seaman employed by a defense contractor 
since June 2015. He has an interim security clearance and seeks a permanent secret 
security clearance as a condition of his continued employment. (GE 1; Tr. 18-19, 75) 
 
Applicant dropped out of high school in August 2005, and was awarded his GED 
in September 2005. He attended community college from August 2005 to October 2005, 
but did not earn a degree. (GE 1; Tr. 19-20, 57) Applicant married in December 2012, 
and has a four-year-old son. His wife is employed as a secretary. Applicant did not 
serve in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1; Tr. 20-21) 
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
3 
 
 
Criminal Conduct/Alcohol Consumption/Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges an extensive history of low-level criminal behavior that 
began in December 2002, when he was 16, and continued until December 2015, when 
he was 29. This behavior involved 18 separate incidents that included possessing 
tobacco as a minor, possession of alcohol as a minor, criminal mischief, speeding, 
driving under the influence, grand theft auto that was dismissed, disorderly intoxication, 
probation violation, and several automobile-related offenses (e.g. no registration 
certificate or no proof of insurance). Two of the arrests were for driving under the 
influence (DUI) in December 2006 and September 2008. He pled guilty to the 
December 2006 DUI and the September 2008 DUI was reduced to reckless driving. His 
last arrest in December 2015 was for disorderly intoxication. Alcohol played a role in all 
of these incidents except for those that were automobile-related. (See SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.r; 
SOR answer; and GE 1 – 4 and AE A - N for further details) 
 
Applicant’s counsel presented a compelling case in mitigation in the form of 
witness testimony and documentary evidence.  
 
Applicant’s mother (AM) – AM is a career paralegal, who has worked for the 
same attorney for over 31 years. She and Applicant’s father divorced around 2005. 
Applicant’s father is an attorney and a functioning alcoholic. Her former husband’s 
family has a history of alcoholism and addiction. Applicant’s older brother is a “serious 
drug addict in active addiction.”  When she left her husband, Applicant and his brother 
remained with their father. AM described the home environment for her sons and former 
husband as “out of control.” (Tr. 22-26)  
 
Applicant played football in high school and in 2004, his team went to the state 
finals and lost. In 2005, Applicant dropped out of high school and his life began to spiral 
downward. (Tr. 26-27) AM lived through all of Applicant’s run-ins with the law. She 
never wavered in her support for him believing that he would overcome his problems 
with alcohol. That day finally came when she picked him up from jail following his last 
arrest in December 2015 for disorderly intoxication. AM described him as a “broken man 
that night” and after getting into her car, “he just broke down.” (Tr. 27-30)  
 
After the December 2015 arrest something was different. Applicant realized that 
he had put everything at risk -- his family and dream job. There was no doubt in AM’s 
mind that her son was a changed man. Applicant has not had a drink since his 
December 2015 arrest. He is on a strict diet and physical fitness program. AM has 
never seen her son make such a dramatic lifestyle change after any of his previous run-
ins with the law. Applicant’s focus is on his family, work, and church. AM sees Applicant 
several times a week and would know if he is drinking. She noted that he has not had a 
drink in over a year and has taken appropriate steps to ensure that he will not re-offend. 
(Tr. 30-35) 
  
Applicant’s associate pastor (AP) – AP is an associate pastor and minister of 
community outreach responsible for overseeing a ministry of substance abuse. He has 
 
4 
 
 
been working in that faith-based ministry for over 27 years. His ministry currently 
administers to over 750 individuals a week and over the course of his career he has 
helped “thousands” with substance abuse problems. (Tr. 35-38) 
 
AP has been working with Applicant for over a year and met him when he started 
attending his church. Applicant regularly attends substance abuse meetings on 
Wednesday nights and Sunday mornings on a voluntary basis. His meetings are faith-
based support groups similar to Narcotics or Alcoholics Anonymous. Applicant is an 
active participant at the meetings and seeks to better his life. AP has discussed 
Applicant’s alcohol issues with him on many occasions and believes that he is fully 
committed to recovery. AP recognizes his credibility is on the line and is confident that 
Applicant “has his head on straight and moving in the right direction and doing very 
well.” (Tr. 38-41) AP has no knowledge of Applicant being formally diagnosed as an 
alcoholic. AP is unable to guarantee anyone’s success, but there are few individuals as 
focused on their recovery as Applicant. (Tr. 42-45) 
 
Applicant’s project manager (PM) – PM is Applicant’s supervisor and is a retired 
U.S. Navy master chief quartermaster with 30 years of naval service. He held a security 
clearance in the Navy and is very familiar with security clearance requirements. PM is 
responsible for managing all the dive boats for the Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, 
Army, Coast Guard, Civil Service, and foreign dive training by the Navy. PM is 
responsible for overseeing the operations of two large dive boats and 15 smaller 
combat rescue and dive boats that he referred to as “small boats. (Tr. 45-49) 
 
Applicant is an ordinary seaman on board one of PM’s large dive boats and 
serves as a fill-in relief Craftmaster on those vessels. PM talks to Applicant two to three 
times a day and sees him once or twice a week. Applicant has the same responsibility 
as a commanding officer as a fill-in relief Craftmaster and as such is responsible for the 
safety of 60 divers in training, 10 to 15 dive supervisors and dive trainers, and a crew of 
5. In short, Applicant is in charge of everything to do with their lives, getting in and out of 
port safely, and is responsible for the safety of the vessel and crew. (Tr. 49-50) 
 
Applicant is a unique employee in that he is the only Craftmaster employed by 
PM’s company who acquired his Captain’s license at his own expense and on his own 
time. Applicant is a top performer and is highly regarded by company and senior Navy 
personnel. PM is familiar with Applicant’s previous arrests, adding that Applicant 
allowed alcohol to take control of his actions and ruin his life. However, based on the 
turnaround that Applicant has made and his years of experience in a leadership 
capacity, PM has absolutely no concerns about Applicant’s ability to maintain his 
security clearance. As far as PM is concerned, Applicant is a “must-have employee” 
adding that he would trust Applicant with his life and one of his ships. (Tr. 50-57) 
 
Applicant’s testimony (AT) – Football was a big part of Applicant’s life from the 
time he was six years old. His dream was to play Division I football in college; however, 
that changed after his high school team lost the state finals in 2004. Things were not 
going well at home and his parents separated in 2005. His older brother was having 
 
5 
 
 
substance abuse problems. The combination of these events were factors that led to 
Applicant dropping out of high school in 2005. (Tr. 58-59) 
 
After Applicant dropped out of high school, his alcohol consumption increased. 
Although he did not drink every day, when he did drink, he drank to excess and made 
poor choices. Applicant does not dispute the arrests listed in his SOR and apart from 
the civil traffic citations, those arrests all involved alcohol. Applicant discussed his 
arrests and acknowledged that he mistakenly thought he knew his limits with alcohol. 
(Tr. 59-64) 
 
Applicant recognizes that he has a problem with alcohol and cannot drink. 
Despite the adverse consequences that drinking caused him, he always thought he had 
learned his lesson and could control himself. After his last arrest in December 2015 for 
disorderly intoxication, he was completely broken and never felt so horrible in his life. 
He disappointed his wife and thought how disappointed his son would be knowing his 
father was in jail. Simply put, he had had enough. (Tr. 64-67) 
 
Applicant has not had a drink since his last arrest in December 2015. Since that 
December 2015 arrest, Applicant voluntarily attends AP’s faith-based meetings on 
Wednesday evenings and Sunday mornings. He takes pride in his personal appearance 
and maintains a healthy lifestyle through improved diet and exercise. Applicant never 
misses church. His wife is supportive of his sobriety. His daily routine consists of getting 
up early, going to work, picking up his son at his father’s house after work, and going 
home to spend time with his family. (Tr. 68-72) In contrast to his weekends before his 
December 2015 arrest, his weekends are family-centric that involve hiking, spending 
time on his boat, and watching football. Applicant and his wife strive to be good role 
models for their son. (Tr. 72-73) 
 
Applicant avoids environments where there is drinking and has a new group of 
friends from church. His goals are to honor God in everything he does, and he wants to 
be hard working, a good husband, and a good father. Applicant enjoys his work and the 
contribution he is making and takes satisfaction in having completed his Captain’s 
license on his own time and at his own expense. His criminal history makes him feel 
awful. Applicant recognizes the turmoil and grief his conduct has caused his mother and 
stepfather. Applicant understands that he cannot drink and that alcohol can no longer 
be a part of his life.  (Tr. 73-80)  
 
Applicant understands that having a security clearance is a privilege. Each 
morning Applicant prays and asks God to give him strength, and before he goes to bed, 
he thanks God for giving him another day of sobriety. In addition to his faith-based 
meetings that he attends, he periodically attends Alcoholic Anonymous meetings. 
Applicant reiterated that is ashamed of his past behavior and very much wants to put it 
behind him. (Tr. 80-93)  
 
Applicant no longer associates with his former drinking friends. He is 
overwhelmed by the support he receives from his supervisors and colleagues at work. 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant is very fortunate to have the continuing support of his mother, who “always 
does the right thing” and is disappointed for having failed her so many times. (Tr. 99-
101) Post-hearing, Applicant submitted a signed statement dated December 30, 2016, 
advising that he has not had a drink since his December 2015 arrest, and 
documentation of his regular attendance at faith-based meetings. (AE R - S)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted his Craftmaster designation letter and a copy of his current 
Coast Guard license. His supervisor submitted a reference letter lauding his 
performance and trustworthiness and recommended him for a security clearance. 
Applicant’s recent performance evaluations document sustained superior performance 
and note his contribution to the national defense. (AE O)  
  
 In addition to his supervisor’s reference letter, Applicant submitted ten character 
reference letters that vouched for his trustworthiness and good character. These 
individuals include his mother’s attorney-employer, family friends, co-workers, pastor, 
and a member of law enforcement. They are familiar with Applicant’s alcohol-related 
arrests, know him well as a member of the community, and have no reservations in 
supporting him for a security clearance. Lastly, Applicant submitted photographs of his 
family that show family involvement that only a photograph could. (AE P) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
    
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
7 
 
 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J (criminal conduct), the Government’s concern is that criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 30. 
 
 The Government established its case under Guideline J through Applicant’s 
admissions and evidence presented. A review of the evidence supports application of 
three criminal conduct disqualifying conditions, AG ¶ 30(a) “a pattern of minor offenses, 
any one of which on its own would be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility 
decision, but which in combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;” AG ¶ 30(b) “evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible 
allegation, an admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless 
 
8 
 
 
of whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted;” and AG ¶ 
30(d) “violation or revocation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-
mandated rehabilitation program.” 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of two 
criminal conduct mitigating conditions is appropriate: 
AG ¶ 32(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
AG ¶ 32(d) there is credible evidence of successful rehabilitation, 
including, but not limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of 
criminal activity, restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or 
probation, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
          Applicant presented credible evidence of actions taken to overcome his 13-year 
history of low-level criminal activity. A review of the evidence demonstrates that the 
source of Applicant’s criminal activity stems primarily from his misuse of alcohol. 
Unfortunately, it took Applicant 13 years and numerous arrests before he came to the 
realization that alcohol was taking him down a destructive path with adverse 
consequences for not only for him, but also for his family. Further mitigating rationale is 
discussed under alcohol consumption below.  
Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G (alcohol consumption), the Government’s concern is that 
excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline G through Applicant’s 
admissions and evidence presented. A review of the evidence supports application of 
two alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions, AG ¶ 22(a) “alcohol-related incidents 
away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse 
abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency 
of the individual’s alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder;”  and AG ¶ 22(c) “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder.”  
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of 
three alcohol consumption mitigating conditions is appropriate: 
 
9 
 
 
AG ¶ 23(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 AG ¶ 23(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive 
alcohol use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and  
AG ¶ 23(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment 
program, has no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making 
satisfactory progress in a treatment program. 
Applicant presented credible evidence of actions taken to overcome his alcohol-
related arrests. Given Applicant’s 13-year history of extensive alcohol-related criminal 
conduct, it appeared unlikely that he could mitigate this history. However, Applicant’s 
counsel did a superb job of presenting a methodical and compelling case of mitigation. 
He did this through Applicant’s credible testimony corroborated by persuasive witness 
testimony and documentary evidence. Applicant has completed one year of sobriety 
accompanied by lifestyle changes. He no longer associates with his drinking colleagues 
and focuses on his work, family, and faith. Applicant’s sobriety has earned him the 
respect and support of his family, friends, and his employer. 
 
          Applicant is an excellent employee, who is reliable, dependable, professional, and 
a respected member of the community. At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged the 
problems the misuse of alcohol has caused him, demonstrated remorse, and a 
steadfast commitment to continue lifestyle changes consistent with leading an alcohol-
free life. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
        The conduct under criminal conduct was cross-alleged under personal conduct 
without any additional facts or allegations. Given the fact that the SOR allegations were 
fully discussed and dealt with under criminal conduct as well as  alcohol consumption, it 
is unnecessary to discuss further under personal conduct  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
10 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The discussion in the 
Analysis section under Guidelines J, G and E is incorporated in this whole-person 
section. However further comments are warranted. 
 
I was particularly impressed with Applicant’s demeanor during his hearing and 
the apparent effect this process has had on him. Applicant has been willing to do 
whatever is necessary to recover from his alcohol-related arrests. The process has 
been costly for him, not only financially, but also personally and professionally. 
Applicant is dedicated to the defense industry and his talents and skillset are in 
demand. His witnesses and reference letters provide insight into his recovery and the 
importance of maintaining sobriety. Applicant demonstrated the correct attitude and 
commitment to maintaining sobriety.  
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set forth 
in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole-person factors” and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   For Applicant 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
