 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02772 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gregory F. Greiner, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct, financial considerations, and 
criminal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct), F (financial considerations), and J (criminal conduct). Applicant responded to 
the SOR on November 17, 2016, and December 23, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On February 27, 2017, Department Counsel amended 
the SOR by adding an allegation under Guideline F. Applicant responded to the 
amendment on February 28, 2017. 
 
The case was assigned to me on August 16, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 23, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for September 22, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through I, which 
were admitted without objection. I also admitted the attachments to Applicant’s SOR 
response. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. She 
submitted AE J through N, which were admitted without objection.1 DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 2, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a government contractor. She worked for 
a defense contractor from 1986 to 2007. She has worked for her current employer or a 
predecessor contractor since 2007. She seeks to retain a security clearance, which she 
has held for decades. She attended college for a period without earning a degree. Her 
first marriage ended in divorce in 1986. Her first husband is deceased. Her second 
husband was an abusive drug addict who committed suicide in 2002. She has three 
adult children.2 
 
Applicant has a history of criminal conduct and financial problems. She filed 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy cases in about 1986, 1997, and 2015. Her debts were discharged 
in all three cases. She has been convicted on five occasions as follows: misdemeanor 
charge of filing a false police report (1992); misdemeanor larceny (1999); misdemeanor 
contempt of court for failure to appear (2000); misdemeanor issuing bad checks (2001); 
and felony larceny, third or subsequent conviction (2015).3 
 
In the most recent conviction, Applicant was arrested in December 2014. The 
grand jury indicted her on the felony offenses of conspiracy and larceny of more than 
$200, committed on or about December 18, 2014, and conspiracy and attempted 
larceny, committed on or about December 26, 2014. In August 2015, Applicant entered 
an Alford plea4 to the amended felony charge of larceny on December 18, 2014, third or 
                                                          
1 The response to the SOR was missing several attachments and pages to attachments. AE K through N 
contain copies of pages that were missing from the SOR response.  
 
2 Tr. at 17-23, 63; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3.  
 
3 Tr. at 35-42, 45-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5-8. The SOR did not allege the 1986 bankruptcy 
or the convictions for filing a false police report and contempt of court. Any matter that was not alleged in 
the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be considered when assessing Applicant’s 
credibility, in the application of mitigating conditions, and during the whole-person analysis. 
 
4 See Cortese v. Black, 838 F. Supp. 485, 492 (D. Colo. 1993) (citing North Carolina v. Alford, 400 U.S. 
25 at 37 (1972): 
 
Under an Alford plea, a defendant maintains innocence while entering a plea of guilty 
because the defendant concludes that his interests require entry of a guilty plea and the 
record before the court contains strong evidence of actual guilt. . . . Guilty pleas must be 
rooted in fact before they may be accepted. Accordingly, courts treat Alford pleas as 
having the same preclusive effect as a guilty plea. 
 
An appellate court in Applicant’s state found that the appellant who entered an Alford plea waived the 
right to appeal the sufficiency of the evidence: 
 
 
3 
 
subsequent conviction. In accordance with her plea bargain, she was sentenced to two 
years in the penitentiary, with both years suspended. She was placed on supervised 
probation for an indefinite period and on good behavior for five years. She was deemed 
suitable and was released from supervised probation in August 2017, conditioned on 
her future good behavior. The suspended sentence remains in effect.5 
 
Applicant does not accept responsibility for any of the convictions, except the 
contempt of court. She stated that her late husband committed the 1999 larceny and 
was responsible for issuing the bad checks because he took money out of her checking 
account without telling her and did not make good on the checks, as he promised. She 
stated she filed an accurate police report alleging her late husband’s physical abuse, 
but later retracted the information. The contempt of court resulted when she failed to 
appear to testify against her late husband. She pleaded guilty at least three of the first 
four times she was convicted.6 
 
Applicant stated that she is innocent of the 2014 larceny charge. Her version is 
as follows. She went to the department store on Black Friday to buy an advertised 
television as a present for her son. It was sold out, but she was able to purchase it 
online at the sale price and then pick it up at the store. She was notified on several 
occasions that it was available. She went to the store, but that specific television was 
not available. On December 18, 2014, she went with her brother-in-law to customer 
service at the store where the wrong television was mistakenly put in their cart. While it 
was being sorted out at customer service, her brother-in-law took it to their car. She told 
him it was the wrong television. He bought it back and left it by customer service. The 
surveillance camera showed him leaving the store with the television, but it did not show 
him returning it. She accepted the Alford plea because her brother-in-law had already 
pleaded guilty and was sentenced to two years for the offense. She did not want to risk 
going to jail. Her brother-in-law wrote a letter stating that Applicant was unaware of his 
actions and did not take part in the incident.7 I did not find her statements credible. 
 
Applicant stated the 1986 and 1997 bankruptcies resulted from the financial 
irresponsibility of her two late husbands. Her 2015 bankruptcy occurred after she 
cosigned car loans for two of her children. The cars were repossessed when the 
children developed substance abuse and legal problems. Applicant was unable to pay 
both car loans and the costs of her child’s substance-abuse rehabilitation. A February 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Thus, under the circumstances of this case, by freely and intelligently entering an Alford 
plea to the breaking and entering charge, Appellant waived his right to appeal the issue 
of whether the evidence was sufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he was 
guilty of that charge. (Citation omitted to not reveal Applicant’s state of residence.) 
 
5 Tr. at 23-24, 32-35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6; AE F, G.  
 
6 Tr. at 37-42, 45-47, 55, 62; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
7 Tr. at 24-34, 41-44, 55-57, 62; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3, 4; AE D, E.  
 
 
4 
 
2017 credit report lists one of the defaulted car loans with a $9,521 balance (SOR 2.f), 
but that debt was discharged in the bankruptcy.8 
 
Applicant received financial counseling as a requirement of her bankruptcy case. 
She stated that her finances are better. She lives by herself in an apartment. She stated 
that all her current responsibilities are paid on time. She has a good salary, and her 
budget shows a healthy amount remaining each month after paying her expenses. She 
no longer provides financial support to her children.9 
 
Applicant submitted numerous documents and letters attesting to her excellent 
job performance. She is praised for her work ethic, professionalism, judgment, 
discretion, dedication, trustworthiness, loyalty to the United States, reliability, and 
integrity.10 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 36-37, 47-52, 57-59; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3, 4, 7; AE B, C.  
 
9 Tr. at 50-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A.  
 
10 Applicant’s response to SOR; AE H-J. 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; 
and 
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 Applicant entered an Alford plea to the felony charge of larceny, third or 
subsequent conviction. In accordance with her plea bargain, she was sentenced to two 
years in the penitentiary, with both years suspended. She was placed on supervised 
probation for an indefinite period and on good behavior for five years. She was released 
from supervised probation in August 2017, conditioned on her future good behavior. 
The suspended sentence remains in effect. The suspended sentence and the 
 
6 
 
requirement of good behavior is the equivalent of unsupervised probation. The above 
disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant denied committing the larceny that resulted in her conviction. I did not 
find her testimony credible. Moreover, by entering an Alford plea, she accepted that her 
plea would have the same preclusive effect as a guilty plea. Her criminal conduct is not 
mitigated. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 
7 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust. 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems including two bankruptcy cases. She 
also has misdemeanor convictions for larceny and issuing bad checks and a felony 
conviction for larceny. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.f alleges a debt that was discharged in bankruptcy. That debt does not 
raise any security concerns that are not already alleged in SOR ¶ 2.e, which alleges the 
bankruptcy. SOR ¶ 2.f is concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant did not accept responsibility for the three convictions. She blamed the 
bankruptcies on her late husband and because she cosigned car loans for her two 
children who developed substance abuse and legal problems. Her debts were 
discharged in bankruptcy, and she stated that her current finances are stable. However, 
I am not convinced that they will remain so or that she will not commit additional 
financial crimes. Applicant’s financial issues continue to cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated.  
 
 
 
8 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
clearance investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant’s misdemeanor convictions for larceny and issuing bad checks and 
felony conviction for larceny reflect questionable judgment and an unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. They also created vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. AG ¶ 16(c) is not perfectly 
applicable because Applicant’s conduct is sufficient for an adverse determination under 
the criminal conduct and financial considerations guidelines. However, the general 
concerns about questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations contained in AG ¶¶ 15 and 16(c) are established. 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
9 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur;  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 Applicant has not acknowledged her behavior; in spite of the multiple guilty pleas 
and convictions, she denies her guilt. Her personal conduct is not mitigated under the 
same rationale addressed under the criminal conduct and financial considerations 
guidelines.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E, F, and J in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s long and steady work history, and her highly favorable 
character evidence. However, she has multiple bankruptcies and five convictions, and I 
did not find her credible. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
 
10 
 
mitigate the personal conduct, financial considerations, and criminal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.f:    For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
