 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 17-02032 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Available information is sufficient to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised 
by Applicant’s financial problems. The delinquent debts for which he is responsible 
arose from circumstances beyond his control and do not reflect adversely on his 
judgment and reliability. His request for eligibility to occupy a position of trust is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On July 29, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position for his job 
with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
 
 
2 
 
 
investigation, DOD adjudicators were unable to determine that it is clearly consistent 
with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request for a position of trust.1  
 
 On June 27, 2017, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts raising trustworthiness concerns addressed through the adjudicative 
guideline (AG)2 for financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to 
the SOR and requested a hearing.  
 
 I received the case on August 21, 2017, and scheduled the hearing for 
September 27, 2017. The parties appeared as scheduled. I admitted Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 - 9.3 Applicant testified but did not present any documentary evidence. I 
received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 6, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $100,572 for 
three delinquent mortgage-related debts (SOR 1.a – 1.c). In a detailed response to the 
SOR (Answer), Applicant admitted, with explanations and supporting documents,4 each 
of the allegations. In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old and employed by a defense contractor in a position that 
requires eligibility for a position of trust. Applicant works as an information technology 
(IT) manager for a company that supports management of the health care system used 
by members of the military, and his duties include safeguarding personally identifiable 
information (PII) associated with the health care system’s constituents. Applicant 
graduated from college with a degree in computer education systems. He also has 
completed extensive employer-sponsored training and post-graduate education 
equivalent to a master’s degree in information systems management. Applicant has 
worked for that company since 2005, and currently supervises about 11 other 
employees. (Answer; GX 1; Tr. 37) 
 
 Applicant has an exemplary record of performance. His evaluations and letters 
from his supervisors extol his professionalism, expertise, and reliability. He has 
completed extensive training and qualifications for compliance with safeguarding 
                                                 
1 Required by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive). 
 
2 At the time they issued the SOR, DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National 
Intelligence issued a new version of the adjudicative guidelines, to be effective for all adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. Publication of the DOD Manual 5200.02 did not affect the adjudicative guidelines 
applicable to this case. In this decision, I have considered and applied the new adjudicative guidelines. 
My decision in this case would have been the same under either version. 
 
3 Tr. 22 – 35. 
 
4 Tr. 10 – 12. 
 
 
3 
 
 
personal and health information, and his record of safeguarding sensitive information is 
unblemished. His personal and professional references are aware of the allegations that 
have raised trustworthiness concerns in this case. All without reservation recommended 
he continue in a position of trust. (Answer; GX 1; Tr. 39 – 40) 
 
 Applicant and his wife have been married since September 2010. They have 
three children, all under five years old. They bought their first house in April 2005. After 
selling that house, they bought their current primary residence in November 2011. 
Applicant also owns two other houses that are rental properties currently housing 
families displaced by a recent natural disaster in Applicant’s state. Applicant has never 
been past due or delinquent on any mortgage related to these properties. (Answer; GX. 
1; GX. 2; Tr. 37 – 38, 51) 
 
 In 2005, Applicant joined a real estate investment group under the tutelage of the 
real estate agent with whom he worked when Applicant bought his first primary 
residence. The group was organized as a limited liability corporation (LLC) and had 10 
members, including Applicant. Members were required to invest about $100 monthly 
toward an organizational goal of making significant down payments on investment real 
estate purchases. In 2006, Applicant and two other members of the LLC formed a 
second LLC to make other investments. Between 2006 and 2008, working with a local 
bank, both LLCs bought an undeveloped lot, a commercial building, and a residential 
condominium building. LLC members expected dividends from the rental revenues of 
the commercial building and the condominiums. All mortgages were for five years with 
an agreement with the bank5 to refinance them at the end of the term. The LLCs also 
planned to strike an agreement with a builder to develop the lot. (Answer; GX. 1; Tr. 40 
– 42) 
 
 Before the refinancing and construction loans could take place, the national 
housing market collapsed. Concurrently, investor participation waned and available 
investment capital quickly evaporated as renters became scarce or unreliable. As these 
events transpired, the bank had required the LLCs to provide personal guarantors for 
the mortgages. Applicant and two other investors agreed to act in that capacity. One of 
the other guarantors was also both LLCs’ registered agent with the state. Eventually, all 
three investment mortgages became delinquent and the responsibility for payments fell 
to the three personal guarantors. As it turned out, Applicant was the only guarantor who 
remained involved in the properties. One guarantor has not been heard from for several 
years. The other guarantor, who also was the LLCs’ registered agent, moved to another 
state and went to law school. Because that person moved, correspondence addressed 
to the LLCs went undelivered and Applicant often did not receive timely notice of legal 
actions and debt collection efforts requiring his attention. (Answer; GX. 1; Tr. 42 – 46) 
 
 Eventually, all three properties went into foreclosure. Credit reports still attribute 
the debts remaining after resale of the properties to Applicant as delinquent joint 
                                                 
5 The same bank served as lender for all mortgage transactions at issue in this case. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
accounts. From about 2011 until 2014, Applicant tried to manage the commercial 
building and the condominium through his own efforts and using his own money. Of the 
three personal guarantors, only one has been in contact with Applicant;6 however, only 
Applicant has made himself available to the lender and has tried to negotiate 
settlements of the debts at issue. The bank did not approve a proposed short sale of 
one of the properties before it foreclosed, and the bank officer with whom Applicant had 
been communicating no longer works for that bank. Applicant also offered a deed in lieu 
of foreclosure to no avail. He has tried as recently as mid-2017 to continue negotiations 
with the bank, but he now is referred to lawyers handling the matter. (Answer; GX. 1; Tr. 
45, 55 – 57, 62 – 63) 
 
 Despite the financial difficulties presented to Applicant through his membership in 
the LLCs, his personal finances are sound. He has an excellent credit score, and he has 
not incurred any unpaid debts apart from the mortgages alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
owns his own home as well as two other rental properties. As already noted, he has 
never experienced any delays or defaults in meeting his personal financial obligations. 
A letter from Applicant’s certified financial planner describes Applicant’s financial health 
as excellent. Applicant adheres to a budget, has low personal debt, ample insurance, 
and significant retirement savings. Applicant has about $1,700 remaining each month 
after meeting all of his regular expenses. (Answer; Tr. 46 – 47, 51, 60) 
 
 Applicant presented at hearing as credible, forthcoming, and knowledgeable 
regarding all aspects of his finances and the events underlying the issues in this case. 
In his e-QIP and during his background investigation, he disclosed all of his financial 
problems in detail. (GX. 1; GX. 2) 
 
Policies 
 
 Eligibility for a position of public trust must be based on a determination that it is 
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.7 All such 
adjudications must adhere to the procedural protections in the Directive before any 
adverse determination may be made. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and 
material information,8 and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication 
policies in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the 
factors, commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, listed in the guidelines at 
AG ¶ 2(d).9 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by 
                                                 
6 That person provided a letter, included with Applicant’s Answer, that corroborates Applicant’s claims of 
what transpired. 
 
7 Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, Appendix A, Paragraph 1(d).  
 
8 Directive, 6.3. 
 
9  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, 
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's 
 
 
5 
 
 
itself, conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever 
a case can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the 
grant or denial of eligibility for a position of trust. 
 
 The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on 
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an 
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a 
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A person who has 
access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government 
based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in 
ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of 
one who will protect sensitive information as his or her own. Any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access should be resolved in favor of the 
Government. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The facts established by this record reasonably raise a trustworthiness concern 
about Applicant’s finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
  Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). Applicant’s financial problems have persisted over much of the 
                                                                                                                                                             
age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the 
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 
past ten years, and they remain unresolved. By contrast, his debts did not arise from 
any misconduct or drastic lapses in judgment. In hindsight Applicant made a poor 
investment decision, but he did not do so recklessly. The enterprise involved a degree 
of risk distributed amongst the members of the LLCs. Unfortunately for Applicant, he 
was left holding the bag after his fellow investors unilaterally left the group and took their 
investment capital with them after the collapse of the national housing market. To his 
credit, Applicant tried to meet his obligations as a personal guarantor of three 
mortgages and he appears to have acted responsibly in trying to resolve the debts that 
remained after foreclosures.  
 
Applicant’s personal finances are sound, and he established that he manages his 
money prudently. He works with a certified financial planner and adheres to a monthly 
budget. His financial posture includes life insurance and savings that would help 
mitigate any future financial problems. Applicant also meets his obligations regarding 
two other rental properties he obtained by himself. All of the foregoing supports 
application of the following AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control. 
 
 Applicant was sincere in his efforts to resolve the mortgage debts attributed to 
him. The continued presence of unpaid debts is not, by itself, disqualifying. Financial 
problems present a two-fold inquiry. First, does the presence of unpaid debt or other 
unresolved financial burdens present a likelihood that Applicant would resort to illegal 
acts or other conduct that might compromise national interests? Here, that appears 
highly unlikely. Applicant is a solid employee with an excellent record of reliability and 
proper safeguarding of sensitive information. Those characteristics are well documented 
and did not change throughout the time Applicant has been trying to resolve his debts. 
 
 Second, did Applicant’s financial problems arise from irresponsible decisions, 
poor judgment, or other factors that indicate he is unreliable or untrustworthy? I 
conclude they did not. Applicant made his 2005 investment decisions reasonably and 
with an eye toward distributed risk. The venture failed through factors Applicant could 
 
 
7 
 
 
not control. To say the least, the record as a whole establishes that Applicant will not 
make the same mistake again. His personal finances are sound and reflect his good 
judgment. On balance, available information is sufficient to mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns raised by Applicant’s financial problems. 
 
 I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors 
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the 
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Although Applicant is not debt-free, his prudent 
response to his financial problems and his overall reputation for integrity, good 
judgment, and reliability support a fair and commonsense conclusion in favor of 
Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for public trust 
eligibility is granted. 
 
 
____________________ 
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
