 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01431 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne M. Driskill Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 10, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on January 12 and 23, 
2017. (Item 3, Personal Subject Interview (PSI)) After reviewing the results of the OPM 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings 
required to issue a security clearance.  
 
On May 30, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
alleging 48 delinquent debts of security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
 
2 
 
 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 30, 2017, admitting 37 allegations of 
delinquent debt, denied six, noted four were paid, and one was being paid. She 
requested a decision based on the written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on July 31, 2017. (Item 6) Applicant received 
a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on August 7, 2017. She was provided the 
opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on December 12, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM investigator (Item 3) was not authenticated and could not 
be considered over her objection. She was further advised that she could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. She was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, 
the administrative judge could determine that she waived any objection to the 
admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM so she did not 
raise any objection to the PSI. Since she did not raise any objection to consideration of 
the PSI, I will consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 44 years old. She graduated from high school in June 1990, and received 
an associate’s degree in April 1994, and a bachelor’s degree in April 2003. She is still 
taking college level courses. Applicant was a quality assurance analysis from April 2000 
to April 2007, and has been a health care consultant for a defense contractor since April 
2007. Applicant first married in January 1992 and divorced in April 1998. She married 
for the second time in July 1998 and divorced in April 2000. She married again in 
August 2006 and divorced in February 2012. She married again in July 2016. She has 
two children. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated December 10, 2015; Item 3, PSI, dated January 12 
and 23, 2017)  
 
 The SOR alleges and credit reports (Item 4, dated April 5, 2017; Item 5, dated 
January 12, 2016) confirm 48 delinquent debts for Applicant: a charged-off bank debt; a 
collection account for a telephone bill; 18 medical debts in collection or charged off; 19 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case were considered under the previous AGs.  
 
3 
 
 
credit card debts in collection or charged off; six judgments on credit cards or medical 
debts; and three debts related to rental property debts. The total amount of the 
delinquent debt is $36,744.  
 
 In her January 2017 PSI and in her response to the SOR, Applicant attributes her 
delinquent debts to her divorce in 2012, and being on short-term disability receiving only 
60% of her pay for six months after an operation. At the PSI, Applicant stated that she 
intends to review her credit reports and begin making settlement arrangements with 
creditors.  
 
 Applicant provided documents to show that the credit card debt at SOR 1.cc for 
$739 has been resolved. Applicant provided a document to show that the judgment for 
the property in SOR 1.ee for $2,600 has been resolved. She provided another 
document concerning a $50 payment on a credit card that is not identified. She provided 
documents pertaining to other judgments with hand written notes that the debts were 
paid in full. However, she did not provide any other documents to establish that these 
judgments were paid and resolved. The debts at SOR 1.cc and 1.ee are resolved for 
Applicant. 
 
 In the PSI, Applicant did not deny any debts. She was unable to recall the 
specifics of many of her debts. She reported that she would do additional research to 
generate a plan to pay off her debts. She will do her best to untangle and pay her bills. 
However, she noted that because of the number of debts, it will take her a few years to 
pay off her accounts. (Item 3, PSI, dated January 12 and 23, 2017, at 9 and 12) 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM, the need to provide documents to verify her 
payment of any debts or contact with creditors. However, Applicant did not provide any 
information or documentation to establish payment of most of her debts or her plans to 
resolve the debts.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified and sensitive information) 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) An 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly 
or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave 
in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
 
5 
 
 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Credit reports confirm the SOR delinquent 
debts. This information is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts, and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s failure to pay debts shows an inability and history of not meeting her 
financial obligations. Once the Government has established adverse financial issues, 
the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. I considered the 
information and documents Applicant provided as mitigation in response to the SOR 
and FORM. The available evidence presented by Applicant does not show that she has 
resolved or is resolving almost all of her delinquent debts. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant received disability payments 
that were 60% of her salary for six months after surgery in 2012. She did not provide 
any information how this six-month period of lower income while on disability affected 
her ability to pay or resolve any debts. The information in the case file shows that she 
has been gainfully employed since August 2000 except for the short period on disability. 
 
6 
 
 
Her regular employment for over 17 years appears to provide her the income and ability 
to pay her financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant did not provide information on her present finances or salary. She 
claimed that she would contact her creditors to establish payment plans, but she did not 
present information on contacts with creditors or efforts to establish payment plans. Her 
lack of action results in her debts being numerous, ongoing, and recent. Her debts were 
not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. Applicant presented no 
evidence that she received financial counseling.  
 
Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. Applicant is not required to be debt-free. 
All that is required is that Applicant act responsibly given her financial circumstances. 
Applicant must establish that she has a reasonable plan to resolve financial problems, 
and that she has taken significant action to implement that plan. Applicant’s plan must 
show a systematic method of handling debts, and meaningful track record of debt 
payment. A meaningful track record of debt payment can be established by evidence of 
actual debt payments. A promise to pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for a track 
record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible 
manner. Except for two debts, Applicant did not present evidence of debt payments.  
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient details about what she plans to do to address 
the debts alleged in the SOR. She did not provide documentation to show proof of 
payments, correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact, 
copies of debt disputes, evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, or other 
evidence of debt resolution. There is insufficient evidence to establish why Applicant 
was unable to make greater progress resolving her debts. There is insufficient 
assurance that her financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not 
recur in the future. Her lack of reasonable and responsible actions towards her finances 
is a strong indication that she will not protect and safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. Applicant failed to mitigate financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
credible documentary information to establish that she took or plans to take reasonable 
and responsible action to resolve her financial obligations. Applicant did not 
demonstrate appropriate management of her finances and did not show a record of 
action to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. She has 
not established her suitability for access to classified information. I conclude Applicant 
failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.bb:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.cc:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.dd:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.ee:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.ff – 1.vv   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
