 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 17-01693 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Robert M. Barga, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of the Republic of China (Taiwan), and her parents 
are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Foreign influence security concerns are not 
mitigated. Access to classified information is denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On August 19, 2015, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86) (SCA). Government Exhibit (GE) 1. On June 6, 2017, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) 2. Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the foreign 
influence guideline. HE 2. 
 
2 
                                         
 
On June 28, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. HE 
3. On August 24, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On August 28, 2017, 
the case was assigned to me. On November 8, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for December 1, 2017. 
HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
Department Counsel offered two exhibits; Applicant offered eight exhibits; there 
were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. Tr. 14-17; GE 
1-2; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-H. On December 20, 2017, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript.  
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position on or after June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the previous AGs, and I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning the 
Taiwan. Tr. 15-16; HE 4 (Administrative Notice Request). I have also taken administrative 
notice of two documents from the U.S. State Department website: U.S. Bilateral Relations 
Fact Sheets, U.S. Relations With Taiwan (Sept. 13, 2016), and Background Note Taiwan 
(Feb. 8, 2012) https://2009-2017.state.gov/outofdate/bgn/ taiwan/196574.htm. Tr. 15-16; 
HE 4 (Item 1); HE 5. There were no objections to the administrative notice documents, 
and administrative notice of these documents is approved. Tr. 15-16.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-
18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of 
facts for administrative notice). See the Taiwan section of the Findings of Fact of this 
decision, infra, for the administratively noticed facts concerning Taiwan. 
  
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.    
 
3 
                                         
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. HE 3. He also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old information technology analyst, and a DOD contractor 
has employed him since October 2015. Tr. 24, 34; GE 1. From June 2005 to August 2015, 
Applicant worked for 16 different employers. GE 1. He was educated in the United States. 
In 2003, he graduated from high school. Tr. 34. He completed about one year of college. 
Tr. 35. He served in the U.S. Navy from 2003 to 2005; he received a general discharge 
under honorable conditions; and he was a seaman apprentice (E-2) when he left active 
duty. Tr. 24. He did not serve overseas. Tr. 7. He does not have any children. Tr. 40. 
Applicant’s net financial worth in the United States is between $50,000 and $100,000. Tr. 
42. His annual salary is about $80,000. Tr. 42. His parents are citizens and residents of 
the United States. Tr. 42. 
 
 When Applicant was in the Navy, he received nonjudicial punishment (NJP) twice 
for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). Tr. 35; GE 2. He said he did not remember 
the breathalyzer result or blood alcohol content (BAC) when he was arrested for the first 
DUI. Tr. 35-36. In June 2006, he was arrested for his second DUI, and he said his BAC 
was only .08 percent. Tr. 37; GE 2. He pleaded guilty to reckless driving. GE 2. Applicant 
did not have any memory of the events leading up to his third DUI arrest in August 2013. 
Tr. 37-39; GE 2. He was driving 100 miles per hour; the police stopped his vehicle; and 
his BAC was “pretty high,” but he did not remember it. Tr. 38; GE 2. He pleaded guilty to 
DUI and speeding. GE 2. He attended an alcohol-education course. GE 2. After the third 
DUI, he stopped consuming alcohol for one year. Tr. 38. He was unsure whether he was 
still on probation. Tr. 39. When he drinks alcohol, he drinks responsibly. Tr. 39. He uses 
public transport when he has been drinking. Tr. 39.   
 
 In September 2015, Applicant married. Tr. 25. Applicant met his future spouse on 
the Internet in 2014. Tr. 22, 31. Applicant has not visited Taiwan, and his parents-in-law 
have not visited Applicant. Tr. 26. His parents-in-law speak limited English. Tr. 26. His 
parents-in-law are mostly retired from their employment in a privately-owned electronics 
business. Tr. 28, 50, 62. His father-in-law’s goal is to resume the private business; 
however, it may not be possible because of foreign competition. Tr. 50-52. Applicant’s 
communications with his parents-in-law are limited to one letter he sent to them and 
sporadic electronic communications. Tr. 22-26. His spouse communicates with her 
parents and her brother, who are citizens and residents of Taiwan, on a weekly basis. Tr. 
26, 60. Applicant’s spouse’s brother, who is single, is employed in communications. Tr. 
26-27. Applicant has never met his brother-in-law. Tr. 27.  
 
 Applicant’s spouse moved to the United States in 2010. Tr. 60. She visited Taiwan 
three or four times after 2010. Tr. 61. Her parents visited the United States in 2014. Tr. 
                                            
2The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or locations 
in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information. 
 
4 
                                         
 
64. She was educated through the bachelor’s degree level in Taiwan. Tr. 30. In December 
2014, she received a Ph.D. from a U.S. university. Tr. 30, 64. Applicant’s spouse owes 
about $70,000 in student loans to a bank in Taiwan.3 Tr. 30, 62-63. Her parents are 
making most of the payments on her student loan. Tr. 43. She was making some 
payments until recently when she became unemployed. Tr. 63. She views the People’s 
Republic of China (PRC) as separate from Taiwan. Tr. 46. She loves the United States, 
and she has greater professional opportunities in the United States than in Taiwan. Tr. 
46. She intends to permanently remain in the United States. Tr. 47. She intends to start 
a business in the United States. Tr. 48. She has visited Taiwan once since 2014. Tr. 32. 
She stayed in Taiwan on that visit for about six weeks. Tr. 32. If her parents become ill, 
she intends to return to Taiwan to visit them. Tr. 58-59. 
 
 Applicant’s spouse has applied to be a permanent U.S. resident. Tr. 33. On 
December 1, 2015, Applicant’s spouse was sworn for her enlistment in the U.S. Army 
Reserve. Tr. 30-31, 53-54, 69; AE A. She takes her enlistment oath seriously and would 
fight on behalf of the United States. Tr. 55-56. She was unable to go to Army basic training 
because she is not a U.S. citizen. Tr. 31, 56-57. On June 21, 2017, the Office of the 
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness removed an impediment for active 
duty service for persons such as Applicant’s spouse, who were enlisted in the Military 
Accessions Vital to the National Interest (MAVNI) Pilot Program. SOR response. His 
spouse has a U.S. driver’s license and a Common Access Card (CAC) for her Army 
Reserve unit. Tr. 34, 71. If someone puts pressure on her parents for classified 
information, she will seek help from the authorities. Tr. 59.   
 
Character Evidence 
 
 A coworker who knows Applicant professionally and socially indicated Applicant is 
trustworthy and reliable. Tr. 74-76. He was aware of Applicant’s history of alcohol 
consumption and of the foreign influence security concerns. Tr. 76. He is not aware of 
any reason to question Applicant’s worthiness for a security clearance. Tr. 76.  
 
                                            
3 Applicant’s SOR does not allege that Applicant’s spouse has any financial connections to Taiwan 
or that Applicant was arrested three times for driving while under the influence of alcohol (DUI). In ISCR 
Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which 
conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). See also ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. April 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-
00151 at 3, n. 1 (App. Bd. Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). These 
allegations will not be considered except for the five purposes listed above. 
 
5 
                                         
 
Applicant’s spouse’s friend has known her since 2013. Tr. 78. Applicant and his 
spouse are respectful of each other’s views. Tr. 80. She does not believe Applicant’s 
spouse would compromise U.S. national security. Tr. 80-81. 
 
Taiwan 
 
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy shared with power shared between the 
Executive, Legislative, Judicial, Control, and Examination. Taiwan’s population is 23.2 
million (December 2011). Taiwan and the United States maintain a robust unofficial 
relationship. In 1979, the United States switched recognition from Taiwan to the PRC. The 
United States maintains cultural, commercial, other unofficial relations with Taiwan. The 
PRC insists that there is “one China” with the PRC contending that Taiwan is part of the 
PRC and not independent. 
 
The PRC is Taiwan’s largest trading partner and the United States is Taiwan’s 
second largest trading partner. The PRC and Taiwan are collectors of U.S. economic and 
proprietary information. In the past ten years, these activities on behalf of Taiwan have 
resulted in criminal and civil charges in the United States. The PRC seeks to acquire 
intelligence through multiple sources, including through illegal means.  
 
The 1979 Taiwan Relations Act includes the United States’ commitment to assist 
Taiwan in the maintenance of its defensive capability. Companies in Taiwan employ more 
than 12,000 workers in the United States. 
 
 The United States and Taiwan have had a close military and diplomatic relationship 
for more than 60 years. Taiwan’s armed forces are equipped with weapons obtained 
primarily from the United States. In January 2010, the Barack Obama administration 
notified Congress of its intent to sell Taiwan $6.4 billion worth of various defensive 
weapons, including Blackhawk helicopters and Patriot missiles, and authorized an 
additional $5.8 billion in September 2011, which included a retrofit of Taiwan’s F-16 A/B 
fleet. Taiwan adheres to the principles of the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and has 
stated that it does not intend to produce nuclear weapons.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 
528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President has 
authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
 
6 
                                         
 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or in part, 
on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President, 
Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. 
Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case 
No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating 
condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side 
of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
 
7 
                                         
 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant is close to his spouse, who is a citizen of Taiwan, and not a citizen or 
permanent resident of the United States. Applicant’s spouse has frequent contacts4 with 
her relatives who are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Foreign influence security 
concerns arise because of Applicant’s spouse’s relationships with her family in Taiwan. 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, 
their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA 
LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection and obligation to 
his spouse. “[A]s a matter of common sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable 
presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family 
members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is the basis 
of AG ¶ 7(e).  
 
Applicant’s spouse’s relationships with her family in Taiwan are sufficient to create 
“a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
                                            
4 The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more frequently constitutes 
“frequent contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings 
once every four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
8 
                                         
 
coercion.” These relationships create a concern about Applicant’s “obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology.” For example, if entities in Taiwan wanted to expose 
Applicant to coercion, they could approach Applicant’s spouse’s family in Taiwan. In turn, 
she could ask Applicant to compromise national security.  
 
The mere possession of ties with family in Taiwan is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant or his spouse has such a 
relationship, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and 
could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR 
Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially in 
the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA 
LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
  
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of Taiwan with the United States places a burden of persuasion 
on Applicant to demonstrate that his spouse’s relationships with her family in Taiwan do 
not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed in a position where he might be 
forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist his spouse.   
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives, terrorists, or other entities 
from Taiwan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant, or his spouse, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
Applicant’s spouse’s communications and visits with her family in Taiwan are sufficient to 
raise a security concern about potential foreign influence. Department Counsel produced 
substantial evidence to raise the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about 
potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
  
 
9 
                                         
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 
10 
                                         
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Nevertheless because of Applicant’s 
spouse’s contacts with her family in Taiwan, Applicant is not able to fully meet his burden 
of showing there is “little likelihood that [his spouse’s relationships with her relatives who 
are residents of Taiwan] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
Applicant’s spouse owes $70,000 to a bank in Taiwan, which she received while 
she was attending post-graduate education in the United States. Her parents are making 
the payments on this debt. Applicant and his spouse’s net worth in the United States is 
about $75,000. This debt to a Taiwan bank is of sufficient magnitude in relation to 
Applicant’s net worth to reduce mitigation under the foreign influence guideline.        
 
Applicant has “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He 
has strong family connections to the United States. Applicant, his parents, and his other 
family members are citizens and residents of the United States. He was educated in the 
United States, and he served under honorable conditions in the Navy for two years. His 
spouse has primarily lived in the United States since 2010, and she joined the U.S. Army 
Reserve. Applicant has never visited Taiwan.      
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his spouse’s relationships with her family in 
Taiwan, the $70,000 debt to a Taiwan bank, and her visits to Taiwan. There is no evidence 
that terrorists, criminals, the Taiwan Government, or those conducting espionage have 
approached or threatened Applicant or his spouse for classified or sensitive information. 
While the Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of such evidence, 
if such record evidence was present, Applicant would have a heavy evidentiary burden to 
overcome to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be mindful of 
the United States’ positive relationship with Taiwan.  
 
While there is no evidence that the Taiwan Government or industrial entities have 
engaged in coercion of former Taiwan citizens to obtain sensitive or classified U.S. 
information, some individuals from Taiwan have violated U.S. law and engaged in 
industrial espionage. Because of Applicant’s spouse’s close and ongoing connections to 
Taiwan, foreign influence security concerns are not fully mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
11 
                                         
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration” 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline B are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old information technology analyst who has been employed 
by a DOD contractor since October 2015. He has about one year of college. He served 
in the U.S. Navy from 2003 to 2005; he received a general discharge under honorable 
conditions. He does not have children. His net financial worth in the United States is 
between $50,000 and $100,000, and his annual salary is about $80,000. His parents and 
family are citizens and residents of the United States. He has never visited Taiwan or met 
his Taiwan in-laws.  
 
 When Applicant was in the Navy, he received two NJPs for DUIs. In August 2013, 
he was arrested the third time for DUI. He pleaded guilty to the DUI in August 2013, and 
he attended an alcohol-education course. GE 2. When he drinks alcohol, he said he drinks 
responsibly. He uses public transport when he has been drinking. His history of excessive 
alcohol consumption was not alleged in the SOR, and this issue may not have been fully 
developed at his hearing. See note 3, supra.    
 
In September 2015, Applicant married a citizen of Taiwan. She is not a U.S. 
permanent resident or U.S. citizen. She joined the U.S. Army Reserve; however, she has 
been unable to attend basic training because of her citizenship status and delays in the 
MAVNI program. She received a Ph.D. from a prominent U.S. university. She has frequent 
contacts with her family in Taiwan. She visited Taiwan several times since 2010. She 
owes $70,000 to a Taiwan Bank. The $70,000 debt to a Taiwan bank was not alleged in 
the SOR. See note 3, supra.    
 
  A Guideline B decision concerning Taiwan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.5 Some Taiwan citizens have engaged in 
economic espionage against the United States. Balanced against this illegal behavior is 
Taiwan’s lengthy history of a positive military and diplomatic relationship with the United 
States. Over the last 10 years, the United States has sold billions of dollars of advanced 
military equipment to Taiwan. There is no evidence that the Taiwan Government has 
coerced any Taiwan citizens or former citizens living in the United States to betray the 
United States.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the granting a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated foreign influence security 
                                            
5 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
12 
                                         
 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more mitigating evidence, he may be able to demonstrate 
persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
