 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00616 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F and personal conduct under Guideline E. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 30, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on May 25, 2016. (Item 6, 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI)) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to 
issue a security clearance.  
 
On March 24, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F and personal 
conduct under Guideline E. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 10, 2017. He admitted the seven 
allegations of delinquent debt under Guideline F, and noted that the delinquent debts 
were charged off and no longer on his credit reports. While Applicant admitted the 
allegation of falsification of information on his e-QIP under Guideline E, his explanation 
leads to the conclusion that he denied that he deliberately provide false or misleading 
information. I consider his response to be a denial of the allegation. Applicant elected to 
have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s written case on June 30, 2017. (Item 7) Applicant received a 
complete file of relevant material (FORM) on July 19, 2017. He was provided the 
opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
disqualifying conditions. Applicant responded to the FORM providing additional 
information. (Item 8) Department counsel had no objection to consideration of the 
additional material. (Item 9) I was assigned the case on October 23, 2017.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the PSI (Item 6) was not 
authenticated and could not be considered over his objection. He was further advised 
that he could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it 
clear and accurate, and could object to the admission of the summary as not 
authenticated by a Government witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection 
was raised to the summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that he waived 
any objection to the admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant timely responded to the 
FORM, but he did not raise any objection to consideration of the PSI. Without objection 
by Applicant, I will consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 59 years old. He did not graduate from high school but received a General 
Education Diploma (GED). Applicant did not remember when he received the GED. He 
has been a manufacturing engineer for a defense contractor since 1984. He married in 
September 1978 and has two grown children. He has been eligible for access to 
classified information since 2001. There is no evidence of any security violations. (Item 
6, PSI, dated May 25, 2016)  
 
 The SOR alleges, and credit reports (Item 4, dated January 24, 2017, Item 5, 
dated November 10, 2015) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a bank 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case were considered under the previous AGs.  
 
3 
 
 
debt charged off for $26,531 (SOR 1.a); a credit card debt charged off for $15,549 
(SOR 1.b); a credit card debt charged off for $651 (SOR 1.c); a credit card debt charged 
off for $17,523 (SOR 1.d);a credit card debt charged off for $745 (SOR 1.e); two 
medical debts in collection by the same collection agency for $1,865 (SOR 1.f), and 
$1,472 (SOR 1.g). The amount of the delinquent debt is approximately $64,000.  
 
 The SOR alleges personal conduct security concerns for Applicant for failing to 
provide full, accurate, and complete information on his September 30, 2015 e-QIP. 
Applicant answered “no” to financial question 26 asking if in the last seven years he had 
any debts turned over to a collection agency, any credit cards suspended, charged off, 
or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed.  
 
 Applicant stated in the PSI that he had little knowledge of the other debts. He has 
no knowledge of the credit card debt at SOR 1.a, claiming he never had a credit card 
from the company. He does not remember receiving inquiries or collection notice for this 
account. He has not received any financial and debt counseling or education, and has 
not participated in any debt consolidation programs. (Item 6 at 6) 
 
 In the PSI, Applicant noted that the debt at SOR 1.b is a collection action for a 
credit card account he used to purchase goods. He initially made payments on the card, 
but it became delinquent in 2008 when he spent the funds he would normally use to pay 
the credit card for his father’s funeral expenses. When he received collection notices 
from the credit card company, he informed them that he could not make payments on 
the card at that time. He believes he accepted a settlement offer from the credit card 
company and paid the settlement resolving this debt. He did not present any documents 
to verify his assertion. (Item 6 at 5) 
 
 Applicant has no knowledge of the account at SOR 1.c. He believes it may be his 
wife’s credit card. He had a corporate card from the creditor but it was paid in full. He 
never received a collection notice for this card. (Item 6 at 5) 
 
 Applicant does not have any knowledge of the debts at SOR 1. d and 1.e from 
the same creditor. He and his wife had credit cards from the company that they used to 
purchase goods. He made payments on the accounts until 2008 and 2010 when he had 
to use his own funds to pay for his father’s and his brother’s funerals. He received 
collection notices for the accounts and told the creditor that he could not afford to make 
payments at this time. (Item 6 at 5) 
 
 Applicant has no knowledge of the medical debt at SOR 1.f and 1.g. He believes 
all of his medical cost have been paid. The accounts may be for his wife’s medical 
expenses. He has not received any collection notices from the medical providers. (Item 
6 at 6) 
 
 In his responses to the SOR and the FORM, Applicant reiterates that his 
delinquent debts resulted from the need to pay funeral and burial expenses for his 
father and brother. He provided death certificates to verify the deaths, and copies of the 
 
4 
 
 
funeral bills to show he paid the funeral and burial expenses. He reported that he took a 
large sum from his retirement savings to help pay the expenses. He also used his own 
funds to pay the federal and state taxes on the early withdrawal thus preventing him 
from paying his other debts. Available documents provided by Applicant shows that 
Applicant paid the taxes incurred by the early withdrawal of his retirement account. 
(Answer to SOR, dated May 10, 2017) 
 
 Applicant noted that the debts at SOR 1.a to 1.f were charged off and no longer 
on his credit reports. The only debt still being reported by the credit reporting agencies 
is the medical debt at SOR 1.g. Applicant also emphasized that his credit score rose 
from the 500s, when he was trying to pay the funeral expenses, to higher than 700. 
(Answer to SOR, dated May 10, 2010) 
 
 Applicant provided copies of his performance reviews. The reviews show that 
Applicant is a strong performer who exceeds customer expectations. He is a 
knowledgeable manufacturing engineer who handles difficult programs. (Response to 
FORM, dated August 2, 2017) 
 
 Applicant did not list any delinquent debts in response to question 26 on the e-
QIP. In the PSI conducted on May 25, 2016, Applicant only knew of one delinquent 
account that he thought had been resolved. He stated that he had no knowledge of the 
other accounts mentioned by the investigator. He told the investigator that he intends to 
study his credit reports to determine if any of the accounts are valid. If valid, he would 
pay them. Applicant did not provide any additional information on this allegation in his 
response to the FORM.   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
 
5 
 
 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.    
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified and sensitive information) 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) An 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 
6 
 
 
 Credit reports reveal, and Applicant admits, that he had multiple delinquent debts 
dating to as early as 2008. The information is sufficient to raise issues about Applicant’s 
willingness and ability to meet his financial obligations, and raises security concerns 
under the following Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions at AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts,  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Once the Government has established the adverse financial issue, the Applicant 
has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. Based on the information provided 
by Applicant, I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible sources, such as a non-profit credit counselling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) apply in part. While Applicant’s debts 
are numerous and recent, Applicant was required to pay funeral and burial expenses 
when his father passed away in 2008 and his brother in 2010. The expenditure of funds 
in the future for funeral and burial expenses is unlikely. However, Applicant may be 
faced with unanticipated expenses that limit his ability to pay other debt in the future. 
While the need to pay the family funeral and burial expenses were conditions beyond 
his control, he has not established that these conditions prohibited him from attempting 
to resolve his financial problems.  
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant did not provide 
information concerning financial counseling or participation in debt consolidation 
 
7 
 
 
programs. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. Applicant is not required to be debt-free 
nor must her plan require paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is 
required is that Applicant act responsibly given her circumstances. Applicant must 
establish that she has a reasonable plan to resolve financial problems, and that she has 
taken significant action to implement that plan. Applicant’s plan must show a systematic 
method of handling debts, and Applicant must establish a meaningful track record of 
debt payment. A meaningful track record of debt payment can be established by 
evidence of actual debt payments or reduction of debt through payment of debts. A 
promise to pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in 
a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible manner.  
 
Applicant did not provide information to establish that he resolved the debts 
alleged in the SOR. Applicant presented no evidence of debt payments or resolution of 
any debts. He has been gainfully employed by the same employer for over 34 years and 
seems to have the ability to resolve his delinquent debts. He has not acted responsibly 
because he has not developed plans to pay his delinquent debts. He appears to rely on 
the debts no longer being reported on his credit reports to resolve the debts. He did not 
provide documentation to show proof of payments, correspondence to or from the 
creditors to establish maintenance of contact, copies of debt disputes, evidence of 
attempts to negotiate payment plans, or other evidence of progress or resolution. 
However, debt remain relevant for security clearance purposes even if they are no 
longer enforceable due to the running of the statute of limitations or cannot be legally 
listed on a credit report due to the passage of time. The reliance on a state’s statute of 
limitations does not constitute a good-faith effort to resolve financial difficulties and is of 
limited mitigation value. There is no clear evidence that his debt problems have been 
resolved, so his finances are not under control. There is insufficient evidence to 
establish why Applicant was unable to make greater progress resolving his debts.  
 
 The ability to resolve his financial problems were within Applicant’s control. He 
did not present a plan to resolve his financial problems or any efforts to pay or resolve 
his delinquent debts. Accordingly, he has not established a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His lack of reasonable and responsible actions towards his finances is a strong 
indication that he will not protect and safeguard classified or sensitive information. He 
did not present information to show a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. Applicant did 
not present sufficient information to mitigate financial security concerns. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or adjudicative 
processes. (AG ¶ 15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because it 
indicates whether the person’s past conduct justifies confidence that the person can be 
 
8 
 
 
trusted to properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. Authorization for a 
security clearance depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. 
If a person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process 
cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified or sensitive 
information is in the best interest of the United States Government.  
 While there is a security concern for a deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral statement to the 
Government when applying for a security clearance, not every omission, concealment, 
or inaccurate statement is a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. 
It is deliberate if done knowingly and willfully with intent to deceive. 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant did not provide full, complete, and accurate 
information concerning the status of his finances. Applicant’s failure to list his delinquent 
debts on his e-QIP raises a security concern under Personal Conduct Disqualifying 
Condition AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). 
 
 Applicant denied that he intentionally withheld full, complete, and accurate 
information on his security clearance application. He did not list any delinquent debts on 
his e-QIP. Applicant must have known that he had credit card and medical debts when 
he completed his e-QIP. He was paying his debts when he had to stop because he 
needed to use his own funds to pay 
 his father’s and bother’s funeral and burial expenses. He may not know all of the details 
of his financial situation, but he knew he had delinquent debt. Applicant’s failure to list 
any delinquent debt on the e-QIP was deliberate with an intent not to present a true 
picture of his financial situation. His failure to provide the correct information obscured 
the full extent of his financial situation from adjudicators. I find Applicant deliberately 
failed to provide correct and accurate information concerning his debts on his SCA.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
9 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 34 years of 
service in the defense industry and that he is highly regarded by his employer. I 
considered that he successfully had eligibility for access to classified information since 
2001.  
 
 Applicant failed to pay his delinquent debts. In requesting an administrative 
determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, he failed to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his financial 
circumstances, to adequately articulate his positions, and provide facts to mitigate the 
financial security concerns. In short, the file lacks sufficient evidence to establish that he 
paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved his 
delinquent accounts. The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documents and 
details to explain his finances. In addition, he deliberately failed to report his debts on 
his SCA. Applicant’s failure to appropriately manage his finances, and his lack of action 
to resolve financial issues, are firm indications that he may not adequately safeguard 
classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not 
established his suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
situation and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
