 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01270 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 26, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 19, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
(Government Exhibit 2.)  On May 17, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations; and Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective 
within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 22, 2017.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.)  On 
June 19, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on June 20, 2017, and received by him on June 26, 2017.  The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
 
2 
 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM.  Applicant failed to respond to the FORM.  Applicant did not object to Items 1 
through 5, and they are admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits 1 through 5.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 58 years old. He holds the position of Vice President of Quality 
Control/ Chief Inspector and is employed with a defense contractor.  He is seeking to 
retain a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified eight delinquent debts totaling approximately $143,960.  The debts include a 
delinquent home mortgage, credit card debt, and medical bills that have either been 
charged off or placed for collection.  Applicant has been working for his current 
employer since September 2013.       
 
 Applicant admitted each of the delinquent debts set forth under this guideline.  
His credit report dated September 2016, confirms that these debts remain owing.  
(Government Exhibit 4.)  Applicant claims that his job requires that he travels 
extensively and his wife handles all of the household financial matters.   
 
The following debts became owing and remain outstanding:  
 
1.a.  A delinquent debt owed to a bank for a mortgage account was past due in 
the approximate amount of $28,893.  The account is in foreclosure status with a total 
loan balance of $131,058.  The account remains owing.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  
 
1.b.  A delinquent credit card debt owed to a bank was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $5,100.  The account remains owing.  (Government Exhibit 4.)       
 
3 
 
 1.c.     A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was charged off.  The debt remains 
owing.  (Government Exhibit 4.)    
 
1.d.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection by CITIBANK 
N.A. in the approximate amount of $6,669.  The account remains owing.   (Government 
Exhibit 4.)  
 
1.e.  A delinquent medical account owed to a creditor was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $520.  The account remains owing.  (Government Exhibit 4.)     
 
1.f.  A delinquent medical account owed to a creditor was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $300.   The account remains owing.  (Government Exhibit 
4.)   
 
 1.g.  A delinquent medical account owed to a creditor was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $213.  The account remains owing.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  
 
 1.h.  A delinquent medical account owed to a creditor was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $100.  The account remains owing.  (Government Exhibit 4.) 
 
 There is no documentation in the record to show that Applicant has made any 
financial arrangements to pay any of his delinquent debt.  Thus, each of the debts listed 
in the SOR, continue to remain delinquent and owing.   
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-OIP) dated June 19, 2016.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  In response to Section 26 
concerning his financial record, Applicant was asked if “in the past seven years, has he 
had any possessions or property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed?  
In the past seven years, has he defaulted of any type of loan?  In the past seven years, 
has he had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency.  In the past seven years, 
has he had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or canceled for failing to 
pay as agreed.  In the past seven years has he been over 120days delinquent on any 
debt not previously entered?. . . and is he currently over 120 days delinquent on any 
debt?” The Applicant answered “NO” to each question.  These were false responses.  
Applicant failed to disclose the delinquent debts set forth in paragraph 1, above.       
 
 Applicant stated that his wife handles the household finances and he was not 
aware of his financial situation.  In view of the number and amount of these debts, it 
appears that he deliberately falsified his answers in response to the above questions on 
his security clearance application.  In fact, it is unlikely that he would not have known 
that in June 2016 his home was foreclosed upon.  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence that 
establishes controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
   
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant remains excessively indebted to the creditors listed in the SOR.  He 
has failed to prove that he has done anything to resolve his delinquent debts.  The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
It appears that Applicant’s home was in foreclosure in June 2016.  There are also 
two credit card debts over $5,000.  There is no evidence to demonstrate that Applicant 
has done anything to resolve is debt.  He has failed to establish that he acted 
reasonably, responsibly or in good-faith to repay his financial obligations or establish a 
 
6 
 
meaningful track record of repayment. Furthermore, Applicant has not demonstrated 
that future financial problems are unlikely.  There are no indications that his financial 
problems are being resolved or are under control.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the personal conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 From the evidence provided, Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his 
delinquent debts and his foreclosure in response to questions on this security clearance 
application.  Even if his wife handles the household finances, he must know enough 
about them to properly and correctly answer the questions on his security clearance 
application.  If he did not know, he has the responsibility to find out before simply putting 
down inaccurate information on the application.  The fact that he did not list his debt in 
response to questions on his security clearance application indicates behavior that 
shown questionable judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
 
7 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, none of 
them were established in this case.  Applicant intentionally and deliberately attempted to 
conceal material information from the Government regarding his financial situation. 
Falsifying material information is a serious offense, and Applicant has done nothing to 
show that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. He has not provided sufficient 
evidence to meet his burden of proof with respect to his personal conduct. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant has failed to 
provide any documentation to show proof of payment toward his delinquent debts.  He 
also deliberately falsified his security clearance application concerning his finances.   
Applicant’s credibility is in question.  He has not been candid and upfront with the 
Government about his financial affairs.  He obviously does not understand the need to 
 
8 
 
ensure that only individuals with whom the Government can trust can be provided 
access to classified information.  Applicant has not demonstrated that he meets these 
qualifications.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations and Personal 
Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
