 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 17-00539 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s parents-in-law and three sisters-in-law are citizens and residents of 
South Korea. He and his spouse frequently communicate with some of them. Applicant 
was born in the United States; he served in the U.S. Army for 13 years; and he received 
a bronze star for service in Afghanistan. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated 
by his strong connections to the United States. Access to classified information is granted.   
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On January 4, 2015, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86) (SCA). Government Exhibit (GE) 1. On April 21, 2017, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. Hearing Exhibit 
 
2 
                                         
 
(HE) 2. Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the foreign 
influence guideline. HE 2. 
 
On May 24, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR. HE 3. On June 21, 2017, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On June 22, 2017, the case was assigned to 
me. On October 19, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing, setting the hearing for October 30, 2017. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was 
held as scheduled.  
  
Department Counsel offered 1 exhibit; Applicant offered 25 exhibits; there were no 
objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. Tr. 10-13; GE 1; AE A-
AE Y. On October 31, 2017, Applicant provided one exhibit, which was admitted without 
objection. AE Z. On November 6, 2017, DOHA received a copy of the hearing transcript. 
On November 16, 2017, the record closed. Tr. 51. 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position on or after June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the previous AGs, and I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning South 
Korea. Tr. 11; HE 4 (Administrative Notice Request). I have also taken administrative 
notice of two documents from the U.S. State Department website: U.S. Bilateral Relations 
Fact Sheets, U.S. Relations With South Korea (Jan. 25, 2017), 
http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/2800.htm, and Background Note South Korea (Apr. 12, 
2012) http://www.state.gov/outofdate/bgn/southkorea/200974.htm. Tr. 11; HE 5; HE 6. 
There were no objections to the administrative notice documents. Tr. 11. I have block 
quoted from these documents without footnotes. 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-
18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of 
facts for administrative notice). See the Republic of Korea or South Korea section of the 
Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, for the administratively noticed facts concerning 
South Korea. 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.    
 
3 
                                         
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. HE 3. He also 
provided extenuating and mitigating information. His admissions are accepted as findings 
of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the 
following additional findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old project manager, and a DOD contractor has employed 
him since May 2015. Tr. 17-18, GE 1. In 2010, he received a bachelor’s degree in the 
United States, and in 2014, he received a master’s degree in homeland security in the 
United States. GE 1; AE Q; AE S. From 2002 to 2015, he served on active duty in the 
U.S. Army. Tr. 19. His last duty assignment was in South Korea. Tr. 19. He served tours 
in South Korea from 2009 to 2010 and from 2014 to 2015. Tr. 19. He served in 
Afghanistan from March 2012 to March 2013. AE Z. Applicant has held a U.S. security 
clearance since 2002, and there is no evidence of security violations. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s spouse, parents-in-law, and three sisters-in-law 
are citizens and residents of South Korea. His in-laws do not work for the South Korean 
Government. Tr. 26, 28. He does not have any bank accounts or property in South Korea. 
Tr. 29-30. 
 
In 2011, Applicant married in the United States. Tr. 34. His spouse was born in 
South Korea. GE 1. She is a U.S. permanent resident, and she has a U.S. Social Security 
number and U.S. driver’s license. Tr. 23; AE B; AE C. She resided in the United States 
while Applicant worked in South Korea so that she could establish her U.S. residence as 
a prerequisite for her eventual U.S. citizenship. Tr. 23. His spouse communicates with 
her mother about once a week. Tr. 35. Applicant was unsure how often his spouse 
communicates with her sisters. Tr. 36. Applicant’s spouse does not have any accounts or 
property in South Korea. Tr. 36-37. Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of South Korea, and 
she is currently a resident of the United States. Tr. 24. Once she becomes a U.S. citizen, 
she intends to renounce her South Korean citizenship. Tr. 24.  
 
Applicant’s spouse has three sisters. One of her sisters is a U.S. citizen who 
resides in the United States. Tr. 27. Applicant has never met one of her sisters who lives 
in South Korea, and he met the other sister about six times in his last 12 months when he 
lived in South Korea. Tr. 27.  
 
When Applicant lived in South Korea, he saw his mother-in-law on a monthly basis, 
and he never saw his father-in-law. Tr. 25. He does not know about his father-in-law’s 
employment. Tr. 25.  
 
Applicant has two children, who are ages 1 and 13. Tr. 21. His 13-year-old child 
does not reside with Applicant. In June 2017, Applicant, his spouse, and infant child 
                                            
2The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or locations 
in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information. 
 
4 
                                         
 
entered the United States from South Korea. Tr. 20. Applicant is taking courses towards 
a Ph.D. degree. Tr. 20. Applicant’s two children are U.S. citizens. Tr. 22; AE A.  
 
Applicant’s parents were born in the United States, and they reside in the United 
States. GE 1. In 1981, Applicant’s brother was born in Germany because Applicant’s 
father was serving in Germany with the U.S. Air Force. GE 1. His brother resides in the 
United States. GE 1. Applicant’s two half-brothers were born in the United States, and 
they reside in the United States. GE 1. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
While Applicant was in the Army, his specialty was intelligence analyst.3 AE S. In 
2007, Applicant was inducted in the Sergeant Audie Murphy Club. AE S. He received 
excellent recommendations for warrant officer school. In July 2008, he was promoted 
from staff sergeant to warrant officer. AE S; AE V.  
 
When Applicant was serving in South Korea, he violated curfew restrictions. Tr. 
30, 38-39. He received a general officer-level reprimand and nonjudicial punishment 
under Article 15, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). Tr. 30; GE 1. In May 2015, he 
received a general discharge under honorable conditions from the Army. Tr. 30-31, 42-
43; GE 1; AE Z. The local major general recommended an honorable discharge; however, 
the Army Human Relations Command issued a general discharge for unacceptable 
conduct. Tr. 30-31, 43; GE 1; AE Z. He disclosed his curfew violations and administrative 
disposition of the offenses on his January 4, 2015 SCA. GE 1. 
 
A retired Army lieutenant colonel (LTC) lauded Applicant’s honesty, dedication, 
intelligence, professionalism, and loyalty to the United States. Applicant expressed 
remorse for his poor judgment for his curfew violations. The retired LTC recommended 
reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance. Applicant’s senior manager praised 
Applicant’s dedication, diligence, loyalty to the United States, and contributions to mission 
accomplishment. 
 
Applicant received the following decorations, medals, or ribbons: Bronze Star 
Medal;4 Army Commendation Medal (5th Award); Joint Service Achievement Medal; 
Afghanistan Campaign Medal with Campaign Star; Army Achievement Medal (2nd 
Award); Meritorious Unit Commendation; Army Good Conduct Medal (2nd Award); 
National Defense Service Medal; Global War on Terrorism Service Medal; Korea Defense 
Service Medal; Noncommissioned Officer Professional Development Ribbon (2nd Award); 
Army Service Ribbon; Overseas Service Ribbon (5th Award); Military Outstanding 
Volunteer Service Medal; and NATO Medal. AE Z. 
 
  
                                            
3 Unless stated otherwise, the sources for the information in this section are Applicant’s biography, 
DD Form 214, or character statements. AE S; AE V; AE Z. 
 
4 Applicant’s bronze star medal cited his exceptionally meritorious wartime service directly resulting 
in the removal of over 200 nefarious targets from the battlefield. AE S; SOR response. 
 
5 
                                         
 
Republic of Korea (R.O.K.) or South Korea 
 
South Korea is a republic with powers shared between the president, the 
legislature, and the courts. Its population is 48,754,657 (July 2011 estimate). South Korea 
is one of the United States’ closest military and diplomatic allies. Over two million Koreans 
have immigrated to the United States. The United States has more troops stationed in 
South Korea than any other foreign country, except for Germany. This heavy U.S. troop 
commitment has continued since the North Korea invasion of South Korea in 1950.   
 
The January 25, 2017 State Department Fact Sheet reads in part: 
 
The United States and R.O.K. share a long history of friendship and cooperation based 
on common values and interests. The two countries work together to combat regional and 
global threats and to strengthen their economies. The United States has maintained 
Army, Air Force, Navy, and Marine personnel in R.O.K. in support of its commitment under 
the U.S.-R.O.K. Mutual Defense Treaty to help R.O.K. defend itself against external 
aggression. In 2013, the two countries celebrated the 60th anniversary of the U.S.-R.O.K. 
alliance. A Combined Forces Command coordinates operations between U.S. units and 
R.O.K. armed forces. The United States and R.O.K. coordinate closely on the North 
Korean nuclear issue and the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. As R.O.K.’s 
economy has developed (it joined the OECD in 1996), trade and investment ties have 
become an increasingly important aspect of the U.S.-R.O.K. relationship. 
 
In recent years, the U.S.-R.O.K. alliance has expanded into a deep, comprehensive 
global partnership, and R.O.K.’s role as a regional and global leader continues to grow. 
The R.O.K. hosted the 2010 G-20 Summit, the 2011 Fourth High-Level Forum on Aid 
Effectiveness, the 2012 Nuclear Security Summit, the 2013 Seoul Conference on 
Cyberspace, and the 2014 International Telecommunication Union Plenipotentiary 
Conference. In 2017, the R.O.K. will assume the chairmanship of the Global Health 
Security Agenda Steering Group. The R.O.K. is a committed member of various 
international nonproliferation regimes, including the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) 
and the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT). . . .  
 
People-to-people ties between the United States and R.O.K. have never been stronger. 
The R.O.K., on a per capita basis, sends the highest number of students to the United 
States to study of any industrialized country. Educational exchanges include a vibrant 
Fulbright exchange program as well as the Work, English Study, and Travel (WEST) 
program that gives a diverse group of Korean students the opportunity to learn more about 
the United States. . . . 
 
Bilateral Economic Relations 
 
Over the past several decades, the R.O.K. has achieved a remarkably high level of 
economic growth and is now the United States’ sixth-largest goods trading partner with a 
trillion-dollar economy. Major U.S. firms have long been leading investors, while the 
R.O.K.’s top firms have made significant investments in the United States. There are 
large-scale flows of manufactured goods, agricultural products, services, and technology 
 
6 
                                         
 
between the two countries. The landmark Korea-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (KORUS 
FTA) entered into force on March 15, 2012, underscoring the depth of bilateral trade ties. 
Under KORUS, 95 percent of all goods are duty free. . . . The agreement has boosted 
exports by billions of dollars annually for both sides and created new export-related jobs 
in both the R.O.K. and the United States. 
 
The Republic of Korea’s Membership in International Organizations 
 
The R.O.K. and the United States belong to a number of the same international 
organizations, including the United Nations, G-20, Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum, International Monetary Fund, World 
Bank, and World Trade Organization. The R.O.K. hosts the Green Climate Fund, an 
international organization associated with the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change. The R.O.K. also is a Partner for Cooperation with the Organization for 
Security and Cooperation in Europe and an observer to the Organization of American 
States.  
 
The Government’s Administrative Notice request provides as follows: 
 
• The 2000 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial 
Espionage, issued by the National Counterintelligence Center, ranks South Korea as 
one of the seven countries most actively engaging in foreign economic collection and 
industrial espionage against the United States. The Annual Report released in 2008 
indicates that the ten major foreign collectors, including both allies and adversaries, 
account for the bulk of the collection activity directed against the United States.   
 
• South Korean government collection activities are also evidenced by several U.S. 
criminal espionage prosecutions. In May 1997, Robert Chaegon Kim, a civilian 
employee for the U.S. Department of Navy, Office of Naval Intelligence, pled guilty to 
“conspiracy to commit espionage for South Korea.” Mr. Kim had passed classified 
documents to an officer in the South Korean navy, serving as the South Korean naval 
attache to the U.S. In 2011, Kue Sang Chun, an employee of the National Aeronautical 
and Space Administration, Glenn Research Center, pled guilty to exporting defense 
articles on the U.S. Munitions List, specifically Infra-Red Focal Plane Array detectors 
and Infra-Red camera engines, to South Korea without first obtaining an export license 
or written authorization for such export. 
 
• The U.S. restricts the export of sensitive, dual-use technologies that can have civilian 
uses, as well as military uses, or to build weapons of mass destruction. South Korea 
has been the unauthorized recipient of technology controlled under U.S. export control 
laws, including: material that could be used in missile delivery/reentry systems, 
encryption software, optics and prism data, and infrared detectors and camera 
engines.  
 
• Industrial espionage remains a high-profile concern relating to South Korea and South 
Korean companies. In 2015, a South Korean industrial company pled guilty to a 
 
7 
                                         
 
conspiracy to steal a U.S. company's trade secrets involving Kevlar technology, which 
is used in a wide range of commercial and dual-use applications including body armor 
and fiber optic cables. In July 2014, a South Korean chemical company, agreed to pay 
a criminal penalty of over $2 million to resolve an investigation into the company's 
attempted theft of a U.S. company’s trade secrets regarding a meta-aramid fiber used 
in protective fabrics, electrical insulation, and lightweight structural support for aircraft. 
Sources have also reported that South Korea may have attempted to compromise 
protected technology of U.S. F-15 fighters that it purchased. 
 
• The primary human rights problems reported were government interpretation and 
application of the National Security Law, libel laws, and other laws to limit freedom of 
speech and expression and restrict internet access; and the continued jailing of 
conscientious objectors to military service. Corruption was also a problem. Choi Soon-
sil, a long-time friend and close confidante of President Park Geun-hye, was arrested 
and indicted on charges of fraud, coercion, and abuse of power. In light of the scandal, 
lawmakers voted 234-56 to impeach President Park in December 2016 and she was 
removed from office. Other human rights problems included the absence of a 
comprehensive antidiscrimination law, sexual and domestic violence, and trafficking 
in persons including sex trafficking of children.  
 
• According to the U.S. Department of Justice, there have been numerous recent 
criminal cases concerning export enforcement related to proprietary defense 
information, economic espionage, theft of trade secrets, and embargo-related criminal 
prosecutions involving both private companies and individuals in South Korea. 
 
• Military-Grade Accelerometers to South Korea - In December 2014, a citizen of 
South Korea and president and CEO of a company located in Seoul, South Korea was 
charged with violations of the Arms Export Control Act and the International 
Emergency Economic Powers Act. According to the indictment, [the defendant] 
exported military grade accelerometers from the U.S. to Iran without first obtaining a 
license from the Treasury Department. Beginning in Dec. 2007 to Mar. 2010, [the 
d]efendant conspired with individuals located in China and Iran to procure U.S.-origin 
aircraft parts that were used in the navigation systems of aircraft and missiles and to 
export the parts from the U.S. to Iran. 
 
• Infrared Military Technology to South Korea - On Dec. 20, 2011, EO System 
Company, Ltd, located in Inchon, South Korea, and several defendants [ ... ] all 
citizens and residents of South Korea, were indicted on five counts of illegally 
exporting defense articles to South Korea. According to court documents, while 
working as an electrical engineer for NASA, [a defendant] also operated a business 
out of his home through which he illegally exported U.S. munitions to the South Korea 
and performed consulting services for Korean businesses. On occasion, [Defendant] 
used his NASA e-mail address to order sensitive items from U.S. manufacturers, 
falsely asserting that they would be used for NASA projects in the United States, when 
in fact, they were to be exported to South Korea.  
 
 
8 
                                         
 
• Military Technical Data to South Korea - On May 16, 2011, a former Vice President 
at Rocky Mountain Instrument Company (RMI), based in Colorado, pled guilty in the 
District of Colorado to violating the Arms Export Control Act. The defendant caused 
the illegal export to South Korea of technical data related to prisms that are useful in 
guidance or targeting systems in Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, AC-130 gunships, tanks 
and missile systems. RMI, the company, pleaded guilty on Jun. 22, 2010, to one count 
of violating the Arms Export Control Act and was immediately sentenced to five years’ 
probation and ordered to forfeit $1 million.  
 
• Rocket Propulsion Systems, Engines and Technology to South Korea - On Oct. 
20, 2010, a naturalized U.S. citizen of Korean origin, was sentenced after pleading 
guilty to attempting to illegally export defense articles to South Korea, including 
components for a 20 mm gun, known as the M61 Vulcan; components for a SU-27 
Russian fighter jet; and RD-180 rocket propulsion systems, and related technology 
without the required State Department licenses.  
 
• Carbon Fiber and Other Materials to Iran and China via South Korea - On Jul. 10, 
2013, an Iranian citizen pled guilty to violating IEEPA by trying to export helicopter 
component parts from the U.S. to Iran, via South Korea.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
 
9 
                                         
 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
 
10 
                                         
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Foreign influence security concerns arise because of Applicant and his spouse’s 
relationships with her family members, who are citizens and residents of South Korea. 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, 
their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA 
LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection and obligation to 
his spouse. “[A]s a matter of common sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable 
presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family 
members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is the basis 
of AG ¶ 7(e).  
 
Indirect influence from Applicant’s in-laws living in South Korea could result in a 
security concern. Relationships with her family living in South Korea are sufficient to 
create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.” These relationships create a concern about Applicant’s “obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology” and his desire to help her relatives who are in South 
Korea. For example, if entities in South Korea wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, 
they could exert pressure on her relatives in South Korea. Applicant would then be subject 
to indirect coercion and classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with relatives or in-laws living in South 
Korea is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant 
or his spouse has such a relationship with even one person living in a foreign country, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case 
No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001).  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
 
11 
                                         
 
of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially in 
the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA 
LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
  
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of South Korea with the United States places a burden of 
persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships to relatives living in South 
Korea do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed in a position where he 
might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist 
family living in South Korea.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives, terrorists, or other entities 
from South Korea seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant, or his family living in South Korea, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility 
in the future. Applicant and his spouse’s communications and visits with family living in 
South Korea are sufficiently frequent to demonstrate obligations to them and affection for 
family living in South Korea. Concern for family is a positive character trait that increases 
trustworthiness; however, it also increases concern about potential foreign influence. 
Department Counsel produced substantial evidence to raise the issue of potential foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply, and further inquiry 
is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the indivual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
 
12 
                                         
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant and his spouse had 
frequent communications5 with her family living in South Korea, and his spouse is 
presumed to have a close relationship with her parents and siblings living in South Korea. 
The amount of contacts between an applicant or the applicant’s spouse and relatives 
living in a foreign country are not the only test for determining whether someone could be 
coerced or exploited through their relatives. Because of connections to family living in 
South Korea, Applicant is not able to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little 
likelihood that [he and his spouse’s relationships with relatives who are residents of South 
Korea] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” Visits to or from family 
provide additional evidence of concern for family and obligation to family welfare.    
 
                                            
5 See ADP Case No. 05-17812 at 2, 3 n.2 (App. Bd. Jun. 11, 2007) (finding contacts with siblings 
in PRC “once every two or three  months” not to be casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 2, 
4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s parents and sisters a total of about 20 times 
per year not casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding 
contacts with applicant’s siblings once every four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
13 
                                         
 
Applicant has “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He 
has strong family connections to the United States. Applicant, his children, his parents, 
his sibling, and his half-siblings are citizens and residents of the United States. His spouse 
is a U.S. permanent resident, and she intends to renounce her South Korean citizen as 
soon as she becomes a U.S. citizen. He was educated in the United States, has lived in 
the United States his whole life, except for Army deployments and about two years when 
he served in South Korea as a U.S. Government contractor. Applicant has never been a 
South Korean citizen.     
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by relationships with family living in South Korea. 
There is no evidence that terrorists, criminals, the South Korean Government, or those 
conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his family in South 
Korea for classified or sensitive information. While the Government does not have any 
burden to prove the presence of such evidence, if such record evidence was present, 
Applicant would have a heavy evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate foreign 
influence security concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ very positive 
relationship with South Korea, South Korea’s human rights violations, and most of all the 
67-year history of close military and diplomatic connections between South Korea and 
the United States.      
 
In sum, the primary security concern is Applicant and his spouse’s relationships 
with her family, who are residents and citizens of South Korea. Those family members 
living in South Korea are readily available for coercion; however, there is no evidence that 
the South Korean Government or industrial entities have engaged in coercion of South 
Korea-United States dual citizens to obtain sensitive or classified U.S. information. 
Applicant has “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,” which 
clearly outweigh his connections to South Korea, that he “can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” He was educated in the United States, 
has lived in the United States for most of his life, his children, parents, and sibling are 
U.S. citizens. He served in the U.S. Army for 13 years, including in Afghanistan. Foreign 
influence concerns are fully mitigated under AG ¶ 8(b). Even if foreign influence concerns 
were not mitigated under Guideline B, they would be mitigated under the whole-person 
concept, infra. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
 
14 
                                         
 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration” 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline B are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old project manager, and a DOD contractor has employed 
him since May 2015. He has a master’s degree in homeland security in the United States. 
From 2002 to 2015, he served on active duty in the U.S. Army including two tours in South 
Korea and a combat tour in Afghanistan. While Applicant was in the Army, his specialty 
was intelligence analyst. He was inducted into the Sergeant Audie Murphy Club. He 
received excellent recommendations for warrant officer school and several awards and 
ribbons for his Army service. 
 
When Applicant was serving in South Korea, he violated curfew restrictions, and 
he received significant disciplinary action for this conduct. He disclosed his curfew 
violations and administrative disposition of the offenses on his January 4, 2015 SCA. 
Applicant expressed remorse for his poor judgment for his curfew violations. 
 
A retired Army LTC lauded Applicant’s honesty, dedication, intelligence, 
professionalism, and loyalty to the United States. The retired LTC recommended 
reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance. Applicant’s senior manager praised 
Applicant’s dedication, diligence, loyalty to the United States, and contributions to mission 
accomplishment. Applicant has held a U.S. security clearance since 2002, and there is 
no evidence of security violations.  
 
In 2011, Applicant married in the United States. His spouse was born in South 
Korea. She is a South Korean citizen and U.S. permanent resident. She has a U.S. Social 
Security number and U.S. driver’s license. She resided in the United States while 
Applicant worked in South Korea so that she could begin her U.S. residence as a 
prerequisite for her U.S. citizenship. She frequently communicates with her mother and 
siblings who are citizens and residents of South Korea. Applicant frequently 
communicates with his mother-in-law. 
 
Applicant has strong connections to the United States, including his birth and 
education in the United States, his 13 years of Army service, his children and parents are 
U.S. citizens, and his family’s residence in the United States.   
 
A Guideline B decision concerning South Korea must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.6 South Korean citizens have a history of 
                                            
6 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
15 
                                         
 
economic espionage against the United States, including export violations and selling 
sensitive U.S. technology to Iran. Balanced against this behavior is South Korea’s lengthy 
history of military and diplomatic alliance with the United States. There is no evidence 
that the South Korean Government has coerced any South Korean citizens living in the 
United States to betray the United States. 
 
Applicant’s service in the conflict in Afghanistan, which resulted in the award of a 
bronze star medal, increases the probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and 
report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or 
exploit him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). His past 
honorable Army service as an intelligence analyst in Afghanistan weighs heavily towards 
approval of his security clearance. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 
2008) (affirming grant of security clearance and noting the importance to national security 
when an “Applicant put[s] his life in danger on at least one occasion to protect American 
lives and interests in Afghanistan.”). 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that foreign influence security concerns are mitigated. It is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
