 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01344 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 26, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 11, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On May 18, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 9, 2017.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2)  On 
July 12, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 5 Items, was mailed 
to Applicant on July 14, 2017, and received by him on July 21, 2017. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
 
2 
 
submitted a respond to the FORM, with copies of letters from each creditor verifying his 
payments.  This response was admitted into evidence. Applicant did not object to Items 
1 through 5, and they are admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits 1 through 5.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 44 years old. He is married a second time with two children.  He has 
a bachelor’s degree, and is employed with a defense contractor as an Outside 
Machinist.   He is applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified five debts totaling approximately $24,0000 that include both delinquent loans, 
medical bills and credit card accounts.  Applicant admits to each of the delinquent 
accounts listed in in the SOR.   
 
Credit Reports of Applicant dated July 13, 2016, and March 29, 2017, confirm the 
indebtedness listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 4 and 5.)  Applicant served on 
active duty in the United States Navy from March 1996 to March 2010 when he was 
honorably discharged.  Applicant has been working for his current employer since 
January 2012. 
 
Applicant admits each of the debts set forth in the SOR.  He explained in his 
response to the FORM dated August 3, 2017, that his financial problems began in June 
2010 when his car was totaled.  At that point, things continued to go downhill from there.  
He was forced to buy another car in order to get to work.  About this time, he and his 
wife separated; and then divorced in 2011.  He remarried in 2012.  His new wife had 
some medical concerns which required multiple visits to the hospital.  His daughter was 
born, and then a son, and the cost of providing food, clothing and shelter for a family 
was expensive.  The heating and air conditioning in their house did not function and had 
 
3 
 
to be repaired.  They experienced a house fire, where his wife received 2nd and 3rd 
degree burns, resulting in even more medical bills. Both cars had to be repaired and 
Applicant spent money caring for his sister.  His finance resources were depleted, 
including his credit cards and loans.  
   
The following debts were alleged on the SOR:  
 
1(a) A delinquent debt owed to a credit union was charged off in the approximate 
amount of $14,492.  According to the payment agreement, Applicant is paying the 
creditor $50 per month and will continue to do so until the debt is paid in full.  (See 
Response to FORM and letter from the credit union.)   
 
 1(b) A delinquent debt owed to credit union was charged off in the approximate 
amount of $7,887.  Accordingly to the payment agreement, Applicant is paying the 
creditor $50 per month and will continue to do so until the debt is paid in full.  (See 
Response to FORM and letter from the credit union.)       
 
 1(c) A delinquent credit card debt was charged off in the approximate amount of 
$1,787.  Accordingly to the payment agreement, Applicant is paying the creditor $50 per 
month and will continue to do so until the debt is paid in full.  (See Response to FORM 
and payment history from the creditor.)       
 
 1(d) A delinquent medical account was placed for collections in the approximate 
amount of $45.  Applicant has paid off this debt in full.  (See Response to FORM, letter 
from the creditor.)   
 
 1(e) A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $29.  Applicant has paid off this debt in full.  (See Response to FORM, letter 
from the creditor.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
 
5 
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant is excessively indebted to the creditors listed in the SOR.  Over the 
past year, he has set up payment arrangements with his creditors and has been paying 
them $50 per month towards each debt.   The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant stated that a series of unexpected problems caused him to become 
excessively indebted.  A divorce, a new marriage, children, providing food, clothing and 
shelter for his family, medical issues, and care for his sister became expensive and new 
to his program.  When Applicant could not afford to pay in cash, he simply used his 
credit cards.  He spent beyond his means and now has to play catch up to resolve his 
indebtedness.  Since January 2012, Applicant has been working full time and for the 
past year, he has been paying his creditors according to the payment arrangements he 
set up.  At this point, he has completely paid off two of his creditors.   
 
Applicant must continue to resolve his debts in compliance with his creditors.  So 
far, he has acted reasonably and responsibly with respect to his debts.  Accordingly, it is 
found that his debts are now under control, and he is no longer spending beyond his 
means.  Furthermore, Applicant has demonstrated that future financial problems are 
unlikely.  There are clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant states that he has been paying $50 
per month toward each of his bills.  He has completely paid off two of his creditors and 
has provided proof of these payments.  He has also provided documentation 
substantiating his monthly payments to the creditors.  This information confirms that he 
has been working systematically to resolve his debt. So far he has paid a total of $700 
toward his indebtedness that will continue until the debts are all paid in full.  Applicant 
has demonstrated that he is financially responsible.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
