 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 17-01178 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant did not properly manage his money before he and his ex-wife divorced. 
Added expenses and loss of his spouse’s income caused him to fall behind on his bills. 
He now has addressed most of his delinquent debts in a responsible manner and his 
finances are much improved. Available information is sufficient to mitigate the security 
concerns about Applicant’s financial problems. His request for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On December 31, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is 
 
 
2 
 
 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant to have a security 
clearance.1 
 
 On May 3, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns under the adjudicative guideline2 for financial considerations 
(Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a 
hearing.  
 
 I received the case on August 4, 2017, and convened the requested hearing on 
September 25, 2017. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel 
proffered five items identified as Government Exhibits (GX) 1 – 5. I sua sponte excluded 
GX 4 from the record,3 but admitted the other four exhibits without objection. Applicant 
testified and proffered three items identified as Applicant Exhibit (AX) A – C, which I 
admitted without objection. Additionally, Applicant submitted post-hearing documents 
identified as AX D, which is included in the record without objection. I received a 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 4, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $13,176 for 12 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.l). In response, Applicant admitted, with 
explanations, all of the SOR allegations. In his e-QIP, Applicant disclosed two 
delinquent debts. Credit reports obtained by investigators during his background 
investigations, and Applicant’s discussions of his finances during an August 2016 
subject interview document all of the debts alleged in the SOR. (Answer; GX 1 – 3; GX 
5) In addition to the facts thus established, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. He has worked for his current employer since May 
2007, and previously worked for a different defense contractor for two years. Applicant 
first received a security clearance in 2005. (GX 1) 
 
 Applicant was married from June 2003 until divorcing in July 2016 after a three-
year separation. He has two children, ages 19 and 16, from his marriage. He currently 
lives with his fiancée and her two children. (GX 1; Tr. 42) 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 At the time they issued the SOR, DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National 
Intelligence issued a new version of the adjudicative guidelines, to be effective for all adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. In this decision, I have considered and applied the new adjudicative guidelines. My 
decision in this case would have been the same under either version. 
 
3 Tr. 23 – 26. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to his divorce, although he also 
acknowledged that he did not manage his finances as well as he should have during his 
marriage. When he and his ex-wife separated, he had too many bills and no longer 
could rely on his ex-wife’s income to help meet their obligations. Additionally, Applicant 
had to pay $600 in child support each month and had to pay for his own residence, as 
he had moved out of the marital home when they separated. (GX 5; Tr. 38 – 39, 73) 
 
 After Applicant met with a government investigator in August 2016, he began 
trying to resolve his past-due debts. He has paid the debts alleged at SOR 1.c and 1.e – 
1.j. He also is repaying the debts alleged at SOR 1.a and 1.d through monthly payment 
plans negotiated with each of those creditors. To resolve his debts, Applicant took a 
loan of about half the balance of his 401k retirement savings account. He is repaying 
that loan through $20 deductions from his paycheck. (Answer; AX A – D; Tr. 40, 47 – 
59) 
 
 The debt at SOR 1.b is for a delinquent retail store credit card that Applicant 
opened in 2011. To negotiate a settlement, he contacted that creditor, who told him they 
would not accept anything less than the total amount past due. (GX 2; GX 3; Tr. 59 – 
60) 
 
 SOR 1.k alleges a civil judgment entered against Applicant to enforce an unpaid 
debt for furniture he and his ex-wife purchased before their separation. The debt went 
unpaid after he left the marital home and had to take on additional expenses with less 
household income. Applicant has not received any response from the law firm 
representing the creditor and does not have the information he needs to negotiate a 
resolution. This debt appears in his February 2016 credit report, but does not appear on 
his March 2017 credit report. (GX 2; GX 3; Tr. 60 – 61) 
 
 Applicant admitted the debt at SOR 1.l, an unpaid rent account incurred in May 
2015, but claims he resolved the debt when he disputed it with the creditor. In his 
August 2016 interview, he claimed he was unaware of this debt. The February 2016 
credit report produced by the Government reported this debt, but it does not appear on 
the March 2017 credit report in the record. (Answer; GX 2 and 3) 
 
 Applicant’s current finances are sound. He meets all of his current obligations on 
time, and he has never failed to meet his obligations regarding his taxes. Applicant 
estimates that he has about $200 remaining each month after expenses, including the 
monthly debt repayments documented in his exhibits. He also avers he has improved 
the way he manages his personal finances. Applicant considered using a credit 
counseling service, but he did not want to pay for something he has learned he can do 
himself. (AX B; AX C; Tr. 61 – 68) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) 
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are:  
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information.  
 
 The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on 
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an 
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to 
refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a 
security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.6 A person who 
has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the 
Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The 
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.7 
                                                 
4 See Directive. 6.3. 
 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government’s information reasonably raised a security concern about 
Applicant’s finances. That concern is stated at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
More specifically, the record as a whole requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). Available information documented the SOR allegations that 
Applicant owes or owed a significant level of past-due or delinquent debt. I have also 
considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose from his separation and divorce. They might 
not have been so severe had he managed his personal finances more prudently during 
his marriage. Nonetheless, he incurred debts he could not timely pay after a loss of his 
 
 
6 
 
 
wife’s income and increased expenses tied to child support and the need to pay for his 
own separate residence. In response to those circumstances, Applicant has taken 
responsible steps to resolve his debts and improve his finances. The record evidence 
as a whole supports application of AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d). I also have evaluated 
this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s 
debts did not arise from misconduct and do not reflect adversely on his judgment and 
reliability. His actions to resolve his debts are sufficient to satisfy the security concerns 
raised by the Government’s information. A fair and commonsense assessment of the 
record as a whole shows that the Government’s security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.l:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
