 
1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 17-02359 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 31, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his connections to China through his family and an 
apartment he owns in China raise a foreign influence security concern. Applicant 
answered the SOR and requested a decision on the administrative (written) record. 
 
 On September 20, 2017, Applicant was sent the Government’s file of relevant 
material (FORM). With the FORM, Department Counsel forwarded to Applicant five 
exhibits, pre-marked Items 1 – 5, which the Government offers for admission into the 
record. Applicant received the FORM on September 28, 2017. (Appellate Exhibit I) He 
was given 30 days to raise any objection to the exhibits offered by Department Counsel 
and submit a response. He did not file any objections or submit a response. Without 
objection, Items 1 – 5 are admitted into the record. 
 
 On January 17, 2018, I was assigned the case. Subsequently, I received written 
confirmation that Applicant remains sponsored for a security clearance (Appellate Exhibit 
 
2 
II) Accordingly, I have jurisdiction to issue a decision. ISCR Case No. 14-03753 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 23, 2016). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 47, was born in China. He is married. His wife was also born in China, 
and they got married in China. Their child was born in 2001 in the United States. 
 
Applicant received an undergraduate and a master’s degree in China. He came to 
the United States in approximately 1992 to pursue additional education. He earned his 
doctorate from a highly-respected U.S. school in 1997. He has been employed by a large 
U.S. company since 2004. He and his family have lived in the same house that he and 
his wife own since 2005. He became a U.S. citizen in 2006. He submitted a security 
clearance application in 2016. This is his first application for a security clearance.  
 
Applicant’s mother, sister, and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of China. 
All three are retired and receive pensions and benefits. Before he died, Applicant’s father 
was a senior engineer, responsible for designing control systems for power plants for a 
Chinese company. Applicant co-owns the apartment in China that his mother and sister 
live in. He co-owns the apartment with his sister. He frequently speaks with his family in 
China, and has taken several trips to China to visit his family. He reported this information 
on his security clearance application and discussed it during the course of the ensuing 
security clearance investigation.  
 
Administrative Notice - People’s Republic of China (China or PRC) 
 
 The following pertinent facts about China as set forth in publically-available U.S. 
Government reports and other reliable U.S. source documents (Item 5):  
 
1. The PRC is an authoritarian state in which the Chinese Communist Party is the 
paramount authority. 
 
2. China is actively engaged in intelligence gathering efforts against the United 
States.  
 
3. China has a poor human rights record, where the repression and coercion of 
individuals and groups is routine.  
 
4. The U.S. State Department warns visitors to China that they may be placed 
under surveillance. Hotel rooms, offices, cars, taxis, internet usage, and fax 
machines may be monitored onsite or remotely, and personal possessions in 
hotel rooms, including computers, may be searched. 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
3 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 
2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards). 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.1 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), ¶ E.4. Additionally, 
the Supreme Court has held that responsible officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
                                                          
1 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case No. 14-
05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises a 
security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
4 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
Foreign contacts and interests . . . are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if 
they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.2 
 
 A person is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have relatives living in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing an 
individual’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, a judge considers the foreign 
country involved, the country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.3  
 
 In assessing the security concerns at issue, I considered all applicable 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, including:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member,  
. . . if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual 
. . . and the interests of the United States; and  
 
                                                          
2 AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 09-07565 at 3 (App. Bd. July 12, 2012) (“As the Supreme Court stated 
in Egan, a clearance adjudication may be based not only upon conduct but also upon circumstances 
unrelated to conduct, such as the foreign residence of an applicant’s close relatives.”) (emphasis added).  
 
3 See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors 
an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
5 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
 An applicant with relatives and other interests in a foreign country faces a high, but 
not insurmountable hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties. 
However, what factor or combination of factors may mitigate security concerns raised by 
such foreign ties is not easily identifiable or quantifiable. Instead, each case must be 
judged on its own merits. In conducting this case-by-case analysis, a judge must take into 
account the foreign country at issue. Additionally, when an applicant’s family members 
reside in a hostile foreign country, such as China, a judge must closely scrutinize all 
relevant facts and circumstances in light of the heightened security concerns raised by 
an applicant’s ties to such a country.4  
 
 Here, Applicant’s relationship to his mother and sister is far from casual, and he 
did not rebut the legal presumption that he has close familial ties or bonds to his mother-
in-law.5 In light of the heightened security concerns raised by Applicant’s close familial 
ties and property interests in China, a country that aggressively engages in espionage 
against the United States and has a less than stellar record when it comes to respecting 
the rights of its own people, I find that the favorable record evidence (including, but not 
limited to, applicant’s decision to leave his country of birth and create a new life for himself 
and his family in the U.S., ownership of his home in the U.S. for over 10 years, and long-
term employment with a large U.S. company) insufficient to mitigate the security concerns 
at issue. At the same time, this adverse security assessment is not a comment on 
Applicant’s patriotism or loyalty. Instead, it is an acknowledgment that people may act in 
unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved one, such 
as a family member. ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). Foreign 
influence security concerns remain.6  
 
  
                                                          
4 ISCR Case No. 12-00058 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2013); ISCR Case No. 09-07565 (App. Bd. July 12, 2012).  
 
5 ISCR Case No. 12-01295 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 20, 2015) (“In-laws represent a class of persons who are 
contemplated by the Directive as presenting a potential security risk. As a matter of common sense and 
human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, 
the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.”) 
 
6 In reaching this adverse finding, I considered the whole-person concept. Specifically, I gave due 
consideration to Applicant’s honesty in reporting the information at issue and the candor and level of 
cooperation he exhibited throughout the security clearance process. See generally AG ¶ 2. See also SEAD 
4, ¶ E.4. However, this and the other favorable record evidence are insufficient to mitigate the heightened 
security concerns raised by Applicant’s circumstances. 
 
6 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied.7 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 I considered the exceptions listed in SEAD 4, Appendix C. Based on the record evidence, none are 
warranted in the case. 
