 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01889 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
     Statement of the Case 
 
On August 31, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On June 7, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006.1  
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 19, 2017, and requested that her case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 1) On 
July 7, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven items, was 
mailed to Applicant and received by her on July 24, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant 
that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. She responded to 
the FORM in a timely manner. She did not object to Items 1 through 7, which are 
admitted into evidence. Likewise, Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s 
Exhibit A, (AE A), which is admitted into evidence. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on November 13, 2017. 
 
    Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact: Applicant is 31 years old and 
employed by a Federal government contractor since July 2015. She is married to her 
spouse since 2006. She has two sons, ages 8 and 6, and a 16-year-old stepdaughter. 
She earned a Bachelor’s degree in 2009. (Item 2) 
 
In May 2017, Applicant had 11 delinquent accounts totaling $52,914. (Items 1, 4, 
and 5) Under the Financial Section of her SCA, she disclosed several delinquent debts 
and listed that the family suffered tremendous financial strain after her husband was laid 
off twice from his job within the last year and a half.  During this time she was a stay-at- 
home mother to their two young sons. Their annual income had been approximately 
$80,000, but then it dropped to $25,000. This large reduction in income caused severe 
financial hardship.  
 
Applicant stated in her answer that she and her husband are both currently 
employed full time with the same Federal government contractor. They decided to file 
for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in May 2017 after they were unable to pay the 
accumulated debt from two years of reduced income. The delinquent accounts cited in 
the SOR were included in their bankruptcy. In July 2017, the bankruptcy court issued an 
Order to Show Cause to the debtors inquiring why the case should not be dismissed for 
their failure to pay the filing fee. (Items 1, 6 and 7) Applicant provided documentation, 
after receipt of the FORM, showing the earlier Order to Show Cause had been 
dismissed after the court allowed them to pay their filing fee in installments. Their 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy is currently pending. None of the debts at this juncture have been 
discharged. A review of the debts listed in the bankruptcy records included unpaid state 
tax, consumer debts, medical accounts, the deficiency balance totaling almost $22,000 
for a repossessed vehicle, an unpaid utility account, and over $32,000 for Applicant’s 
unpaid student loans. Their liabilities totaled $210,579. (Item 6) No other evidence was 
provided by Applicant. (AE A) 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began in late 2014 after her husband was laid off 
by his employer. At the time, Applicant was not working, and the family income dropped 
from $80,000 to $25,000. During the last two years after her spouse was laid off, they 
accumulated at least 11 delinquent accounts totaling $52,914. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant experienced financial hardship after her spouse was laid off twice by 
his employer within a relatively short period of time. This situation was beyond 
Applicant’s control and adversely affected her finances. There is insufficient information 
to determine whether the circumstances are likely to recur. Her spouse has since found 
new employment, as did Applicant in July 2015.  Applicant must also establish that she 
acted responsibly under the circumstances for the full application of the mitigating 
condition. Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief almost two years after obtaining 
full-time employment. She did not provide sufficient information to explain why she 
chose to file bankruptcy over setting up payment arrangements with her creditors. There 
is insufficient evidence to determine that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. She did not provide a budget to substantiate her current financial 
standing. The debts are unresolved and pending in bankruptcy. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) 
do not apply.  
 
 The filing of a bankruptcy case in the United States Bankruptcy court requires the 
debtors to enroll in financial counseling. Applicant’s bankruptcy petition disclosed that 
she and her husband received a briefing from an approved credit counseling agency 
within 180 days prior to filing the bankruptcy petition. (Item 6) AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 
 
 There is no evidence to show that Applicant is adhering to the rules set by the 
bankruptcy court in order to have her debts discharged. The record evidence in this 
case shows only that the case is pending and the debts are not resolved. AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
       
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG 
(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 I considered Applicant’s explanation of suffering severe financial strain after her 
husband had been unexpectedly laid off twice from his employer within a relatively short 
span of time. The family income was reduced by more than two-thirds during this 
period. Both of his job lay-offs were incidents beyond her control. Applicant and her 
spouse have since found steady employment with the same Federal government 
contractor. Applicant did not provide an explanation as to why she waited almost two 
years to file for bankruptcy in May 2017, despite obtaining full-time employment in July 
2015. There is insufficient evidence to show that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances, or otherwise made a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors.   
 
 In reviewing all the evidence of record, I conclude that Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent debt cited under Guideline F. 
Applicant is attempting to resolve her accumulated debt through a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, but there is no evidence that those debts have been discharged. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
   
                                 
               
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
