                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
       -------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  17-01821       
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate the security concerns regarding his personal conduct. Eligibility for access
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On June 15, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing reasons why
DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility
to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated
substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that
were in effect for the issuance of the SOR would not affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 7, 2017, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on August 22, 2017, and did not object to any of the exhibit items in the
FORM or provide additional information. The case was assigned to me on December 19,
2017.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly (a) in March 2014 paid a third party $1,000
via PayPal to have the third party create a falsified resume with erroneous DoD
certifications, including an Army certificate, and act as Applicant in all matters concerning
the hiring process with Company A, which hired him in April 2014 based on the false
interactions; and (b) in September 2014 used the falsified resume he had paid the third
party to apply for and obtain employment with Company B, who upon learning of his false
resume and lack of DoD certifications, fired applicant in April 2015
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the SOR allegations. He
provided no explanations or affirmative defenses for his alleged actions. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old air and ground services technician for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in March 1991 and divorced in May 1997. (Items 4-5) He has
one adult child from this marriage. (Item 4) He remarried in January 2000 and has no
children from this marriage. Applicant earned a high school diploma in June 1990 and
reported no college credits. (Item 4) 
He enlisted in the Army in May 1993 and served three years of active duty. He
received an honorable discharge in June 1996. Between October 1997 and April 2001,
Applicant served in the Army National Guard of his state. (Item 4)
2
Since October 2015, Applicant has worked for his current employer. (Items 3-4)
Between October 2014 and April 2015, he held various jobs. (Item 3) He reported periods
of unemployment between April 2015 and October 2015 before being terminated for
cause. Between September 2014 and March 2015, he was employed by another defense
contractor as a deputy country manager before being terminated for his involvement in a
heavy equipment accident. (Items 4-5) Prior to this employment, he was employed as a
transportation coordinator for a defense contractor. Previously, he was employed by
multiple employers between March 2001 and March 2014 (Items 4-5) His employments
included various overseas assignments in Iraq and Afghanistan. (Item 4) 
Falsified employment resumes 
Desperate to find work, Applicant engaged a third party for profit in March 2014 to
create a falsified resume for him with erroneous DoD certifications, including an Army
specialization certificate. (Items 4-6) He paid this person $1,000 via PayPal to create the
false resume and act in Applicant’s behalf in all matters concerning the hiring process
with a defense contractor (Company A) based on the submitted false resume. Relying in
material part on the strength of this resume with the false DoD certifications, Applicant
was hired by Company A in April 2014. (AEs 4-5)
Months later, in September 2014, Applicant used the same described falsified
resume to apply for a position with another employer (Company B). Claiming mistaken
submission of the falsified resume to Company B, he used the resume to gain
employment with this new employer and failed to correct it before being confronted with it
by his supervisor. (GEs 4-6) When the supervisor learned of the false resume and lack of
DoD certifications, he summarily fired Applicant on the spot in April 2015. (Items 4-6)
Applicant provided no additional explanations for his obtaining and using a false resume
to gain employment with these two employers in 2014.
Asked to complete an electronic questionnaires for investigations processing (e-
QIP) in October 2015, Applicant acknowledged his being fired by Company C for not
having a DoD certification on his resume, without explaining all of the circumstances
surrounding his creation of the false resume. (Item 4) When interviewed by an agent of
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in October 2017, he fully disclosed all of the
circumstances of how he approached the individual through PayPal and engaged this
person for pay ($1,000) to create the false resume for use in his job application with
Company A. (Item 5) Applicant made his disclosures voluntarily without any apparent
prompting or confrontation.
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
3
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c) In
addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the pertinent
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG ¶ 2(d) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Personal Conduct 
The Concern. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any
failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national
security investigative or adjudicating processes  .  . . . AG E.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
4
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns over Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness are
raised under Guideline E as the result of his paying a third party a $1,000 in advance to
falsify his resume for use in job applications. With this false resume, Applicant was able
to successfully procure employment with Company A in April 2014, and with Company
B in September 2014. Once Company B learned of his false resume, it promptly fired
him. 
Applicant acknowledged his creation and use of a false resume to gain
employment with Company A and with Company B. Applicable to Applicant’s situation is
DC ¶ 16(b), “deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security
official, competent medical or mental health professional involved in making a
recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility determination, or other
government representative.’
Applicant’s admissions of his involuntary termination from Company B in his e-
QIP and ensuing voluntary explanations of the circumstances surrounding his engaging
of a third party to create a false resume for Applicant’s use in his employment
applications, while welcomed, is not to mitigate his intentional engaging of a third party
to falsify his resume for use in his employment application with Company A and
additional use with inferred knowledge of the false contents of the same resume in his
application for employment with Company B.  
5
To his credit, Applicant acknowledged his involuntary termination from Company
B after the employer first learned of his falsified resume. And he fully disclosed the
circumstances surrounding his creation and use of the falsified resume to obtain
employment with Company A and inferentially with Company B. Although his
acknowledgments entitle him to some mitigating credit under MC ¶ 17(a), “the individual
made prompt, good faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification
before being confronted with the facts,” the benefits available to him under MC ¶ 17(a)
are very limited considering the severity of Applicant’s falsification actions as they
pertain to his security clearance application.
While Applicant’s candor is welcomed, it is not enough under these
circumstances to overcome reasonable doubts about his overall trustworthiness,
candor, and reliability. Personal conduct concerns are not mitigated considering all of
the developed facts and circumstances associated with Applicant’s creation and use of
a falsified resume to obtain employment with two defense contractors.
Whole Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. He has not demonstrated
evidence of overall trustworthiness, candor, and reliability to date to surmount major
candor questions associated with his engaging and using a false resume to obtain
employment with two successive employers in 2014. His actions to date reflect a lack of
trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. 
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s creation and use of a falsified resume to obtain employment with successive
employers in 2014, there is insufficient probative evidence of restored trustworthiness, 
reliability, and judgment on Applicant’s part to mitigate personal conduct concerns.
Reasonable doubts remain about Applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and judgment. 
Unfavorable conclusions are entered with respect to the personal conduct
allegations covered by ¶¶ 1.a-1.c of the SOR. Overall, eligibility to hold a security
clearance under the facts and circumstances of this case  is inconsistent with the
national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):              AGAINST APPLICANT
 
         Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:                                 Against Applicant 
              
6
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
  
8
