 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
       )  ISCR Case No. 17-01852 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges five delinquent debts totaling 
$27,421. Two SOR debts are in established payment plans, and he settled or paid the 
other three SOR debts. He made sufficient progress towards resolution of his financial 
issues. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.       
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On January 6, 2016, Applicant signed a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Government Exhibit (GE) 1. 
On June 2, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006. Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2. The SOR 
set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. HE 2. 
 
On June 23, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he requested 
a hearing. HE 3. On August 2, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On 
August 7, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On November 8, 2017, the Defense Office 
 
2 
                                         
 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for 
November 30, 2017. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits; Applicant offered 
one exhibit; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Tr. 17-19; GE 1-5; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. On December 13, 2017, DOHA 
received a copy of the hearing transcript.  
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position on or after June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the previous AGs. Accordingly, 
I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted he was responsible for the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.e. HE 3. He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. HE 3.   
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old cyber-security specialist employed by a government 
contractor. Tr. 5, 9; GE 1. In 1979, he graduated from high school. Tr. 5. In 2001, he 
received an associate’s degree in electronic communication. Tr. 6. He served in the Air 
Force from 1981 to 2001. Tr. 6. His Air Force specialty was systems controller. Tr. 6. When 
he honorably retired from the Air Force, his rank was technical sergeant (E-6). Tr. 7. His 
highest Air Force award was the Air Force Commendation Medal. Tr. 7. He did not serve 
in any combat zones. Tr. 7. From 1986 to July 2017, Applicant was married. Tr. 8. His 
spouse passed away. Tr. 8. His two children are ages 29 and 30. Tr. 8; GE 1.  There is no 
evidence of security violations, abuse of alcohol, arrests, or convictions. GE 1; GE 4. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s spouse was responsible for paying the family bills. GE 4. Applicant has 
not had any periods of unemployment for the previous ten years. Tr. 9, 21; GE 4. Applicant 
generated a budget. Tr. 20; AE A at 24. He has about $50,000 in his 401(k) account, and 
about $18,000 in his bank account. Tr. 21. His taxes and mortgage accounts are current. 
Tr. 22. His credit reports show an overall track record of paying his debts.     
 
The SOR alleges five delinquent debts totaling $27,421, and the record establishes 
the status of Applicant’s accounts as follows: 
 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.    
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b allege two education accounts owed to the same creditor and 
placed for collection for $9,669 and $9,668. He co-signed on education loans for his 
children. Tr. 23. On June 21, 2017, the creditor wrote that the current balance owed was 
$22,022. SOR response. From November 2016, to June 2017, Applicant made 15 
payments of $517 for total payments of $7,755. Tr. 23; AE A at 19-22. In September 2017, 
he paid $1,035 to the creditor. AE A at 2. After his student loans were rehabilitated, his 
monthly payment was reduced to $250. Tr. 25. The current balance on the two student 
loans is $15,678. Tr. 24; AE A at 13. The two student loans are current. Tr. 24. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a charged-off bank debt for $7,850. In June 2017, Applicant 
paid $4,710 and resolved this debt. Tr. 23; AE A at 2, 9.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e allege two medical debts placed for collection for $153 and 
$81. Applicant was unaware the two debts were delinquent. AE A at 3. In June 2017, 
Applicant paid the two debts. AE A at 10-12. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
 
4 
                                         
 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
 
5 
                                         
 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 
2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG           
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions. 
 
  Two financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,3 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
                                            
3 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
6 
                                         
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) apply. Applicant’s finances were harmed by his spouse’s 
death, which is a circumstance beyond his control. He did not provide details about his 
spouse’s death or its effect on his finances. He generated a budget.  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges five delinquent debts totaling $27,421. His two student 
loans are in established payment plans, and he settled or paid the other three SOR debts. 
The Appeal Board explained that resolution of all SOR debts was not required to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required 
to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly given 
his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, 
accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a 
serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). Although there is limited evidence 
of record that he established and maintained contact with his creditors,4 his financial 
problem is being resolved or is under control. Applicant admitted responsibility for and 
took reasonable and responsible actions to resolve his debts, establishing some good 
faith.5 Based on Applicant’s credible and sincere promise to pay his debts and his track 
record of paying them, future new delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on [Applicant’s] current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant 
assures he will conscientiously endeavor to maintain his financial responsibility. He has 
sufficient income to resolve his remaining debts. His efforts mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
                                            
4  “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
5 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).  
 
7 
                                         
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old cyber-security specialist employed by a government 
contractor. In 2001, he received an associate’s degree in electronic communication. He 
served in the Air Force from 1981 to 2001. His Air Force specialty was systems controller. 
When he honorably retired from the Air Force, his rank was technical sergeant. There is 
no evidence of security violations, abuse of alcohol, arrests, or convictions.   
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges five delinquent debts totaling $27,421. His SOR debts are 
either resolved or being resolved. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the 
whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and 
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. . . . There 
is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
 
8 
                                         
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and quotation 
marks omitted). He understands how to establish and maintain his financial responsibility. 
He took reasonable actions under his particular financial circumstances to address his 
delinquent debts. Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt re-
payment, and he assures he will maintain his financial responsibility. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
