 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 17-01179 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Guideline E, personal conduct concerns were not established. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 19, 
2016. On May 4, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 25, 2017. He denied most of the SOR 
allegations and admitted others with explanations. Applicant pointed out that SOR ¶ 1.j 
is a duplicate of the allegation in SOR ¶1.a for $6,184 and SOR ¶ 1.p is a duplicate of 
SOR ¶ 1.d for $578. He denied the alleged falsification in SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant also 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed on July 26, 2017. The case was assigned to me on July 27, 2017. On 
November 7, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for December 7, 2017. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A - 
K, which were admitted without objection. He also presented testimony from his wife. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 14, 2017.  
 
  Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant is 47 years old. He obtained his GED in 1990. Applicant enlisted in the 
U.S. Army Reserve in 1994 but got an inter-service transfer after one year to the Navy. 
He served on active duty from 1995 to 1998 in the Navy and received a general 
discharge. (Tr. 56) He has been married three times: 2003-2005; 2010-2012; and 
presently since July 2014. He and his present wife have five children combined. 
Applicant and his wife are employed as long-range truck drivers. (Tr. 57) His employer 
requires him to have a security clearance. His pay dropped from $171 per day to $156 
per day recently when his interim security clearance was revoked. (Tr. 88) Applicant 
had a series of low-paying jobs previously including state corrections officer from 2009 
to 2012. (Tr. 62) He has always maintained health insurance since then. (Tr. 62)    
  
The SOR alleges delinquent debts totaling approximately $26,273, including 
$4,725 in medical debts that he has successfully disputed at SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1,n, 1.o, 1.q,  
1.r, 1.u, 1.s, 1.v, 1.w, 1.x, and 1.y. (AE K, Tr. 34-36, 67-70)  SOR ¶ 1.i was paid in full. 
(Answer, Tr. 37) These minor co-payments resulted from Applicant’s four-day 
hospitalization in October 2010 when he was fully covered by health insurance. (Tr. 65) 
Applicant testified credibly that these bills were already paid by the state when he was a 
corrections officer. He sent letters of dispute to all three credit-rating bureaus, and these 
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s February 19, 2016 
security clearance application (SCA) and the summary of his security clearance interview on September  
16, 2017. 
 
 
3 
 
 
medical debts no longer appear on his most recent credit bureau reports. (AE K, Tr. 64-
68, 73) Presently, Applicant pays $20 each month to Experian for credit monitoring 
services. (Tr. 44)  
 
     SOR ¶ 1.a, which is a duplicate of SOR 1.j for $6,184, has been resolved as 
Applicant has been making payments of $200 per month pursuant to a plan since May 
2017. (Tr. 25) SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.p are duplicate debts and Applicant provided 
documentary evidence showing they have been paid in full. (AE A, Tr. 17) Applicant 
also provided documents showing he entered into a payment plan on SOR ¶1.b, and it 
has now been paid in full. (AE B, Tr. 19) He testified credibly that his second wife 
stopped contributing to the household budget, and stopped cooperating with paying 
their bills. (Tr. 21) The debt in SOR 1.z for $33 has been paid in full. (AE C) Applicant 
provided evidence that his child-support payments are current and the amount of 
$1,116 placed for collection in SOR ¶ 1.k was paid off in September 2014. (Tr. 21) 
Further, SOR ¶ 1.g  was satisfied by an offer and compromise amount of $125 paid in 
May 2017. (AE E, Tr. 23)    
 
   SOR ¶1.b is satisfied since Applicant provided evidence that he is making 
payments to the creditor pursuant to a plan, and he owes $588 of the original $1,960 
amount. (Tr. 30, AE J) Similarly, SOR ¶ 1.c is now paid in full, as Applicant has been 
paying $50 per month since June 2017. (Tr. 19, AE B) SOR 1.e was paid in full in May 
2017 (AE H), and SOR 1.aa has also been paid in full. (AE G, Tr.27) SOR 1.f (for $263) 
and placed for collections and has been paid in full. (AE I, Tr. 29) SOR ¶ 1.l alleges a 
charged-off debt for $613 resulting from the repossession of his second wife’s 
automobile in 2010. (Tr. 64) Applicant testified that he sent letters of dispute to the three 
credit-rating bureaus and they agreed to take it off his credit reports. (AE K) SOR ¶ 1.m 
was for another repossessed vehicle that he co-signed for in the amount of $4,936. 
Applicant also successfully disputed this delinquent debt, since his ex-wife was required 
to pay it pursuant to the terms of their divorce. (AE K, Tr. 37) It has been removed from 
his recent credit reports.   
 
      SOR ¶ 1.n was disputed when Applicant sent letters to all three credit rating 
bureaus and they removed it from his credit reports. (Tr. 44, AE K) SOR ¶1.o, 1.r, 1.s, 
1.v, 1.w, 1.x and 1.y are for delinquent medical debts that Applicant incurred in 2015 – 
2016 when he had two knee surgeries for injuries sustained in Afghanistan. (Tr. 32) 
However, he could not get into the VA hospital. He is a 70% disabled veteran, and 
contends that these injuries should have been covered by the VA. In his post-hearing 
submissions, Applicant included a bank statement showing that the delinquent medical 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b to 1.e have all been paid in full. Further, he produced 
evidence that he has entered into a payment plan of $100 per month in SOR 1.f, and he 
is making continuous payments on the plan. These debts are not reflected on his latest 
credit report. (AE A) SOR ¶ 1.t for $165 is a delinquent cell phone bill for his ex-wife’s 
cell phone. Applicant testified that he has contacted the creditor to dispute this 
delinquent debt. (Tr. 71)  
  
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that his delinquent debt resulted from his two previous 
divorces and a series of low-paying jobs. (Tr. 88) He did not provide evidence of 
financial counseling or a budget but he now has his finances under control and he is 
paying to have his credit monitored. His recent credit reports reflect no new debts (AE 
K, Tr. 90) Applicant testified credibly that he hand-wrote his SF-86 SCA form and 
handed it in to the human resources person. (Tr. 77-79) She then typed it into the 
template on the computer and signed it on his behalf. It contained many mistakes. He 
was not aware of the omitted debts and did not intent to deceive or mislead anybody as 
alleged in SOR ¶2.a. He did not specifically intend to falsify this SCA. (Tr. 78)  
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
5 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.            
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, clearance interview, and answer to the SOR. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 
19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
 
6 
 
 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.3 Applicant has met that burden. Most of the delinquent 
debts have been resolved or disputed.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant suffered through two divorces, and periods of underemployment.  
Arguably, these conditions were beyond his control. He has now produced relevant and 
responsive documentation, demonstrating that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant has met his burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that 
his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred under 
circumstances making them unlikely to recur. He has either paid off, disputed, or made 
consistent payments pursuant to a plan, on most of his delinquent debts. He produced 
extensive documentary evidence demonstrating his commendable efforts to resolve 
these delinquent debts. The mitigating conditions enumerated above apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
                                                          
3 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes….  
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative.  
Since Applicant denied any intent to provide false information as alleged at SOR 
¶ 2.a, his intent is an issue. Under ¶ E3.1.14 of DOD Directive 5220.6, the Government 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and evidence on facts alleged in the SOR that 
have been controverted. Intent can be inferred or determined from the circumstances. 
Applicant relied on his human resources representative to in-put his hand-written 
information into the computer program. She signed it on Applicant’s behalf. I conclude 
that he did not have the specific intent to deceive when he provided a negative 
response to the financial questions about delinquency involving routine accounts in 
section 26, and he did not deliberately falsify the SCA. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (b) do not 
apply. SOR ¶ 2.a has been mitigated.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
8 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant testified credibly and 
persuasively that his finances are now under control. Most importantly, Applicant has 
addressed the specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative measures to 
resolve them. He has met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances no longer remain a security concern. There is sufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He is 
gainfully employed and managing his financial affairs. The record evidence leaves me 
with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. Personal conduct concerns were not established.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
           Paragraph 1, Guideline F:                       FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.aa:            For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:                       FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a                                    For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
9 
 
 
 
