 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00322 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 29, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On January 29, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). (Government Exhibit 1.)  On February 24, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 4, 2017 and May 22, 2017. He requested 
that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a 
hearing. (Item 2.) On June 26, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
 
2 
 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 5 
Items, was received by Applicant on July 5, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he 
had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant failed to respond to the 
FORM.  DOHA assigned the case to me on November 9, 2017.  Items 1 through 5 are 
admitted into evidence, and hereinafter are referenced as Government Exhibits 1 
through 5.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 32 years old and married with three children.  He has a high school 
diploma.  He is employed by a defense contractor as an Assembler.  He is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The SOR identified ten delinquent credit cards debts totaling approximately 
$17,842.  Applicant admitted each of the debts set forth under this guideline.  
(Government Exhibit 2.)  Applicant’s work history shows that he has been consistently 
employed since March 2010, despite is claims of unemployment in 2014 as noted 
below.  He began working for his current employer in January 2016. Credit Reports of 
the Applicant dated February 13, 2016; and January 11, 2017, confirm each of the 
debts listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 4 and 5.) 
 
 Applicant attributes a period of unemployment, and having to help with the cost 
of funeral expenses for his late uncle that set him behind on his bills.  Applicant claims 
that he incurred the debt during a period of steady employment, and then after 2014, 
lost his job, his uncle died, and the financial struggles began.  Applicant was forced to 
 
3 
 
make a choice between providing for his family or paying his credit card debt.  He chose 
to provide for his family.      
 
 He states that he is currently paying for rent, transportation, car insurance, 
utilities and food.  He states that he has also started paying off some of his delinquent 
debt.  In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant attached proof of several payments he made 
to a law office.  It is not clear from the record whether this law firm is collecting for the 
creditors listed in the SOR.  Furthermore, the record is void of any other documentation 
to show that any of the debts have been resolved. 
       
Guideline E – Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant engaged in conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations that raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. 
 
Applicant completed an e-QIP dated September 4, 2015.  Section 26 asked 
about his Financial Record, specifically, whether in the past 7 years, he had bills or 
debts turned over to a collection agency?  It also asks, whether in the past seven years 
he had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for filing to pay 
as agreed?”  Applicant responded, “NO,” to both questions.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  
These were false answers.  Applicant failed to list any of the delinquent debts set forth 
in the SOR.      
 
 Applicant stated that when he filled out the job application, which I assume 
included the security clearance application, he did not have a good understanding of the 
English language, and he misunderstood the questions.  He stated that he was not 
aware that he was required to list his delinquent debts in response to those questions 
on the application.  He also stated that some of his delinquent debts became delinquent 
after he completed the application.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR and Government 
Exhibit 3.)     
   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
 
4 
 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
5 
 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s states that his financial problems began when he lost his job and his 
uncle passed away in 2014.  It appears that Applicant has started to pay some of his 
delinquent debts.  However, the record is not clear which debts, if any, listed in the SOR 
have been addressed.  Applicant has not indicated that he has set up any payments 
plans or is following an agreement structured between him and the creditor.  Without 
more, Applicant’s actions demonstrate both a history of and inability or an unwillingness 
to satisfy his debt. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations are 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
  Applicant provided no information concerning his financial affairs that 
demonstrate appropriate mitigation.  There is insufficient evidence showing that he has 
 
6 
 
done much to resolve his delinquent debt.  Thus, it can be assumed that the delinquent 
debts listed in the SOR remain owing.  Under these circumstances, there is no evidence 
that he has acted reasonably and responsibly.  His actions demonstrate unreliability, 
untrustworthiness, and poor judgment. 
 
Guideline E- Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.   
  
 Applicant deliberately falsified his e-QIP in response to questions regarding his 
delinquent debts.  Applicant stated that in 2014, after the death of his uncle, and when 
Applicant lost his job, he had to choose in providing for his family or making payments 
on his credit card debt.  He choose to provide for his family, and his financial problems 
began.  This clearly shows that he knew about the debts.  He knew that the debts 
became delinquent and he deliberately failed to disclose them in response to questions 
on the e-QIP.  Furthermore, I understand that he has a language barrier, but these 
questions, he clearly understood.  If an individual cannot understand the questions on 
the application enough to answer them correctly, an individual certainly cannot qualify 
for access to classified information.  There are no applicable conditions that could be 
mitigating under AG ¶ 17.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
7 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant:    
  Subparagraph 1.j.   Against Applicant 
   
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
