 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00852 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 18, 2014, 
seeking to continue a security clearance he has held since February 2004. On April 24, 
2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.1  
  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines for all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. The changes resulting 
from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 25, 2017, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on July 20, 2017. On July 21, 2017, a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the 
FORM on August 8, 2017, and did not respond.2 The case was assigned to me on 
December 18, 2017  
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He married in May 
1983 and has two adult children. He served as an enlisted sailor in the U.S. Navy from 
March 1976 to March 1980 and from August 1982 to August 2000, and he received 
honorable discharges for both periods of service. He worked for a private-sector company 
from February 2002 to March 2012 and for another defense contractor from March 2012 
to March 2013. His SCA reflects that he was unemployed for about a month before being 
hired for his current job in March 2013.  
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he disclosed that he did not file his federal 
income tax return for 2013 or pay the taxes due. He stated that he thought he filed an 
electronic return but it was not received by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). He 
estimated that he owed about $2,000 in federal taxes, and he stated that he contacted 
the IRS to set up a payment system. In his answer to the SOR, he admitted that he did 
not filed his federal returns for 2013 and 2014 and his state return for 2014 because he 
was not financially stable at the time. He stated that he had contacted both federal and 
state tax authorities.  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file federal income tax returns as required 
for 2013 and 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and failed to file a state income tax return for 2014 as 
required (SOR ¶ 1.b). No federal or state tax debts are alleged.  
 
Applicant’s admissions are the only admissible evidence supporting the allegations 
in the SOR. Applicant has provided no documentary evidence of any contacts with federal 
and state tax authorities and no evidence that the past-due returns have been filed. The 
SOR does not allege and the admissible evidence does not establish that he owes any 
federal or state taxes.  
                                                          
2 The FORM includes a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) conducted in August 2015 (FORM 
Item 4). The PSI was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel did not 
inform Applicant that he was entitled to comment on the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any 
corrections, additions, deletions or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI on the ground that it was 
not authenticated. Item 4 is not admissible, and I have not considered it in my decision. 
 
3 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (FORM Item 3) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
 4
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions establish the following disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(c) 
(“a history of not meeting financial obligations”) and AG ¶ 19(f) (“failure to file or 
fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax as required”). The following mitigating conditions are 
potentially relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
 
 5
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions are established. Applicant has submitted 
no evidence of conditions that caused inability to file his tax returns as required. He has 
not disputed his obligation to file. He has not provided evidence of financial counseling or 
arrangements with tax authorities to file the returns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4 Because Applicant 
requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to 
evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor and no opportunity to question 
him about the allegations in the SOR. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 
23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his failures to file federal and state 
income tax returns as required. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
  
                                                          
4 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 6
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
