 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02036 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns relating to his relatives 
who are citizens and residents of Lebanon and Saudi Arabia. He served as a U.S. 
linguist for five years under combat conditions in Iraq and for six years in other 
Southwest Asia countries. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 24, 2016, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Position (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1. On July 27, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). 
 
On October 5, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. 
HE 3. On November 7, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On November 7, 2017, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the 
hearing for November 28, 2017. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant offered 
nine exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Tr. 10-12; GE 1-4; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-I. On December 7, 2017, DOHA 
received a copy of the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel offered a summary for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to Lebanon and 
Saudi Arabia. Tr. 10-11; HE 4. Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of 
notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 16-02522 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. July 12, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n. 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR 
Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 
F.2d 89, 93 n. 4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, 
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice). Applicant did not object to me taking administrative notice of the 
proffered documents. Tr. 11. Department Counsel’s request for administrative notice is 
granted. The “Lebanon” and “Saudi Arabia” sections in this decision are derived from 
Department Counsel’s administrative notice request. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges Applicant’s mother (¶ 1.a), brother (¶ 1.b), and two 
sisters (¶ 1.b) are citizens and residents of Lebanon. Another brother is a dual citizen of 
Lebanon and the United Kingdom (¶ 1.c); his sister is a dual citizen of Lebanon and 
Saudi Arabia (¶ 1.d); and he provides $8,000 annual support to his mother (¶ 1.e). 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e. He partially admitted 
the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d. He also provided some mitigating information. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor who has been 
employed as a U.S. linguist and cultural advisor since 2006. Tr. 13-14. Applicant was 
                                            
1 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
born in Lebanon. Tr. 25. He completed one year of community college in the United 
States. Tr. 13. He was married from 1997 to 2005. Tr. 13. His former spouse is a U.S. 
citizen. Tr. 13. His former spouse was born in Germany, and her parents were 
employed by the U.S. Government. Tr. 42. He does not have any children. Tr. 13. He 
held a security clearance in 2010. Tr. 15. There is no evidence of security violations. His 
current annual salary is $64,000. Tr. 38. His net worth in the United States because of 
investments is about $710,000. Tr. 40. 
 
In 1995, Applicant moved from Lebanon to Russia, and in 1997, when he was 27 
years old, Applicant immigrated to the United States. Tr. 15, 33. In 2004, Applicant was 
naturalized as a U.S. citizen. Tr. 15. He has not been to Lebanon since 1995. Tr. 33. 
 
Applicant served as a linguist in Iraq from 2006 to 2011. Tr. 38. He was deployed 
to other countries in Southwest Asia (not Iraq) from 2012 to present. Tr. 38-40. During 
his tour in Iraq, he was exposed to hostile enemy fire. Tr. 47-48; AE A. 
 
In 2015, Applicant’s father died. Tr. 34. His father was a truck driver. Tr. 35. 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Lebanon. Tr. 17. She is 75 years old, and 
she does not work outside her home. Tr. 18. He communicates with her about every six 
months. Tr. 18. He provides about $8,000 annually to his mother because she lacks 
financial resources and does not receive a pension from the Lebanese Government. Tr. 
19-20, 34. He has not seen his mother since 1995. Tr. 33. He would like his brothers to 
take financial responsibility for his mother in lieu of his financial support. Tr. 20-21. His 
mother is not aware of Applicant’s employment or location of his employment. Tr. 22. 
She believes he is located in the United States and not deployed overseas. Tr. 22. 
 
Two of Applicant’s sisters and one brother are citizens and residents of Lebanon. 
Tr. 23-27. His siblings do not know about Applicant’s employment or deployments 
overseas. Tr. 23-27. He does not provide any financial support for his siblings. Tr. 24-
27. He has not communicated with two siblings for several years, and he communicates 
with one sister about every six months. Tr. 24-26. The Lebanese Government does not 
employ his brother. Tr. 25.  His sisters do not work outside their homes. Tr. 25-26. He 
has not seen any of his siblings since 1995. Tr. 36. 
 
One of Applicant’s brothers is a dual citizen of Lebanon and the United Kingdom. 
Tr. 27. He resides in the United Kingdom. He is a warehouse manager for a private 
company. Tr. 28. He knows Applicant works for a U.S. Government contractor. Tr. 28. 
He does not know Applicant is seeking a security clearance. Tr. 28. Applicant 
communicates with his brother about three times a year, and he is upset with his brother 
because his brother is reluctant to provide financial support for Applicant’s mother. Tr. 
28-29.  
 
One of Applicant’s sisters is a dual citizen of Saudi Arabia and Lebanon. Tr. 29.  
She resides in Saudi Arabia. Tr. 30. He communicates with her about three times a 
year. Tr. 30. She does not work outside her home. Tr. 31. She does not know about his 
employment; he does not provide financial support to her; and she does not know when 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
he is deployed. Tr. 30. Her husband is a citizen of Saudi Arabia and another country. Tr. 
37.  
 
One of Applicant’s brothers was drafted into the Lebanon military, and he served 
in the Lebanon military for two years. Tr. 37. None of his other siblings have served in 
Lebanon’s military. Tr. 37.   
 
On October 5, 2017, Applicant provided a “statement of intent” and promised to 
“have minimal or no contact with [his] mother or siblings outside of [his] official duties, 
and [his] conversations will remain strictly casual and infrequent.” SOR response, Ex. C. 
He promised not to “travel to Lebanon unless directed to do so by the U.S. Government 
in connection with [his] employment.” Any violation of this statement of intent can result 
in “automatic revocation of [his] security clearance.” SOR response, Ex. C.     
 
If someone sought classified information from Applicant, he would report the 
attempt to security. Tr. 32. Applicant is loyal to the United States. Tr. 31, 42. He is 
honest and trustworthy. Tr. 31. He is careful about following security rules and complies 
with the laws of the United States. Tr. 33. He is a good U.S. citizen, and he is willing to 
risk his life to safeguard the United States. Tr. 42. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Seven character letters, including a letter from a Federal Bureau of Investigation 
special agent, interrogators, and a military officer, laud Applicant’s loyalty, patriotism, 
diligence, dedication, and contributions to mission accomplishment of the U.S. armed 
forces in Iraq. AE A. His work “entailed long work hours in austere conditions with an 
ever present risk of hostile fire,” and he “volunteered to accompany assault units on 
targets” AE A at 4-5. The letters describe Applicant as an important asset to any 
organization and recommend his employment in support of DOD operations. AE A. He 
also received certificates of appreciation from some of the U.S. armed forces units he 
supported in Iraq. SOR response, Ex. B.  
 
Lebanon 
 
Lebanon is a parliamentary democracy. Syria borders on Lebanon and 
influences Lebanon’s foreign and internal domestic policies. Syria has been engaged in 
an internal conflict for many years and millions of refugees have left Syria and settled in 
camps in neighboring countries. The U.S. State Department has declared the Syrian 
Government to be a supporter of terrorism. The United States seeks to maintain its 
traditionally close ties with Lebanon. Lebanon has some serious human rights 
problems.  
 
Hezbollah is a radical Shia group, which operates in Lebanon and Palestine and 
receives support from Iran. It is a U.S.-designated foreign terrorist organization. The 
Lebanese Government recognizes Hezbollah as a legitimate group. The Islamic State of 
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Nusra Front (ANF), Hamas, and the Abdullah Azzam 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Brigades (AAB) operate in Lebanon, and ISIL and ANF have claimed responsibility for 
suicide bombings in Lebanon.  
 
Americans have been the targets of terrorist attacks in Lebanon, and the 
perpetrators of some of those attacks are still present in Lebanon and retain the ability 
to commit further acts of terrorism. U.S. government employees in Beirut are required to 
live under strict security because of the dangers of terrorism. Groups hostile to the 
Lebanese Government and the United States operate largely autonomously inside 
refugee camps in different areas of Lebanon. The U.S. State Department continues to 
urge Americans to avoid travel to Lebanon.  
 
Saudi Arabia 
 
The United States and Saudi Arabia generally have good relations and share a 
common concern about regional security in the Middle East. Relations between the 
United States and Saudi Arabia were strained after the September 2001 terrorist 
attacks. During 2003 and 2004, terrorists and suicide bombers kidnapped or killed 
Americans and attacked the U.S. consulate. Terrorist attacks have been attempted or 
have occurred in the last several years. The State Department warns U.S. citizens to 
carefully consider the risks of travel to Saudi Arabia due to concerns about potential 
terrorist activity directed against U.S. citizens and interests.  
 
Individuals and organizations based in Saudi Arabia have been designated by 
the U.S. government as providing financial and material support to Al-Qaeda and more 
recently to ISIL and other terrorist groups. Violence from the conflict in Yemen has 
occasionally “spilled over” into Saudi Arabia. Human rights problems have occurred 
throughout Saudi Arabia. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Exec. Or. 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should 
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President,  
Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 has two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant has limited contacts with relatives who are citizens or residents of 
Lebanon or Saudi Arabia. He provides $8,000 annually to his mother who lives in 
Lebanon. His payments to his mother are a manifestation of his affection for her. His 
communications and relationships with his relatives in Lebanon and Saudi Arabia are 
sufficient to raise a security concern.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with one or more family members living 
in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B; however, 
if an applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case 
No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001). There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationships of Lebanon and Saudi Arabia 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
with the United States, and the situation in Lebanon and Saudi Arabia place a 
significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate 
that his relationships with his family members living in those foreign countries do not 
pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be 
forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a relative 
living in one of those foreign countries.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from foreign 
countries seek, or have sought, classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Lebanon and Saudi Arabia to a 
lesser degree have problems with terrorism. Applicant’s relationships with relatives who 
are living in Lebanon and Saudi Arabia create a potential conflict of interest because 
terrorists could place pressure on his family living in those countries in an effort to cause 
Applicant to compromise classified information. These relationships also create “a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 
7. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts and 
relationships with family residing in Lebanon and Saudi Arabia. Department Counsel 
has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) 
and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any 
mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) have limited application, and 8(c) applies. Applicant left 
Lebanon 22 years ago, and he does not frequently communicate2 with his mother and 
siblings in Lebanon and his sibling in Saudi Arabia. Still, his relationships with family 
members residing in Lebanon and Saudi Arabia are sufficient even without frequent 
contacts to cause lingering security concerns. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” In 1997, 
Applicant immigrated to the United States, and in 2004, he became a U.S. citizen. He 
has not returned to Lebanon since 1995.  
 
                                            
2 The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more frequently constitutes 
“frequent contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings 
once every four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
There are widely documented safety issues for residents of Iraq, Afghanistan, 
Syria, Lebanon, and to a lesser degree Saudi Arabia, because of terrorists and 
insurgents. Applicant has voluntarily shared in those dangers on behalf of the DOD for 
about five years during his service in Iraq, and in other Southwest Asia countries for six 
years. He is willing to expose himself to similar dangers in the future.  
 
Numerous linguists supporting U.S. forces have family living in Iraq, Afghanistan, 
or other Southwest Asia countries under serious threat from terrorists. Thousands of 
United States and coalition armed forces and civilian contractors serving in Southwest 
Asia are targets of terrorists along with civilians who support the Southwest Asian 
governments and cooperate with coalition forces. Like many other linguists with family 
in Southwest Asian countries, Applicant has family in Lebanon and Saudi Arabia that 
are vulnerable to terrorists.  
 
Applicant’s years of support to the DOD in Iraq as a linguist and cultural advisor, 
including the dangers that service entailed, weigh heavily towards mitigating security 
concerns. Applicant is currently serving in Southwest Asia providing critical assistance 
to U.S. Armed Forces. He has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United 
States during his approximately five years of support to the DOD while serving in Iraq 
and for six additional years in other Southwest Asia countries.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives who are citizens 
and residents of Lebanon and Saudi Arabia. His relatives living in Lebanon and Saudi 
Arabia are at risk from terrorists, and Applicant’s access to classified information could 
theoretically add risk if the terrorists discover he has relatives in Lebanon and Saudi 
Arabia.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his relatives living in Lebanon and Saudi 
Arabia are less significant than his connections to the United States. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ huge investment of manpower and money in Southwest 
Asia, and Applicant has supported U.S. goals and objectives in Southwest Asia. His 
employment in support of the U.S. Government, performance of linguist duties in a 
combat zone, and U.S. citizenship are important factors weighing towards mitigation of 
security concerns. His connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to 
fully overcome and mitigate the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B. 
Even if foreign influence security concerns were not mitigated under Guideline B, they 
would be mitigated under the whole-person concept.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guideline B are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor who has been 
employed as a linguist and cultural advisor since 2006. He was born in Lebanon, and he 
completed one year of community college. He is not married, and he does not have any 
children. He held a security clearance in 2010, and there is no evidence of security 
violations. His current annual salary is $64,000. His net worth in the United States is 
about $710,000.  
 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Lebanon, and he has siblings, who 
are citizens and residents of Lebanon or Saudi Arabia. Any relationships with citizens 
and residents of Lebanon or Saudi Arabia raise important foreign influence security 
concerns, and they must be balanced against his connections to the United States.      
 
In 1997, Applicant immigrated to the United States, and in 2004, he became a 
U.S. citizen. When he became a U.S. citizen, he took an oath of allegiance to the United 
States. There is no evidence that Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused 
alcohol or illegal drugs, or violated any of his employer’s rules. 
 
Applicant served as a U.S. linguist, translator, or cultural advisor for about five 
years during the conflict in Iraq. Applicant provided character references and certificates 
for his service in a U.S. designated combat zone. He made contributions to the U.S. 
military at personal risk. He is willing to continue to serve in Southwest Asia as a 
linguist, risking his life as part of his duties on behalf of the United States. All of these 
circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report 
any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit 
him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). His past honorable 
service as a linguist weighs heavily towards approval of his security clearance. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) (affirming grant of security 
clearance and commenting “Applicant has served as a translator and as a cultural 
liaison between Americans and Afghan citizens, diffusing tensions and facilitating 
transactions between the two groups. . . . . Applicant put his life in danger on at least 
one occasion to protect American lives and interests in Afghanistan.”). 
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
A Guideline B decision concerning Lebanon must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.3 Lebanon and to a lesser degree Saudi Arabia 
are dangerous places because of violence from terrorists. These entities continue to 
threaten the Lebanese and Saudi Arabian Governments, the interests of the United 
States, U.S. Armed Forces, and those who cooperate and assist the United States. The 
Lebanese and Saudi Arabian Governments do not fully comply with the rule of law or 
protect civil liberties in many instances. The United States, Lebanon, and Saudi Arabian 
Governments are allies in the war on terrorism.       
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign influence security 
concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
