1 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ADP Case No. 17-02089 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility to occupy a public trust position is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On November 10, 2016, Applicant applied for a public trust position and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 30, 2017, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
established by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4) (December 10, 
2016), effective June 8, 2017. 
The SOR alleged trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for occupying a public trust position to support a 
 
2 
                                      
 
contract with the DOD. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for occupying a public trust 
position to support a contract with the Department of Defense, and recommended referral 
to an administrative judge to determine whether such eligibility should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a statement, notarized on July 19, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations, and elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to 
Applicant on August 18, 2017, and she was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 
days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the 
Directive. Applicant purportedly received the FORM on September 14, 2017. The 
response was due on October 14, 2017. Applicant chose not to take advantage of that 
opportunity.  The case was assigned to me on January 26, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted nearly all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.b. through 1.m.). Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been serving 
as a Medical Scribe for her current employer since January 2017. She previously held 
positions as a clinical assistant, a mental health technician, and counselor, with a number 
of employers. It is unclear if she is a high school graduate. Applicant attended a college 
from February 2013 until May 2014, and she received a designation as a Certified Nursing 
Assistant (CNA). She has never served with the U.S. Military. She has never been granted 
a security clearance, and it is unclear if she ever held a public trust position. Applicant 
was married in 2009 and divorced in 2011. She married again in 2012, and has been 
separated since 2014. She has one son, born in 1996. 
 
Financial Considerations1 
 
 It is unclear when Applicant first experienced financial difficulties, but a review of 
her 2016 credit report reveals that both a tax lien and a judgment were filed against her 
in 2012. She acknowledged that she had been through one period of unemployment from 
                                                          
1 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: Item 3 (e-QIP, dated November 10, 2016; Item 2 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated July 19, 2017); Item 
5 (Personal Subject Interview, dated March 28, 2017); Item 4 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit 
Report, dated December 20, 2016).  
 
 
3 
                                      
 
August 2016 until January 2017. The only factor she attributed to her inability to pay her 
bills was that she had insufficient funds to do so.2  
 
When Applicant completed her e-QIP in November 2016, she acknowledged 
having only one delinquent account, a repossessed vehicle that she claimed her ex-
husband purchased in her name, and that the financial issue arose in 2006. She denied 
having any other delinquent accounts.3 When she was interviewed by an investigator from 
the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in March 2017, she again stated that 
she had no other delinquent debts, but she was confronted with additional delinquent 
debts, some of which she acknowledged, and some of which she claimed to have no 
knowledge of.4 
 
The SOR identified 13 purportedly continuing delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $16,448 that had been placed for collection, charged off, repossessed, or 
one to judgment, as reflected by the December 2016 credit report. Those accounts were 
as follows:  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): a judgment in the amount of $8,130 that Applicant initially said was 
for the vehicle her ex-husband purchased in her name, and that she was making 
payments when she could afford to do so.5 During her OPM interview, she claimed to 
know nothing about the judgment.6 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the 
account, stating it was from her ex-husband, and that she was “still fighting in court.” She 
failed to submit any documentation to support her contentions: the account was not her 
account; she had made any efforts with the creditor to resolve the account; she had been 
making payments; or the matter was in litigation. The account has not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): an unspecified type of unsecured account, identified by Applicant as 
a student loan, with an unpaid balance of $600 that was charged off in June 2014.7 During 
her OPM interview, she claimed to know nothing about the account.8 In her Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant contended that she had paid off the account, and she submitted extracts 
of a 2017 Credit Karma credit report that reported that the account has a balance of $959, 
and that Applicant has paid off 60 percent of her student loan amount.9 The documents 
she submitted do not support her contentions that she had paid the charged-off $600 or 
                                                          
2 Item 5, supra note 1, at 7. Applicant submitted documentation related to an Interim Peace Order and a 
Temporary Peace Order against an individual who was apparently stalking her, but there is no evidence to support a 
conclusion that the situation had any relevance to Applicant’s finances or financial situation. 
 
3 Item 3, supra note 1, at 31-33. 
 
4 Item 5, supra note 1, at 5. 
 
5 Item 4, supra note 1, at 5. 
 
6 Item 5, supra note 1, at 7. 
 
7 Item 4, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
8 Item 5, supra note 1, at 7. 
 
9 Credit Report extracts, downloaded July 18, 2017, attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
4 
                                      
 
that the account had been successfully resolved by her, for there are no cancelled checks, 
receipts, bank account reports, or letters from the creditor. The account has not been 
resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): a vehicle loan with a high credit of $10,113 and unpaid and past-due 
balance of $4,087 on a vehicle that was repossessed.10 During her OPM interview, she 
claimed the account was the same one related to the judgment,11 but she failed to submit 
documentation to support that claim. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she 
was going through hardship because she was not working, and her mother died. She 
offered no evidence to indicate that she had contacted the creditor or had made any 
payments. The account has not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): an apartment lease with an unpaid balance of $1,245.12 On March 
23, 2017, Applicant settled the account for less than the full balance by paying the 
collection agent $374, and the remaining $871.33 was cancelled.13 The account has been 
resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.f.): two utility accounts with unpaid balances of $644 and 
$477.14 During her OPM interview, Applicant claimed to have no knowledge of the larger 
account, but agreed that the smaller account was hers, and she indicated she would pay 
it when she has the funds to do so.15 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant contended that 
she had made payment arrangements regarding the larger account, and that she had 
paid the smaller account.16 She failed to submit any documentation, such as payment 
agreements, cancelled checks, receipts, or account statements, to support her 
contentions that there were payment arrangements made with one creditor, or that the 
other creditor had been paid. In the absence of such documentation, I conclude the 
accounts remain unresolved. 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.g. through 1.m.): seven medical accounts with unpaid balances of $435, 
$236, $194, $141, $115, $91, and $53 with a variety of collection agents.17 During her 
OPM interview, Applicant claimed to have little specific knowledge of the accounts, but 
indicated she would pay them when she has the funds to do so.18 In her Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant acknowledged that she did not have health insurance at the time. For two 
                                                          
10 Item 4, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
11 Item 5, supra note 1, at 7. 
 
12 Item 4, supra note 1, at 8. 
 
13 Account Detail, dated July 18, 2017, attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
14 Item 4, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
15 Item 5, supra note 1, at 6-7. 
 
16 Item 2, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
17 Item 4, supra note 1, at 9-10. 
 
18 Item 5, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
5 
                                      
 
of the accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.i. and 1.j.) she claimed to have made payment arrangements, 
and for one account (SOR ¶ 1.l.) she claimed to have paid it. Applicant failed to submit 
any documents, such as payment agreements, cancelled checks, receipts, or account 
statements, to support her claims. The accounts have not been resolved. 
 
There is no evidence of a budget, repayment plans, or any financial counseling.  
Applicant failed to submit a Personal Financial Statement to reflect her family’s combined 
net monthly income, monthly expenses, or any remainder available for discretionary use 
or savings. In the absence of such information, there is no evidence to indicate that 
Applicant’s financial problems are now under control.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a [position of public trust].”19 As Commander in Chief, the President 
has the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. DOD contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained 
in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination may be made.20  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for a public trust position. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”21 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
                                                          
19 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
20 It should be noted that a memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Counterintelligence 
and Security, Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases, dated November 19, 2004, covers the handling of trustworthiness 
cases under the Directive. The memorandum directed the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) to continue 
to utilize the Directive in ADP contractor cases for trustworthiness determinations. 
 
21 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
6 
                                      
 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.22  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to sensitive 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.  Furthermore, security clearance 
determinations, and by inference, public trust determinations, should err, if they must, on 
the side of denials.23 In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that 
are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
                                                          
 
22 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
23 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators. 
 
 Applicant has had a long-standing problem with her finances. She has chronically 
found herself with insufficient funds to prevent her accounts from becoming delinquent. 
They were placed for collection, some were charged off, one went to judgment, and 
another resulted in a repossession. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(e) apply. There is 
insufficient evidence to support AG ¶ 19(b). 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;24 and 
                                                          
24 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
 
8 
                                      
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
I have concluded that AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies, and AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), 
and 20(e) do not apply. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing 
financial difficulties make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so 
infrequent.” While Applicant mentioned her mother’s death, a period of unemployment, 
and some irrelevant situations, the only factor she attributed to her inability to pay her bills 
was that she had insufficient funds to do so. When Applicant completed her e-QIP, she 
acknowledged having only one delinquent account, a repossessed vehicle that she 
claimed her ex-husband purchased in her name, and that the financial issue arose in 
2006. She denied having any other delinquent accounts. When she was interviewed by 
an OPM investigator, she again stated that she had no other delinquent debts, but she 
was confronted with additional delinquent debts, some of which she acknowledged, and 
some of which she claimed to have no knowledge of.  
 
While Applicant resolved one account with a relatively small payment of $374, 
there is no documentation to reflect that accounts as modest as $53, $93, or $115, have 
been resolved. Applicant contends that she either resolved, or is in the process of 
resolving other accounts, but she still failed to submit the necessary documentation.  
 
Applicant offered no explanation as to why she took no action to resolve her 
delinquent accounts before her period of unemployment or after she obtained her current 
position. Applicant’s professed actions and intentions are not supported by any 
documentation. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant ever received financial 
counseling. It is unclear if she has funds remaining at the end of each month for 
discretionary use or savings. There is no evidence to reflect that Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control. Applicant has not acted responsibly by failing to address her 
delinquent accounts and by making little, if any, efforts of working with her creditors.25 
Applicant’s actions under the circumstances cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.26 
                                                          
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
25 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
26 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, Appendix (App.) A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I 
have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record 
evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.27   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. She has been 
with her current employer since January 2017. She was unemployed from August 2016 
until January 2017. She previously declared her intention of addressing her creditors and 
resolving her financial problems.  
  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant repeatedly found herself with delinquent accounts, and some were placed for 
collection or charged off. There was one judgment and one repossession. Although 
Applicant had the opportunity to submit any documentation to support her contentions 
regarding her purported resolution efforts, with one exception, she failed to do so. There 
is no overall repayment plan, no budget, and no indication of her current finances. There 
is no evidence from third-parties as to her current reputation for reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. Despite her promises to resolve her delinquent accounts, Applicant 
has essentially taken relatively little positive actions to do so. Considering the relative 
absence of confirmed debt resolution and elimination efforts, Applicant’s financial issues 
are likely to remain. Applicant’s actions, or demonstrated inaction, under the 
circumstances cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:28 
                                                          
27 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
28 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
10 
                                      
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an essentially poor track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, generally ignoring all but one of her debts. She promised to take some 
corrective actions, and she claimed that she had taken other measures to resolve her 
delinquencies, but could not support her claims with documentation. Overall, the evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public 
trust position. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns arising from her financial considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, 
AG ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e. through 1.m.: Against Applicant 
    
  
                                                          
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a public 
trust position to support a contract with the Department of Defense. Eligibility is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
