 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03367 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 16, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 6, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 22, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 27, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 16, 2018. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection.1 Applicant testified and did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript on January 23, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He denied the SOR 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2006. He served in 
the military from 1991 to 1994 and was honorably discharged. He married in 2001. He 
has one child born in 2006. Applicant has been employed by a federal contractor since 
2013 and has had no periods of unemployment since being discharged from the Army. 
His wife worked full time as a teacher at a community college from 2003 to 2006, and 
part time from approximately 2007 to the present.2 
 
 Applicant testified that before their child was born in 2006, he and his wife had 
debts that were manageable. Shortly before the birth, his work hours were reduced and 
they had to decide what debts to pay. He worked with several creditors to resolve other 
debts. The debts alleged in the SOR are owed to creditors with whom he could not 
reach payment agreements, so he decided he would not pay the debts at that time. He 
anticipated these debts would be removed from his credit report in August 2018, and it 
would not be to his financial benefit to pay them.3  
 
 Applicant admitted he owed the credit card debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($20,614) 
and ¶ 1.d ($11,419). He stopped making payments on the debts in 2011 and does not 
intend to pay these debts. He was using one credit card offering a low introductory 
interest rate to pay another credit card and then could not afford to make the payments. 
He is waiting for the delinquent debts to drop off his credit report.4  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶ 1.b ($13,847) and ¶ 1.c ($16,890) are also delinquent credit 
card debts. Applicant testified that these credit cards belonged to his wife from before 
they were married. He stated they were remaining debts for college. He indicated she 
went to an out-of-state college. She put Applicant on the accounts as an authorized 
user. He testified that he was unaware he was an authorized user until he reviewed his 
credit report. Credit reports from March 2016 and September 2017 reflect the credit 
                                                          
1 Tr. 13-15. Applicant requested that I not consider a statement in GE 2 that was incorrect regarding a 
civil lawsuit. I granted his request and will not consider it. He had no objection to my considering the rest 
of the document.  
 
2 Tr. 16-19, 21-22. 
 
3 Tr. 23-25. 
 
4 Tr. 25-27, 35-39, 47; GE 3, 4. 
 
3 
 
 
card accounts were opened in June 2008 and the debts were incurred during his 
marriage. They have not made payments on these debts since 2011.5  
 
 Applicant and his wife purchased a new home in May 2016. He explained that he 
was able to sell his old house and used the profit to purchase a new one. He used some 
of the profit to pay other debts. He felt it was in the best interest of his family not to pay 
the delinquent creditors in the SOR. He purchased a 2018 vehicle. He stated by 
purchasing the new vehicle he reduced his previous car payment on his 2015 vehicle, 
which he sold. Applicant earns approximately $67,000 and his wife earns approximately 
$13,000 annually.6 
 
 Applicant explained he is focused on taking care of his family and does not 
intend to incur new delinquent debts. He explained he and his wife accumulated too 
much debt, and he believes his current plan not to pay some delinquent debts is the 
best way to handle his finances. He has not contacted the creditors for his delinquent 
debts in more than five years. He does not intend to have financial problems in the 
future. He has approximately $1,000 in the bank and stated he and his family live 
paycheck to paycheck. He cashed out his retirement accounts to pay debts. He testified 
he is current on his monthly expenses. He has not had financial counseling. His wife 
maintains a budget, but he knows very little about it because his wife manages it. 
However, he said that he is aware of where money is spent. He takes his job and 
security very seriously, and he is a patriot.7  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 20-21, 23-25, 33-34, 47; GE 3, 4. 
 
6 Tr. 28-33. 
 
7 Tr. 42-47, 51-61. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
 
5 
 
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.8 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has unresolved delinquent debts that began accumulating in 2011. He 
is unwilling to pay the accounts he admits he owes. The above disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counselling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not paid the two delinquent credit card debts he admits that he 
owes (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d). Although he acknowledges these are his legitimate debts, 
he testified he does not intend to pay them. Applicant’s refusal to pay his legal debts 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to a period in 2006 when his child was 
born; his pay was reduced; and his wife went from a full-time position to a part-time 
position. These are conditions that were beyond Applicant’s control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant began incurring these debts in 2006 and stopped making 
payments in 2011, despite having stable employment. He failed to provide evidence that 
he has acted responsibly in paying his debts. Instead, he chose not to make payments 
since 2011 and has no plan to pay them in the future. I cannot find Applicant has acted 
responsibly in addressing his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 There is insufficient evidence Applicant received financial counseling and that 
there are clear indications his finances are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
There is no evidence Applicant initiated a good-faith effort to repay the delinquent debts 
alleged or that he intends to do so. I find AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant disputes that he is responsible for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 
1.c because his wife owns the account, and he is only an authorized user. Although the 
credit card debts were incurred after Applicant and his wife married, as an authorized 
user he is not responsible for the debts. The credit reports document that he is not the 
owner. AG ¶ 20(e) applies.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 47 years old. He has been employed with his present employer since 
2013 and did not disclose periods of unemployment. He testified that after his child was 
born in 2006, his income was reduced and his wife began part-time employment. As an 
authorized user, Applicant is not responsible for his wife’s credit card debt. He is 
responsible for his delinquent credit card debts which total approximately $32,033. He 
admits he owes that money, but does not intend to pay it. He has not made payments 
since 2011 and is waiting for the debts to be removed from his credit report after seven 
years of delinquency. He believes it is in his family’s best interest not to pay the debts. 
He testified he lives paycheck to paycheck. Applicant’s actions raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude he failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
