
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 15, 2017 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on July 10, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on July 11, 2017, setting the hearing for September 20, 2017. On that date, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence. 
Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through C into evidence. All exhibits were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 10, 
2017. The record was left open until October 30, 2017, for Applicant to submit additional 
documentation. Applicant requested, and received, an extension until December 1, 
2017, to submit his post-hearing documentation. He did not submit anything further. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative 
guidelines that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
determinations issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as promulgated in 
Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the 
new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. This decision is issued 
pursuant to, and cites, the new AG; but my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. He is single and has no children. He is employed as a 
flight simulator technician, and is applying for a security clearance in connection with 
that work. He has worked for his employer since November 2015. (GE 1; Tr. 31, 35-36.) 
He admitted the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h. He 
denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶.1.a, 1.f, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k. (Answer; Tr. 8.) Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated in the findings below.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial delinquencies to motor vehicle accidents and a 
boating accident, which have left him in “debilitating chronic pain.” (Tr. 26-27.) He is on 
partial-permanent disability. Additionally, he was unemployed from January 2009 to 
October 2010. (GE 1; Tr. 26-27.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleged Applicant was indebted on a credit card debt placed for 
collections in the amount of $13,619. This debt was reported delinquent in November 
2015. Applicant testified that he closed this account nine years ago. He claimed, “I had 
been told by [creditor] that that account had been through a combination of lump-sum 
repayment and debt forgiveness, had been removed from my credit history . . .” (Tr. 21.) 
Appellant promised to submit copies of payments in his post hearing documentation. He 
failed to do so. This debt is unresolved. (GE 2; Tr. 21, 33-34, 47-48.) 
  
 
 
 
 
3 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.h alleged Applicant was indebted on 
delinquent student loans in the amounts of $9,596; $7,854; $5,994; $5,934; $5,863; and 
$1,899, respectively. These debts were reported delinquent in August 2015. Applicant 
stopped taking classes in 2015 due to “the massive flare-up of some of [his] medical 
issues,” and these loans subsequently became due. (Tr. 40.) Applicant made a 
rehabilitation agreement with this creditor on September 20, 2017, the day of the 
hearing, agreeing to pay $5 toward the rehabilitation of his student loans. Previously, his 
wages were being involuntarily garnished toward the repayment of his student loans in 
the amount of $165.97 per pay period. His total Federal student loan debt was listed as 
$42,215.04 on the rehabilitation agreement. He failed to produce documentation 
showing he made successive payments under this agreement. (GE 23; AE A; AE C; Tr. 
21-26, 39-45.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g alleged Applicant was indebted on a past-due account in the amount 
of $713. This debt was potentially for a private student loan or educational debt, 
although Applicant initially testified it was for a parking ticket. At the time of the hearing, 
he had not contacted this creditor. This debt is unresolved. (GE 3; Tr. 48-52.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i alleged Applicant was indebted on a past-due account in the amount 
of $344. This debt was reported delinquent in September 2016. This debt was also 
owed to an educational institution. At the time of the hearing, he had not contacted this 
creditor. This debt is unresolved. (GE 3; Tr. 34, 48-52.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j alleged Applicant was indebted on a past-due account in the amount 
of $346. This debt was reported delinquent in August 2015. This debt was another 
account owed to an educational institution. At the time of the hearing, he had not 
contacted this creditor. This debt is unresolved. (GE 3; Tr. 48-52.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k alleged Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount 
of $269. This debt was reported delinquent in 2014. Applicant testified this debt was 
potentially related to identity theft. He submitted nothing further in that regard. (GE 3; Tr. 
53-54.) 
 
 Applicant’s monthly income was listed as $4,116.67 on his student loan 
rehabilitation agreement. He listed monthly expenses of $4,053.67 including a $715 
monthly payment on student loans in that agreement. (AE A.)  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of E O 10865, “[a]ny determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also E O 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated at least $52,431 in delinquent debt from 2015 to the 
present. He has taken little action to resolve those debts despite full employment since 
November 2015. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing 
disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant accepted responsibility for his delinquent student loans and educational 
debts. While he experienced significant medical problems and was unemployed from 
2009 to 2010, he failed to establish that he has acted responsibly with respect to his 
debts. There are no clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under 
control. While some of his student loans have been subject to involuntary garnishment, 
and he recently negotiated a rehabilitation agreement for those student loans, he 
demonstrated no track record of payment and his outstanding balance is greater than is 
alleged in the SOR. Further, his credit card debt and other educational debts remain 
unresolved. Applicant produced neither evidence to establish he has a reasonable basis 
to dispute the legitimacy of any of his past-due debts, nor documented proof to 
substantiate any basis of dispute. None of the above mitigating conditions have been 
fully established by the record evidence. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his choices to incur substantial educational debt and not repay it. 
There is insufficient evidence of rehabilitation and the potential for pressure, 
exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. Overall, the evidence creates significant 
doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He 
failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline 
for financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
                                        
         
 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
