                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )     ISCR  Case No.  17-02056          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel
                    For Applicant: Pro se                    
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns regarding her financial considerations. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On June 30, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility
to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated
substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that
were in effect for the issuance of the SOR would not affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 27, 2017, and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to me on August 22, 2017, and scheduled for hearing on September
28, 2017. The Government’s case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5). Applicant relied on
one witness (herself) and two exhibits. (AEs A-B) The transcript was received on October  
5,  2017.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant asked to keep the record open to permit
her the opportunity to supplement the record with her response to the default judgment
entered against her by SOR creditor ¶ 1.b. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted
14 days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded two days to
respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant furnished a cover letter explaining the
origins of the default judgment entered in 2008 against her by SOR creditor ¶ 1.b, along
with an explanatory letter from her attorney confirming the absence of any documented
renewal of the judgment. Applicant’s submissions were admitted without objection as AEs
C-D. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated one delinquent debtin the
amount of $1,454 and incurred an adverse judgment against her in 2008 in the amount of
$22,263. Allegedly, these debts remain outstanding.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations covered by SOR ¶
1.a, with explanations. She claimed she was in contact with SOR creditor ¶ 1.a to
determine how to settle the account in full. Addressing the allegations covered by SOR ¶
1.b, Applicant denied the allegations, with explanations. She claimed she overpaid the 
SOR ¶ 1.b creditor for plumbing costs by the amount of $9,183.75. She further claimed
that any amount due on the judgment that does not relate to plumbing is fraudulent. And
she claimed she is working with an attorney to further rectify the situation.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 67-year-old quality assurance engineer for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
2
Background
Applicant married in October 1969 and divorced in January 1970. (GEs 1-2) She
remarried in May 1978 and divorced in May 1989. She has no children from either
marriage. (GEs 1-2) She earned an associate’s degree in quality assurance in May 2003
and a bachelor’s degree in organizational behavior in December 2004. (GEs 1-2) Also,
she earned an esthetician’s license in 2003. (GEs 1-2) Applicant reported no military
service.
Applicant has worked for her current employer since February 2016. Between
August 2008 and February 2016, she was employed by the same defense contractor in
neighboring states. Applicant worked for another defense contractor between October
2006 and August 2008, and for non-defense contractors in various jobs between
December 2005 and October 2006. (GEs 1-2)
Applicant’s finances
In 2003, Applicant (aided by the sale of a home in another state) opened a
personal business devoted to skin care. (GE 2; Tr. 32-33, 42) Having previously been laid
off by her previous employer, the income she earned from her personal business was her
only source of revenue. (GEs 1-2) She leased office space from creditor ¶ 1.b.  As part of
her leasing contract, she agreed to have the owner install sinks and minor build-outs to
her space at a cost of $8,475. (GE 2; Tr. 29, 34-40) Because this initial lease agreement
with accompanying addendums is not in evidence, verification of the terms of the lease
cannot be made. (Tr. 39)
In July 2004, Applicant signed a promissory note for $22,203, to be repaid by July
2014. (GE 2; Tr. 40) Applicant initially disputed the amount called for in the note as
excessive for the work she orally agreed to be performed by the owner. When the owner
afforded her the option of either signing the note for $22,203 or vacating the space (GEs
2 and 5), she signed the note proffered to her for $22,203. (GEs 2 and 5) While she
characterized the note as adhesive and claimed the promissory note afforded her little
choice, she committed herself to honor the terms of the note she signed. (GEs 2-5; Tr.
39-42) The note summarized Applicant’s agreed monthly lease payment terms as follows:
$185 covering rent, taxes, and utilities, and an additional $22,062 for agreed extras for a
total of $23,913 (less the credited rental payment of $1,650 for the month of July 2004).
(GE 5)
 Applicant continued to make the agreed monthly payments for several years. After
unsuccessful efforts to sell her business, she closed the business in 2005 without any
residual market value or remaining lease obligations from the successor landlord. (GE 2;
Tr. 31, 49) Still, after closing her business, she continued to make her lease payments to
her original landlord. All told, between July 2004 and June 2007, she made aggregate
lease payments of $9,183 to her old landlord under the terms of her promissory note,
leaving around $14,000 owing on the note. (GEs 2 and 5 and AE A; Tr. 44-47) 
3
On the advice of her lawyer, Applicant ceased making payments on the lessor’s
promissory note in June 2007. (GE 2; Tr. 41) Her attorney, in turn. wrote to the landlord (a
lawyer) in an effort to try to settle Applicant’s dispute over the terms of the promissory
note. (Tr. 43) When her attorney encountered resistance from the landlord’s own
attorney, she hired another attorney to try and resolve the dispute, but he, too, was
unsuccessful in resolving Applicant’s dispute with the creditor’s judgment claim.  (GE 2;
Tr. 43) 
In late 2008, creditor 1.b filed a civil suit seeking recovery of the full $22,203
covered in the 2004 promissory note. (GEs 2 and 5 ) Without any verifiable service on
Applicant, the landlord obtained a default judgment against Applicant in June 2009 for the
full $22,203 demanded in the complaint, plus interest and costs. (GE 5 and AE A)
Applicant never learned of the default judgment until 2012, when she noted its entry in her
obtained credit report. (GE 2; Tr. 30, 44-45) After learning of the judgment’s existence,
she never took any action to set aside the judgment, and the judgment continued to be
fully enforceable for the ensuing seven years. (GEs 2 and 5; Tr. 45-46)
Between 2010 and 2014, SOR creditor ¶ 1.b recovered $3,836 from Applicant
through court-approved garnishment levies on her wages, leaving over $9,000 on the
judgment unsatisfied. (GEs 2 and 5) When creditor ¶ 1.b did not renew its default
judgment in accordance with the legal requirements of the state where the judgment was
entered, the state’s statute of limitations on judgment registration and enforcement
expired, and the judgment is no longer an enforceable instrument.  (AEs B an C) Based
on the legal findings of Applicant’s retained attorney, Applicant is no longer obligated to
satisfy the remaining payment terms (approximating $9,000) of creditor ¶1.b’s June 2009
default judgment. (AE C) 
Besides the SOR creditor ¶ 1.b judgment debt, Applicant accumulated a $1,454
delinquent debt owed to SOR creditor ¶1.a. This debt is reported in Applicant’s credit
reports as a consumer account she opened in November 2002 and defaulted in May
2007. (GEs 2-4) Applicant characterized this debt as business-related, and she attributed
its origins to her closing of her business in 2006 and the lack of financial resources to
cover the debt after she shuttered her business.( GE 2) Applicant has since settled the
SOR ¶ 1.a debt with a payment in full of $1,454. Creditor ¶ 1.a credited Applicant with
making a last payment of $375 in September 2017 in accordance with the payment
agreement she had with the creditor. (AE A; Tr. 48) 
Other debts that became past due after Applicant closed her business in 2006
(albeit  not covered in the SOR) have since been paid in full by Applicant. (GEs 3-4; Tr.
51-53) After resolving her old delinquent debts, she was able to buy another house in
2016 for around $90,000  (Tr. 53-54) Her current debts include a mortgage on the house
she recently purchased, a car payment, and six credit cards payments, all of which she
assures are in current status. (GEs 3-4; Tr. 56-58) Applicant’s assurances are credible
and accepted.
4
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
5
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s incurring a default judgment in
2009 in the amount of $22,203 and his incurring a delinquent $1,475 consumer debt.
Applicant’s incurring of a business-related default judgment and delinquent consumer
debt warrant the application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts;” 19 (b), “unwillingness to satisfy
debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
6
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to her listed consumer debt (SOR
debt ¶ 1.a) negates the need for any independent proof. See McCormick on Evidence, §
262 (6th ed. 2006). Applicant’s delinquent consumer debt is fully documented in her
credit reports and create some initial judgment issues. See ISCR Case No. 03-01059 at
3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles her to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving debt
delinquencies.  
Extenuating circumstances (i.e., unemployment and business-related issues
involving a disputed judgment) have accounted for a good deal of Applicant’s financial
problems over the course of the past 13 years. MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” partially 
applies to Applicant’s situation.
Since 2016, Applicant has made  considerable progress in addressing her still
outstanding judgment and consumer debts. Both her judgment debt and single
consumer debt isted in the SOR have either been eliminated or paid in full.
Applicant’s responsible efforts in addressing her debts with the limited resources
available to her while struggling to keep her business afloat amidst an ongoing rental
dispute with her landlord enable her to be credited with meeting the acting responsibly
under the circumstances prong of MC ¶ 20(b). See ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005).
Both debts are linked to her closed business. After paying over $9,000 towards
satisfaction of the disputed landlord’s invoice for unit upgrades associated with her
business and being subjected to garnishment by the judgment creditor for an additional
$3,836, the judgment creditor let his judgment expire without renewing it. Additional
monies owed under the expired judgment are no longer enforceable.
Applicant’s corrective steps taken to resolve her disputed judgment debt and 
consumer debt through a combination of payments and garnishment enable her to avail
herself of the mitigation benefits of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated and is adhering
to a  good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” And by
consistently disputing the bona fides of the promissory note she signed with SOR ¶ 1.b, 
Applicant may avail herself of the benefits of  MC ¶ 20(e), “the individual has a
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
7
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)
(internal citations omitted) In Applicant’s case, her demonstrated responsible efforts in
addressing her business-related judgment debt and lone consumer debt enable
favorable findings and conclusions to be reached with respect to security concerns
raised in connection with  her security clearance application.
Whole-Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is favorable to Applicant. She has shown sufficient 
progress to date in addressing her business-related judgment debt and consumer debt
to merit positive overall credit. The contributions she is credited with making to her are
fully noted. Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing her finances reflect
restored financial responsibility and good judgment and resolve questions about her
trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18.
Conclusions are warranted that Applicant’s finances are sufficiently stabilized at
this time to meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance. 
Favorable conclusions are entered with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b of the SOR. Eligibility to hold a security clearance under the
facts and circumstances of this case  is consistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
     GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b                 For Applicant            
   
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to hold a
security clearance. Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
9
  
10
