1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------  )  ADP Case No. 17-01604 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
public trust position. Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the trustworthiness concern stemming from her problematic financial condition. 
Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on December 14, 2015. On May 26, 2017, after reviewing the application 
and the information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent Applicant a 
statement of reasons (SOR), detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F for 
financial considerations.1 It detailed the factual reasons for the action under the guideline 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In addition, Security 
Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudication Guidelines (AG), effective within the 
Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. The AG were published in the Federal Register and 
codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2016). In this case, the SOR was issued under Adjudicative 
Guidelines effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006. My decision and formal findings 
under the revised Guideline F would not be different under the 2006 Guidelines.  
 
2 
 
known as Guideline F for financial considerations.  Applicant answered the SOR on July 
11, 2017, and requested a decision based on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On July 26, 2017, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant and material 
information (FORM).2  Included in the FORM were six items of evidence, which are 
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. GE 1 through 3, 5 and 6 are admitted 
into evidence. GE 4 is discussed below. The FORM was mailed to Applicant on July 27, 
2017, and Applicant received it on August 7, 2017. Applicant responded to the FORM on 
September 28, 2017.  She submitted one document, which I marked as Applicant’s 
Exhibit A (AE A), and it was admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on December 7, 2017.  
 
On December 14, 2017, I reopened the record sua sponte until close of business 
December 22, 2017, to allow Applicant (1) to review the revised AG effective June 8, 
2017, and (2) to supplement the record as to the status of the SOR debts. Applicant 
responded via email on December 22, 2017, and submitted the following four documents, 
which are marked as AE B through AE E and are admitted into evidence without objection:  
 
AE B - Letter from Creditor B to Applicant dated July 6, 2017; 
AE C - Letter from Creditor C to Applicant dated July 6, 2017; 
AE D - Letter from Creditor D to Applicant dated October 19, 2017; and 
AE E - Letter from Creditor E to Applicant dated July 6, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 The FORM includes GE 4, which is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing 
Applicant’s interview that took place during the December 2016 background investigation. 
The ROI is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.3 Department 
Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not 
authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the authentication 
requirement. Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant 
that the summary was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver 
of the authentication requirement. The footnote is prominently prefaced with a bolded, 
upper-case notice to Applicant and flagging for Applicant the importance of the footnote, 
which then explains the concepts of authentication and waiver. In a case such as this, 
where Applicant has responded to the FORM, it is fair to conclude that Applicant read the 
footnote, understood it, and chose not to object to GE 4. GE 4 is, therefore, admitted into 
evidence.   
 
                                                          
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process. Judge Ra’anan raises a number of pertinent questions 
about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is 38 years old, married, and has two daughters (ages 19 and 16) and 
a stepdaughter (age 23). She earned her Bachelor’s degree in 2013 and has worked at 
a Defense Department healthcare provider since April 2016. Applicant was unemployed 
for about one year, while she cared for her ailing father (from March 2015 to the date of 
her security clearance application – December 2015). She left a full-time job to care for 
her father. She also experienced brief periods of unemployment in 2012, 2010, and 2008.4 
  
  The SOR alleged nine delinquent debts totaling more than $36,000.5 In her answer 
to the SOR, Applicant provided documentation that she has resolved three SOR debts 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.f, and 1.g).6 Applicant submitted a document showing that she has a 
reasonable basis to dispute SOR ¶ 1.i.7 SOR debt ¶ 1.a is a charged off auto loan for 
$20,925. With her answer, Applicant documented that the auto was voluntarily 
repossessed, thus reducing the deficiency to $13,896, which she will begin paying 
monthly ($300) in January 2018.8 
 
 In her response to the reopened record, Applicant documented that she has 
resolved SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.h.9 In sum, Applicant has addressed each of the 
SOR debts.  
 
 The “Dates of Last Activity” on credit reports are good indicators of when an 
account first went delinquent.10 The delinquency indicators for SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.h 
range from April 2015 to February 2016.11 This is consistent with Applicant leaving her 
full-time job (and thus losing her income) in March 2015 to care for her father.  
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
                                                          
4 GE 3 and 4.  
 
5 GE 1.  
 
6 GE 2, enclosures 2, 5, and AE A.  
 
7 GE 2, enclosure 6. 
  
8 GE 2, enclosure 1.  
 
9 AE B through AE E. See also GE 5, p. 8; GE 6, p. 2 (pertaining to SOR ¶ 1.h).  
 
10 For a collection account, the indicator is the date when the account was assigned or reported. For a 
judgment, the relevant date is when it was filed (although the delinquency had to precede the filing).   
 
11 GE 5.  
 
4 
 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline F – Financial  
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,12 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.13 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
                                                          
12 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
13 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The record shows that Applicant gave up her full-time job in March 2015 to care 
for her ailing father. In doing so, she lost her employment income for almost a year. And 
the evidence is clear that her delinquent debts were caused by that loss of income. I 
conclude that those were circumstances largely beyond her control under AG ¶ 20(b). 
The next question under AG ¶ 20(b) is whether she acted responsibly to address her 
indebtedness under those circumstances.  
 
 Individuals applying for a position of public trust are not required to be debt free.  
Nor are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
SOR debts first. They are, however, expected to present evidence to mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns raised by their delinquent debts.14 That is, an applicant is 
required to demonstrate that he or she has “established a plan to resolve his [or her] 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case No. 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
6 
 
financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.”15 In this case, 
Applicant has addressed responsibly each of the SOR debts, reducing her SOR 
indebtedness from about $36,000 to $13,896, the amount of the deficiency of her auto 
loan, which  she will begin defraying beginning in January 2018. AG ¶ 20(b) applies fully, 
as do AG ¶¶ 20(d) and (e).   
   
The record does not create doubt about Applicant’s trustworthiness, good 
judgment, and ability to protect sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also considered the “whole-person” concept.16 
Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant satisfied her ultimate burden of persuasion to show 
that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant her eligibility for 
access to sensitive information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:           For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas  
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 14-00504 at 3 (Aug. 
4, 2014). 
  
16 AG ¶¶ 2(a) and (d)(1)-(9).  
