 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01479 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred more than $28,000 in delinquent debt over the past six years, 
most of which he has been unable or unwilling to repay. He failed to demonstrate a 
workable plan to resolve his financial issues or progress toward implementing one. 
Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the testimony, 
pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On March 24, 2016, Applicant completed and signed his security clearance 
application (SCA). On June 2, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 
20, 1960; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 
 
 
 
 
2 
2006 AGs). The SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.1   
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 26, 2017 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on October 16, 2017. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on October 16, 2017, setting the video teleconference (VTC) hearing 
for October 31, 2017. On that date, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5 into evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified, but offered no documents into evidence during the hearing. I granted 
Applicant’s request to leave the record open until December 1, 2017, to permit 
submission of additional evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
November 7, 2017. Applicant submitted documentary exhibits on November 29, 2017, 
which were marked Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, and admitted without objection.  
 
                                          Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions to all of the SOR allegations, (¶¶ 1.a through 1.f), with explanations 
provided, I make the following findings of fact: Applicant is 39 years old, currently 
employed as a guard by a federal DoD contractor on a call-in basis since April 2013. His 
employer has requested he obtain a DoD security clearance. He is expected to be hired 
on a full-time basis during the summer of 2018, at which time a current guard plans to 
retire. Applicant has attended some college courses, but did not earn a degree. He was 
married from 2003 to 2011, and he was a military dependent during the majority of his 
marriage. He received alimony from his ex-spouse at approximately $500 per month for 
one year after their divorce. He is currently engaged to his fiancee’ who works full time. 
He testified that she pays for the majority of their living expenses. (Answer; Tr. 21-24) 
 
 Applicant admitted that he owed all six of the delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR. These debts ranged from $133 to $10,180 and totaled $28,087. They became 
delinquent between 2011 and 2016. Their existence is confirmed by the record credit 
reports. Applicant paid the smallest debt in full for $133 (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d). He also 
paid $20 toward the largest debt (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a), and paid $20 toward a credit-
card debt (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b), in June 2017. He paid $110 for another credit-card 
debt (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c), in July 2017. He paid $20 toward a credit-card debt that 
resulted in a judgment (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e), in June 2017. He was not certain, but he 
also believed he made a $20 payment towards a collection account (alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.f), in the same time frame. This reduced his total outstanding delinquent debt to 
$27,764. Applicant stated that the circumstances beyond his control that led to these 
debts began after his divorce in 2011, lost jobs, moving, and not holding full-time 
employment for a long period of time. He testified that he cannot find another part-time 
job that will not interfere with his on-call status at his current employment. His last full- 
                                            
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
3 
time employment was in 2015. He earned a total of approximately $3,000 for tax year 
2016. He stated his intention was to repay all of his creditors once he is hired full-time in 
the summer of 2018. (Answer; GE 2 through 5; Tr. 21, 32-37.) 
 
 Applicant provided no budget information from which to predict his future 
solvency, or his ability to make payments toward his delinquent debts. He did not 
provide any proof of financial counseling. He did, however, offer evidence (AE A and B) 
to support findings concerning his professionalism and excellent work ethic from two 
former co-workers. In addition, Applicant’s testimony was forthright and credible. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
 
 
 
 
4 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for 
access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds…. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant incurred six delinquent debts, totaling more than $28,000, over the past 
six years. He resolved only the smallest debt, and he has made minimal payments 
toward the five remaining debts. More than $27,000 in delinquent debt remains, for 
which he demonstrated neither progress toward resolution nor a basis for dispute. 
These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and 
shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate the resulting security concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s admitted financial difficulties:  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant continues to owe more than $27,000 to numerous creditors for debts 
incurred since his divorce in 2011. Applicant resolved the smallest of SOR-alleged 
debts, and despite one initial payment, demonstrated no effort to address any of the 
remaining delinquencies. There is no evidence to show he has completed financial 
counseling. He did not demonstrate a legitimate basis to dispute his responsibility for 
any of these debts. Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish sufficient mitigation of 
security concerns arising from his financial irresponsibility under any of these 
conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
 
 
 
6 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his decisions that led to substantial debt he has been unable or 
unwilling to repay. He continues to owe more than $27,000 in delinquent debt that he 
accumulated over the past six years and either could not, or chose not to, repay. 
Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s trustworthiness, 
reliability, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
                                        
         
 
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
