KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2003,.  He filed again for
Chapter 7 protection in June 2017, and he claimed that all of his SOR debts were addressed in
the petition.  His bankruptcy filing reveals a $60,000 priority claim in favor of the IRS for back
taxes.  He also owed money to his state for back taxes, which he paid off through garnishment. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-00303.a1
DATE: 01/29/2018
DATE: January 29, 2018
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-00303
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
8, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On November 2, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has bachelor’s and master’s degrees and is working on a second bachelor’s.  He
has been employed as a Federal contractor since late 2015.  Applicant’s SOR lists numerous
delinquent debts. Applicant testified, and the Judge found, that he had experienced periods of
unemployment, which contributed to his financial difficulties.  Applicant stated that he had been a
victim of identity theft, and his debts were also affected by medical expenses.
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2003, although he testified that his
debts were not discharged.  He filed again for Chapter 7 protection in June 2017, and he claimed that
all of his SOR debts were addressed in the petition.  Applicant’s delinquent debts include medical
expenses, a broken apartment lease, telecommunication services, tuition expenses, etc.  His
bankruptcy filing reveals a $60,000 priority claim in favor of the IRS for back taxes.  He also owed
money to his state for back taxes, which he paid off through garnishment.  He hired a tax relief firm
to assist him in resolving his debt with the IRS.  He states that he has submitted an offer in
compromise and is awaiting a response from the IRS.
Applicant has not had financial counseling but intends to receive it in the future.  He has less
than $5,000 in savings and no investments.  In late 2016, he loaned his girlfriend about $6,000 and
she has paid back about $4,800.  He traveled to Australia in the summer of 2014, and his girlfriend
paid all of the expenses.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted that, as of the date of the hearing, Applicant’s debts had not been discharged
in bankruptcy.  She cited to evidence that Applicant had paid some of his debts, although these were
not alleged in the SOR.  She also took into account circumstances that were outside Applicant’s
control, such as his unemployment and medical expenses.  The Judge cited to Applicant’s claims
to have been a victim of identity theft, acknowledging that he had submitted disputes to the credit
bureaus.  However, she also noted that Applicant had not filed a police report upon discovery of the
2
purported theft.  Although she addressed some of Applicant’s debts in his favor, the Judge concluded
that he had not provided evidence that others had been resolved.  Although Applicant’s bankruptcy
petition is a legal means of resolving debts, she noted that such a procedure is not equivalent to
actually paying debts when due.
In the whole person analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s bankruptcy petition, which, she
stated, will likely provide him with debt relief.  She stated that some of Applicant’s financial
decisions raise questions about his ability to manage his finances and that Applicant has not
demonstrated a track record of financial reliability.  
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge did not give proper consideration to his having paid many
of his debts.  He cites to his unemployment and his medical problems, which were beyond his
control.  He also cites to evidence that he has hired a firm to assist him in resolving his tax debt.  He
notes that he has never gotten into trouble with the law and that he is going back to school to
improve his job skills.  He states that he has taken a financial course, contrary to the Judge’s finding. 
He argues that without a clearance he will not be able to continue his employment.
We have considered Applicant’s brief in light of the record evidence as a whole.  The Judge
made findings about the things that Applicant has cited in his brief.  His argument consists in
essence of a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence.  He has not rebutted the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record, nor has he shown that the
Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 17-00257 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2017).  We note Applicant’s argument that his
continued employment is dependent on his receiving a clearance.  However, the Directive does not
permit us to consider the impact that an unfavorable decision might have upon an applicant.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-01787 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 22, 2017).  Applicant claims that he has received
financial counseling.  The record does not contain evidence that he has received counseling,
although that could be inferred from his ongoing bankruptcy procedure.  Even if the Judge erred,
however, it did not likely affect the outcome of the case.  Therefore, any error in this regard in
harmless.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.15-05047 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 8, 2017).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: james E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
