 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-00599 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
      For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire 
                                         For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On April 3, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement).1 Applicant answered the SOR on April 17, 2017, admitting all allegations 
and offering explanations. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge 
from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on 
May 2, 2017. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 12, 2017, setting the hearing for 
June 6, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered two documents, accepted without objection as exhibits 
(Exs.) 1-2. Applicant offered testimony and four exhibits, accepted without objection as 
Exs. A-D. The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 21, 2017, and the record was 
closed. Based on my review of the documentary evidence, testimony given, and the 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Since that time, the AG were amended as 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse, and it is now in effect for any adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. This includes the decision here. 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant’s demeanor, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate drug involvement security 
concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 30 years old, single, and has no children. After graduating from high 
school in May 2005, he began an undergraduate program in August 2005. Due to 
various interruptions, his matriculation was interrupted. These interruptions included 
time off to attend an outpatient treatment program to address his bipolar disorder, as 
well as time away from university due to a romantic breakup. Ultimately, Applicant 
graduated in May 2012, after a challenging period during which he got his life under 
control. (Tr. 22) In August 2015, he earned a master’s degree in aerospace engineering. 
(Tr. 25) After receiving his master’s degree, he continued working for his academic 
department until he began his current position.  
 
Since April 2016, Applicant has been working for the same employer as a 
systems engineer. He is considered a superior employee. His employer has a policy 
against on-duty and off-duty drug use. It conducts random drug testing. Applicant has 
been subject to drug testing only once, when he initially applied for the position.  
 
In April 2002, while in high school, Applicant began using marijuana with school 
friends. By March 2003, he began purchasing the drug for personal and social 
consumption. During high school, he used the drug on a monthly basis. After high 
school through 2005, his marijuana use increased to a few times a week. He did, 
however, refrain from marijuana between January 2010 and January 2011, “mostly 
trying to get [his] head on straight.” (Tr. 28) During that year, he eschewed all drugs and 
alcohol as he focused on his mental and physical health issues.  
 
In January 2011, Applicant started using marijuana about two times a month. 
This increased to two to five times a week in about November 2012, mostly as a way to 
relax from school-related pressures, overcome insomnia, and socialize. (Tr. 31) When 
consumed in social settings, he used it with a “long list of people,” including the circle of 
friends he still maintains. Some of those individuals still use the drug. (Tr. 31-32) 
Applicant finally quit using it a couple of months after he completed his master’s degree 
program in 2015, exerting “a bit of effort” to get out of his habit. (Tr. 34).  
 
Today, Applicant sees the people with whom he formerly used drugs when he 
returns to his home state, about every three of four months.2 (Tr. 32) When he is with 
them and they use marijuana, he will remain in the room or on the premises where they 
use the drug. He has told them that he would prefer them not to use it around him. Thus 
far, he has not pressed the issue because he thought it “wasn’t fair of [him] to ask them 
to discontinue that which” might be legal locally. (Tr. 63) Applicant stresses, however, 
that he is mostly in his current state of residence and he does not want to use drugs 
again going forward. (Tr. 64)  
                                                          
2 Applicant returns to his former home state to continue psychological counseling. He has no friends in his 
current area of residence who use drugs. (Tr. 61) 
 
 
 
 
3 
Also during his collegiate years, and due to the influence of his present circle of 
friends, Applicant bought and socially used MDMA (“Ecstasy”3) and cocaine with 
varying frequency from about May 2009 to September 2015. (Tr. 36) He obtained the 
MDMA and cocaine from the “dark web.” (Tr. 38-41) He used MDMA about 18-20 times 
and the cocaine at least seven times. He was spurred on to user cocaine by a “desire 
for adventure,” as well as basic temptation. (Tr. 45-46) Like Applicant, his friends have 
also ceased using this drug. In about April 2009 and around December 2013, he used 
LSD, purchasing it once. One cohort who shared LSD with Applicant no longer uses the 
drug, and Applicant has no contact with the other individual.  
 
Between April 2008 to July 2013, Applicant used and purchased psilocybin 
mushrooms. The first time he used that drug, he was on vacation abroad with a former 
girlfriend. The other time he used it, he purchased it on the “dark web” and used it with 
some friends, most of whom he no longer has contact. (Tr. 51-52) At least one friend 
with whom he used the drug still uses it. (Tr. 52-53) Indeed, Applicant was with that 
friend on a trip abroad in the past year. There, that acquaintance used psilocybin 
mushrooms. (Tr. 52-55)  
 
Applicant has never received drug counseling and he has never been diagnosed 
as drug dependent. (Tr. 55) He has never been arrested for drug involvement. Applicant 
submitted favorable recommendations from three peers. (Exs. A-C) While Applicant has 
used drugs with all three individuals, two of them still use marijuana. (Tr. 57-58) 
Applicant stresses that while he still associates with those who use illegal drugs, he no 
longer attends music festivals or goes to clubs where they might be available, although 
he still travels to destinations, here and abroad, where drugs are readily available. With 
his answer to the SOR, Applicant submitted a statement of intent not to use drugs in the 
future. Should he violate that commitment, he is willing to lose any security clearance 
granted. (Answer to the SOR; Tr. 60-62) He has been drug-free since October 2015, his 
longest period of abstinence since January 2010 to January 2011.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
3  According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NITA), MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine) is a synthetic drug 
that alters mood and perception (awareness of surrounding objects and conditions). It is clinically similar to both 
stimulants and hallucinogens. It is also known as “Ecstasy” or “Molly.” See https://www.drugabuse.gov/ 
publicvations/drug facts/mdma-ecstasymolly.  
 
4 Applicant clarified that this period was not a conscious effort to abstain from drugs permanently. It was 
only a temporary break from illegal drug use while he addressed other issues. (Tr. 69-70) 
 
 
 
 
4 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern for this guideline is set forth in AG ¶ 24, where it is noted 
that the illegal use of a controlled substance, and the use of other substances that can 
cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose, can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. This is because such behavior may lead to physical or psychological 
impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Such use also raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Here, Applicant, now age 30, admitted he purchased and used marijuana and 
other illegal drugs between his early high school years through about October 2015. 
This is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 25(a): any substance misuse, and ¶ 25(c): illegal 
possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. The Government’s 
 
 
 
 
5 
substantial evidence, as provided by Applicant’s admissions, thus raises security 
concerns under Guideline H. Therefore, the burden shifts to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate related security concerns.  
 
Under Guideline H, conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
drug involvement and substance misuse are enumerated. The following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 26 potentially apply to Applicant’s case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions to overcome this problem, 
and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not limited to: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) providing a 
signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse 
is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility.   
 
Applicant’s illegal use of drugs continued from early high school through October 
2015, a little over two years ago. His drug use included a variety of controlled 
substances (ie. marijuana, cocaine, ecstasy, LSD, psilocybin mushrooms) over many 
years, usually while socializing with peers. Applicant still keeps social contact with some 
of these peers. Although he has asked those who still use illegal drugs to refrain from 
their use around him, they have not honored his request. This raises serious questions 
concerning his judgment and his commitment, not just to stay drug-free, but also to 
avoid situations involving illegal drug activity. Consequently, AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has, however, stopped attending public venues and events where 
illegal drugs are freely used. He has also signed a statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. He seems committed to 
remaining drug-free. AG ¶ 26(b)(2)-(3) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, one must evaluate security clearance eligibility 
by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. 
Consideration shall be given to the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
The final determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
 
 
 
6 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and conducted a whole-person 
analysis based on the record. In addition to Applicant’s past drug involvement, I 
considered his life, past and present, and candor at the hearing. 
 
Applicant is a single, 30-year-old systems engineer who has worked for the same 
employer since April 2016, about a year after earning a master’s degree in his field, and 
a short period of post-graduate employment in his academic department. His 
matriculation from high school through college was protracted, due to multiple problems. 
He has since learned to keep his personal obstacles and issues at bay, and he is 
capable of superior work.   
 
While in high school in 2002, Applicant began using marijuana with school peers. 
By March 2003, he began purchasing the drug for personal and social consumption. He 
refrained from marijuana use between January 2010 and January 2011 while trying to 
get other personal issues resolved. From there, he also used cocaine, Ecstasy, LSD, 
and psilocybin mushrooms at various times and for varying frequencies. He became 
drug-free in October 2015.   
 
Applicant has made genuine strides to make changes in his life and adapt to a 
drug-free lifestyle after abusing controlled substances for a decade. He has relocated 
away from his drug using peers and former venues. He is starting a successful career in 
his chosen field. He has proven his ability to adapt and comport his behavior by making 
several adjustments that have improved his life, including laudable success keeping his 
psychological issues under control.  
 
Two factors, however, sustain security concerns. First, Applicant has been drug-
free since October 2015, after a decade of illegal drug use. This is particularly 
worrisome given the assortment of drugs used and his access of such substances from 
the “dark web.” Less than three years of abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate a firm 
commitment to remaining drug-free. It is also deficient for demonstrating a commitment 
to avoiding contact with people and places who break Federal law by using drugs.  
 
Second, Applicant continues to socialize with individuals with whom he once 
used illegal drugs. He encounters such friends every three or four months when he 
returns to his past state of residence and, in one or more occasions, while on trips 
abroad with such individuals. Those peers who still use illegal drugs have not respected 
Applicant’s request that they refrain from drug use in his presence. In response, 
Applicant has failed to extricate himself from their presence when they use controlled 
substances. This most recently occurred within the past year while abroad with one of 
his former school peers. Such circumstances not only present temptation, but, more 
importantly, demonstrate poor judgment.  In light of these factors, I find that insufficient 
time has passed for Applicant to demonstrate the behavior sufficient to mitigate drug 
involvement and substance misuse security concerns. Consequently, I conclude drug 
involvement and substance misuse security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
