 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00594 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 26, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 11, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On March 23, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 12, 2017.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.)  On 
June 23, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 7 Items, was mailed 
to Applicant on June 26, 2017, and received by him on July 6, 2017. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant failed to 
 
2 
 
respond to the FORM. Applicant did not object to Items 1 through 7, and they are 
admitted into evidence.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 38 years old. He is employed with a defense contractor as an 
Installer.   He is applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.  
Applicant began working for his current employer in August 2012.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified five delinquent debts totaling in excess of $20,000 that consist of a past due 
mortgage account and delinquent consumer accounts.  Applicant admits to each of the 
delinquent accounts listed in in the SOR.  Credit Reports of Applicant dated April 23, 
2013; August 12, 2016; and June 23, 2017; confirm the indebtedness listed in the SOR.  
(Government Exhibits 5, 6, and 7.)      
 
Applicant failed to explain why he has become excessively indebted.  A security 
officer’s report dated August 2, 2016, stated that Applicant missed payments on his 
credit card because his mortgage increases $400 per month, effecting his ability to 
make the credit card payments.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  Despite his long term 
employment, Applicant has continued to have financial problems.  Applicant’s recent 
credit report shows that he paid, settled, or became current on several debts that were 
past due as of his August 2016 credit report.  These creditors are not listed in the SOR.  
He has also settled two of his debts, listed in the SOR.  His most recent credit report 
shows that his delinquent mortgage account had increased to $40,000.  He states that 
he is going through a loan modification concerning his mortgage accounts, but has 
failed to provide any documentation to substantiate such.    
 
 
 
3 
 
The following debts became owing and remain outstanding:  
 
1(a) A delinquent mortgage account is past due in the approximate amount of 
$17,982 with a total balance of $221,112.  This account remains outstanding.    
 
 1(b) A delinquent credit card account owed to CAP ONE was past due in the 
approximate amount of $281 with a total balance of $1,457.  Applicant stated that he 
was currently on a payment plan that was to be paid off within six months.  This debt 
has been settled this debt and it is no longer outstanding.  (Answer to SOR.)     
 
 1(c) A delinquent credit card account owed to CAP ONE was past due in the 
approximate amount of $183 with a total balance owed of $1,089.  Applicant stated that 
he was currently on a payment plan that was to be paid off within six months.  This debt 
has been settled this debt, and it is no longer outstanding.  (Answer to SOR.)   
 
 1(d) A delinquent department store account was charged off in the approximate 
amount of $787.  He stated that he was going to pay it off in two months.  The account 
remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 1(e) A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $222.  He stated that he needed to get more information regarding the debt.  
If it is determined that he owes it, he intends to pay it off within two months.  The 
account remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 The vast majority of Applicant’s delinquent debt resides in his $40,000 past due 
mortgage.  There is no documentation in the record to show that he has done anything 
to resolve this debt.  Applicant most recent credit report indicates that the two debts 
owed to a bank have been settled for less than what was owed.  The remaining two 
smaller debts in the SOR still remain owing.  It would have been helpful for Applicant to 
provide additional documentation relating to his loan modification or any debt 
repayments plan with his creditors, his current financial state of affairs, as well as any 
budgets in place to show that his finances are now in order.  The record is void of this 
mitigation.     
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
 
4 
 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, 
I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
5 
 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant is excessively indebted to the creditors listed in the SOR.  He has 
settled two of his credit card debts for less than what was owed.  There is no other 
evidence in the record to prove that he has done anything to resolve the other 
delinquent debts.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant has failed to explain why he became excessively indebted.  If the 
increased mortgage account is the reason he cannot pay his debts, it was not beyond 
his control based upon the fact that he voluntarily entered into the mortgage agreement.  
Under the particular circumstances here, Applicant has failed to establish that he acted 
reasonably or responsibly with respect to his debts.  Applicant has not resolved the 
majority of his delinquent debt nor has he demonstrated that future financial problems 
are unlikely.  It has not been demonstrated that his current financial problems are under 
control.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  Other than his mortgage adjustment, 
Applicant has provided no information to explain what if anything has negatively 
impacted his financial situation.  Applicant has not demonstrated that he is financially 
responsible.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
