 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     ----------------------------------- ) 
     aka ----------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-02676 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for access to classified information. The evidence is sufficient to mitigate the 
security concern based on his family ties to Iraq, the country of his birth, from which he 
fled. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on November 14, 2016.1 This document is commonly known 
as a security clearance application. Thereafter, on September 15, 2017, after reviewing 
the application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 3.  
 
 
2 
 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline B for foreign influence based on 
his family ties to Iraq.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 26, 2017. He admitted the SOR 
allegations and explained the circumstances surrounding his family ties to Iraq. He 
requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. He did not submit 
supporting documentation with his answer.       
 
On October 13, 2017, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, some of 
which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, who received it on October 23, 2017. He made a timely reply consisting of 
several pages of documentation concerning his U.S. family members, which are 
admitted without objections as Exhibits A through K. The case was assigned to me on 
January 16, 2018. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
The FORM includes Exhibit 6, which is a report of investigation (ROI) 
summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the 2016 background 
investigation. The ROI is not authenticated by a witness, as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of 
the Directive.2 Likewise, Section 5(a) of Executive Order 10865 prohibits receipt and 
consideration of “investigative reports” without authenticating witnesses. The Directive 
provides no exception to the authentication requirement. Indeed, the authentication 
requirement is the exception to the general rule that prohibits consideration of an ROI. 
Accordingly, given the lack of authentication, I have not considered the ROI in reaching 
my decision.  
 
I also note that Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising 
Applicant that the ROI was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a 
“waiver” of the authentication requirement. It is my view that Department Counsel is 
misusing the term waiver,3 and this misuse may confuse an applicant. In the law of 
evidence, errors are preserved by timely objections, and relief on appeal is granted from 
a preserved error unless it is harmless (the harmless-error doctrine). Waiver is the 
voluntary relinquishment or abandonment of a legal right or advantage. With a waiver, 
there is no error to correct on appeal and no relief to grant. On the other hand, failure to 
                                                          
2 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.).  
 
3 See United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725 (1993) (the Supreme Court distinguishes between forfeiture 
and waiver).  
 
 
3 
 
make a timely objection usually forfeits any error, and relief on appeal is appropriate 
from a forfeited error only upon a showing that the error was plain, obvious, and 
prejudicial (the plain-error doctrine). This brief discussion highlights the complexity 
involved in expecting a layman applicant to understand the concepts of authentication, 
waiver, forfeiture, and admissibility, as those concepts are used in deciding a security 
clearance case based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. This is especially a 
concern here since Applicant did not receive his formal education in the United States 
and English is not his native language.  
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his job 
as an interpreter in support of the U.S. armed forces. His formal education includes 
enrollment in a local community college since 2015. A native of Iraq, he was born in a 
city of Iraqi Kurdistan. He is married, and he and his wife had four children, two born in 
Iraq and two born in the United States. His eldest minor child, a daughter, passed away 
due to a serious medical condition in 2015.4 His wife and three minor children are U.S. 
citizens by birth or naturalization, and they reside in the United States.5 
 
During 1999-2007, Applicant was the owner of a small business in a major city in 
northern Iraq. In 2007, he closed the business due to terrorism.6 He was threatened in 
an attempt to extort money and he refused to pay. After that, the terrorists attacked 
(with gunfire) Applicant while he was traveling in a car, resulting in the death of his sister    
and a badly injured daughter. The terrorists were run off by Iraqi police after a firefight. 
He, along with his wife and two minor children, left Iraq in 2008 and fled to Turkey 
where they sought protection from the United Nations. About a year later, he and his 
family were granted permission to immigrate to the United States as refugees. 
 
Applicant has been employed steadily since his arrival in the United States.7 He 
worked as a role player for a federal contractor at a U.S. military installation during 
2010-2011. He went through counterintelligence screening for that employment, and he 
disclosed the terrorism attack discussed above.8 He was then self-employed as the 
manager of a small retail business during 2011-2014. He was then employed as the 
manager of a small retail business during 2014-2015. He has since worked as an Uber 
driver. After becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2016, he obtained his current 
position with a federal contractor in November 2016. Presumably, if granted a 
clearance, he will be required to live and work in Iraq in support of the U.S. armed 
forces, a task which he is more than willing to do, describing it as an opportunity to give 
                                                          
4 Exhibit E.   
 
5 Exhibits A-K.  
 
6 Exhibit 4.  
 
7 Exhibit 3. 
 
8 Exhibit 4.  
 
 
4 
 
back to the United States in appreciation for his immigration and resettlement of his 
family here.9  
 
As alleged in the SOR and admitted in his answer, Applicant has several family 
members who are citizens of and residents in Iraq. His mother, two brothers, a sister, 
and mother-in-law are all present in Iraq. His family live in a city of Iraqi Kurdistan. He is 
in contact with his elderly mother through his brothers to inquire about her well-being, 
and he provides some financial assistance to her. He has less contact with his sister. 
His mother-in-law lives in the same major city in northern Iraq in which he lived and ran 
his small business during 1999-2007. His wife is in regular contact with her mother by 
telephone.  
 
Administrative or official notice is taken of certain facts about Iraq as described in 
Department Counsel’s written request.10 The situation in Iraq is well known within the 
Defense Department and it is unnecessary to discuss those facts at great length here. 
In general, the overall security situation in Iraq is fluid and at times quite unstable if not 
deadly after many years of war. The risk of terrorism remains high (for example, a 
double-suicide bombing in central Baghdad in January 2018 killed dozens of people).  
 
Law and Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.11 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.12 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”13 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.14 The Appeal Board has 
                                                          
9 Answer to SOR.  
 
10 Exhibit 5.  
 
11 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
12 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
13 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
14 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.15 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.16 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.17 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.18 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.19 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.20 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.21 
  
Discussion 
 
 The gravamen of the SOR under Guideline B is whether Applicant’s family ties to 
Iraq should disqualify him from access to classified information. Under Guideline B for 
foreign influence,22 the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into doubt 
due to foreign contacts and interests. The overall concern is: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted). 
 
16 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
17 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
19 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
20 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
21 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
22 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).  
 
 
6 
 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.23 
  
 Given the evidence of Applicant’s family ties to Iraq, I have considered the 
following disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B as most pertinent: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions of activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country, is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, 
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor or the U.S. interest.  
 
Based on U.S. concerns about the risk of terrorism, Iraq meets the heightened-risk 
standard in AG ¶ 7(a). This conclusion is based on the facts set forth in Department 
Counsel’s written request for administrative notice.24 
 
 Applicant’s family ties to Iraq are sufficient to raise a concern under Guideline B. 
Applicant’s mother, siblings, and mother-in-law are citizen-residents of Iraq. It is 
presumed that he or his wife or both have feelings of affection or obligation or both 
toward those family members. With that said, Applicant has the signs of being a mature 
and responsible person. He has lived and worked in the United States since shortly 
after his arrival here in 2009.  He is now a 38-year-old husband and father of three 
minor children. He is seeking to support his family by working as an interpreter in 
support of the U.S. armed forces in Iraq, which is a high-risk endeavour. He’s willing to 
                                                          
23 AG ¶ 6.  
 
24 Exhibit 5. 
 
 
7 
 
take that risk not only for his own financial interest, but also as a way of giving back to 
his adopted country. Although he has several close family members in Iraq, he also has 
strong family ties to the United States consisting of his spouse and three minor children, 
two of whom are native-born U.S. citizens. His ties or contacts with his family in Iraq are 
about what you would expect given his age, financial means, and family circumstances. 
There is nothing out of the ordinary about his family ties to Iraq.  
 
 This process is not a zero-risk program, because nearly every applicant presents 
some risk or concern. Many security clearance cases come down to balancing that risk 
or concern. Here, Applicant has family ties to Iraq. Such circumstances should not be 
dismissed or overlooked as fanciful or unrealistic, especially in light of the matters the 
United States views of concern in Iraq. Indeed, Applicant was the victim of a terrorist 
attack in Iraq in 2007, which was the motivation for him to flee Iraq for a better life for his 
family. Nevertheless, on balance, I am satisfied that the strength of his ties to the United 
States outweigh and overcome his ties to Iraq. This is not a case of “divided allegiance” 
with an applicant who has one foot in each country. In contrary, Applicant appears to 
have both feet planted here in the United States and his ties to the United States will 
grow stronger over time. Viewing the record evidence as a whole, Applicant can be 
expected to resolve any potential concern or potential conflict of interests in favor of the 
U.S. interest.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to 
classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
