 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00531 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 8, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) A security investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) interviewed Applicant on August 2, 2016. (Item 4, 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI)) On February 28, 2017, Applicant responded to 
interrogatories sent to him by the Department of Defense (DOD). The interrogatories 
included a request for information to clarify facts about Applicant, and a copy of the 
summary of the PSI. (Item 4) After reviewing the background investigation and 
Applicant’s answers to the interrogatories, DOD could not make the affirmative findings 
required to issue a security clearance. On May 17, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for financial considerations 
under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
 
2 
 
 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 2, 2017. He admitted the two allegations of 
failing to timely file federal and state tax returns for tax years 2011 through 2013. He 
requested that the matter be decided on the written record. (Item 2) Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on August 23, 2017. (Item 5) 
Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on August 30, 2017, and 
he was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant timely responded to the 
FORM on September 29, 2017. Department Counsel had no objection to consideration 
of Applicant’s response to the FORM. (Item 7, dated October 2, 2017) I was assigned 
the case on December 12, 2017. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all covered individuals 
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and 
are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM investigator (Item 4) was not authenticated and could not 
be considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
administrative judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility of 
the PSI summary. Applicant did not raise an objection to consideration of the PSI in his 
respond to the FORM. Without an objection by Applicant, I will consider information in 
the PSI in my decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 59 years old. He completed his studies for a high school diploma in 1976, 
but was not awarded one because he had started taking college level courses. He 
graduated from college and received a bachelor’s degree in 2010. Applicant served on 
active duty in the United States Marine Corps (USMC) from April 1984 to April 2004 
 
3 
 
 
when he retired honorably as a gunnery sergeant (E-7). Applicant married in November 
1984 and he has one adult child.  
 
 Applicant has been eligible for access to classified information since 1986. The 
case file contains no indications of any security issue or violation. Applicant was 
employed by a defense contractor as a calibration technician from July 2004 until 
September 2006. He was employed as a movie theater manager from October 2006 
until July 2011. He was a project manager for another defense contractor from August 
2011 until November 2015. He has been a systems engineer for a defense contractor 
since November 2015. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated March 8, 2016; Item 4, PSI, dated August 
2, 2016, including a DD 214)  
 
 The SOR alleges, and Applicant’s PSI statement and his response to the 
interrogatories confirm, the two financial allegations in the SOR, that Applicant did not 
file federal tax returns for tax years 2011 through 2013 (SOR 1.a), and state tax returns 
for 2011 through 2013 (SOR 1.b)  
 
 Applicant noted his failure to file his state and federal tax returns for tax years 
2011, 2012, and 2013 on his March 8, 2016 e-QIP. He wrote that he was seeking 
assistance from a “tax authority” to complete his tax returns. In the August 2, 2016 PSI, 
Applicant was questioned about his tax returns, and stated that he attempted to 
determine his taxes himself but did not calculate his taxes correctly. He filed tax returns 
for 2010, 2014, and 2015. He planned to file tax returns for 2011, 2012, and 2013 in 
September 2016. He indicated that he had filed his 2015 federal tax return. (Item 3, e-
QIP, dated March 8, 2016; Item 4, PSI, dated August 2, 2016) 
 
 Applicant was sent interrogatories concerning his tax returns on February 22, 
2017. Applicant responded to the interrogatories on April 21, 2017, stating that all of his 
federal and state tax returns have been filed. He included copies of his 2011, 2012, and 
2013 federal and state tax returns that he signed on April 12, 2017, and mailed on April 
19, 2017. (Item 4) The SOR is dated May 23, 2017. (Item 1) Applicant’s SOR response 
is dated the same day and includes as exhibits his state and federal tax returns for 
2011, 2012, and 2013. (Item 2, exhibits 1 through 4 and exhibits 8 through 10) He 
stated that his failure to timely file his 2011 through 2013 federal and state tax returns 
was due to “gross procrastination” and not due “to deception or illegal financial practices 
or tax evasion.” (Item 2, at 2) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor stated that he has known Applicant since November 2015. 
Applicant exhibits good self-control, judgment, and abides by rules and regulations. He 
is reliable and trustworthy, and is always courteous and professional. The supervisor 
has no hesitation assigning him to difficult or critical tasks. Applicant’s integrity and 
efficiency is of the highest caliber. The supervisor saw no reason to doubt Applicant’s 
integrity or dedication. He recommended that Applicant be granted eligibility for access 
to classified information. (Item 2, Exhibit 12) In his annual performance rating, the 
supervisor rated Applicant‘s performance as excellent. (Item 2, Exhibit 13) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
 
5 
 
 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. An individual 
who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18).  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions in his response to the SOR and the interrogatories shows 
his failure to timely file federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2011 to 2013. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the following Financial Considerations Disqualifying 
Conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state tax returns for 2011 to 2013, 
and such failure can exhibit an inability and unwillingness to satisfy debts and meet his 
financial obligations. Once the Government has established the adverse financial issue, 
the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant did not timely file his federal 
and state tax returns for at least three tax years because of gross procrastination. 
Procrastination does not relieve a person from timely filing returns. His lack of action to 
file the returns resulted in his financial problems being ongoing and recent, and not 
incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. Applicant presented no 
evidence that he received financial counseling.  
 
Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. All that is required is that Applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances. Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable 
plan to resolve financial problems, and that he has taken significant action to implement 
that plan. Applicant’s plan must show a systematic method of handling debts, and 
Applicant must establish a meaningful track record of tax filing. A meaningful track 
record of tax filing can be established by evidence of actually filing tax returns. A 
promise to timely file tax returns is not a substitute for a track record of filing returns in a 
timely manner and acting in a financially responsible manner.  
 
Applicant knew when he completed his e-QIP in March 2016 that he had not 
timely filed his federal and state tax returns for 2011 through 2013. He was advised of 
his failure to file again during the PSI in August 2016. The requirement to timely file tax 
returns was reinforced when he received the interrogatories in February 2017. However 
after being advised three times of his failure to file the tax returns, Applicant did not file 
the tax returns until April 12, 2017.  
 
 Failure to timely file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary compliance 
with such rules and systems is essential for protecting classified and sensitive 
information. A person who fails to fulfill his or her legal obligation to timely file tax 
returns does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required 
for a grant of access to classified or sensitive information. Where an applicant may have 
attempted to correct the tax return problem, there must still be careful consideration of 
the applicant’s trustworthiness in view of his longstanding prior behavior evidencing 
irresponsibility by failing to timely file income tax returns. By failing to file three years of 
federal and state tax returns, Applicant did not demonstrate the high degree of good 
 
7 
 
 
judgment and reliability required of persons granted access to classified or sensitive 
information  
 
 Applicant did not provide enough details about what he did to address the tax 
return allegations in the SOR. Tax return filing is a necessity. The fact that he merely 
procrastinated in filing his tax returns does not indicate that the Applicant is acting 
reasonably and reliably. Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to show that 
he worked diligently to resolve the issues that was ongoing for three years. There is 
insufficient evidence to establish why Applicant was unable to make greater progress 
resolving his tax return problem. There is insufficient assurance that his tax problems 
are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. His lack of 
reasonable and responsible actions towards his tax return is a strong indication that he 
will not protect and safeguard classified or sensitive information. Under all these 
circumstances, Applicant failed to mitigate financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered that Applicant 
served 20 years in the Marine Corps and retired as a gunnery sergeant. I considered 
that he has been eligible for access to classified information for over 30 years without 
any issues. I also considered the opinion of Applicant’s supervisor concerning 
Applicant’s performance and that he should be granted access to classified information. 
However, Applicant was a Marine Corps gunnery sergeant. As a Marine and especially 
a gunnery sergeant, procrastination is not a sign of being responsible and exhibiting 
reasonable action. Procrastination is an excuse and not a reason for inaction. Applicant 
did not provide sufficient credible documentary information to establish that he took 
reasonable and responsible action to resolve his tax obligations. Applicant did not 
 
8 
 
 
demonstrate appropriate management of his finances. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. He has not established his suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from his financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
