 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02954 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a long history of illegal drug use. His recent substance misuse 
occurred after he submitted his 2016 security clearance application (SCA) and while the 
application was pending. The drug involvement and substance misuse security 
concerns are not mitigated. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an SCA on September 22, 2016. He was interviewed by a 
government investigator several times in May 2017. After reviewing the information 
gathered during the background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 5, 2017, alleging security concerns under 
Guideline H (drug involvement and substance misuse). Applicant answered the SOR on 
October 17, 2017, and requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.  
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence prompting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
November 13, 2017. Applicant was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the 
FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
submitted a one-paragraph statement in response to the FORM on November 20, 2017. 
The case was assigned to me on January 17, 2018. I admitted and considered all the 
FORM’s proffered evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations (¶¶ 1.a - 1.c). His admissions to the 
SOR are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 1998 and has no additional formal education. He enlisted in the U.S. 
Army National Guard in March 1998, but did not attend the basic course. He received 
an uncharacterized discharge in July 1998. Applicant married in 2006 and divorced in 
2016. However, he and his ex-wife are living together and they intend to set aside the 
divorce. They have three children, ages 11, 9, and 8. 
 
Applicant was employed between September 2006 and March 2010; 
unemployed between March and May 2010; and employed between May 2010 and 
June 2011. He was employed part time between June 2011 and September 2011, and 
employed with a federal contractor between September 2011 and February 2012. His 
current employer and security sponsor, a federal contractor, hired Applicant in February 
2012. He has been working there since. 
 
Applicant disclosed in his 2016 SCA (Section 23 Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug 
Activity) that he illegally used marijuana and cocaine during the preceding seven years. 
He stated he used marijuana between June 1994 and April 2016. He described his use 
as “recreational use. Used once in the past year,” and claimed “I’m not a big user of 
substance.” Applicant disclosed he illegally used cocaine (snorted) between April 2003 
and December 2006. He described his use as “recreational use. Weekend parties in 
that time period.” He stated that he did not intend to use illegal drugs in the future 
because, “I have a family now and do not intend to use.” 
 
Applicant discussed his illegal drug use with a government investigator during his 
May 19, 2017 interview. He told the investigator that he used marijuana approximately 
one time per year from June 1994 to April 2017. He explained he used marijuana in 
April 2017 after his divorce, recreationally to relax and unwind. Applicant stated that he 
illegally used cocaine every 2-3 years from April 2003 to April 2017. Applicant also 
volunteered that he illegally used LSD/Acid twice between February and March 2017. 
(FORM, Item 6) 
 
Applicant claimed that his friends brought the illegal drugs when they visited him 
and they illegally used the drugs at Applicant’s home or at parties. Applicant indicated 
that his parents and siblings are aware of his illegal drug use. During the interview and 
in his response to the FORM, Applicant averred he does not intend to use illegal drugs 
in the future because he does not need the drugs any longer, and those days are now 
 
3 
 
 
behind him. He stated that the most recent illegal drug use happened when he was 
going through his divorce. He acknowledged that any future involvement with illegal 
drugs or misuse would be grounds for revocation of his national security eligibility. 
(Answer to the FORM) 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), 
effective 8 June 2017. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
 
4 
 
 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for the illegal use of drugs:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802.  
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana between June 1994 and April 2017. He illegally 
used cocaine between April 2003 and April 2017. He illegally used LSD/Acid twice 
between February and March 2017. AG ¶ 25 provides disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia. 
 
The record established the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c), 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 26: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
5 
 
 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. In his 2016 SCA, Applicant disclosed 
that he illegally used marijuana approximately once a year between 1994 and 2016, and 
that he used cocaine several times between 2003 and 2016. He stated that he did not 
intend to use illegal drugs in the future because he had a family now. 
 
In his May 2017 interview, Applicant corrected and updated the details of his 
illegal drug use and admitted to further illegal drug use after submitting his September 
2016 SCA. He used marijuana, cocaine, and LSD/Acid on at least two occasions 
between September 2016 and April 2017. 
 
Applicant’s recent use of illegal drugs cast doubts on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations, and suitability to hold a clearance, especially because his recent substance 
misuse occurred after he submitted his 2016 SCA and while the application was 
pending. He promised in his 2016 SCA he would not illegally use drugs again, and he 
broke that promise.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant has a long history of illegal drug use. His recent substance misuse 
occurred after he submitted his 2016 SCA and while the application was pending. The 
drug involvement and substance misuse security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:     Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
