1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-01801 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F, Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F, and he did not provide sufficient 
information to mitigate personal conduct security concerns under Guideline E. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On October 12, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on January 18, 2017. 
(Item 5, Personal Subject Interview (PSI)) After reviewing the results of the OPM 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings 
required to issue a security clearance.  
On June 3, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F and personal 
conduct under Guideline E. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 
 
2 
 
 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 23, 2017. He admitted eight and denied 
eight allegations of delinquent debt under Guideline F. Applicant admitted the two 
allegations of personal conduct security concern under Guideline E. Applicant elected to 
have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s written case on July 28, 2017. (Item 9) Applicant received a complete 
file of relevant material (FORM) on August 4, 2017. He was provided the opportunity to 
file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I was assigned the case on 
December 12, 2017.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the PSI (Item 5) was not 
authenticated and could not be considered over his objection. He was further advised 
that he could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it 
clear and accurate, and could object to the admission of the summary as not 
authenticated by a Government witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection 
was raised to the summary, the administrative judge could determine that he waived 
any objection to the admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM. Without an objection by Applicant, I will consider information in the PSI in my 
decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 33 years old. He graduated from high school in May 2003 and has attended 
courses at a community college. He has been a service desk administrator for a 
defense contractor since November 2015. Prior to that position, he was employed by a 
contractor providing care for special-needs people in a school system. He was also self-
employed in computer repair, and worked at a restaurant. He has never been married 
and has no children. This is his first application to be granted eligibility for access to 
classified information. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated October 12, 2015; Item 5, PSI, dated 
January 18, 2017)  
 
 The SOR alleges, and credit reports (Item 4, dated October 31, 2015; Item 6, 
dated April 21, 2017) and court records (Item 7 and 8, judgment documents) confirm the 
following delinquent debts for Applicant: the balance on a car repossession for $4,787 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case were considered under the previous AGs.  
 
3 
 
 
(SOR 1.a); a cell phone account in collection for $736 (SOR 1.b); a cable television 
account in collection for $623 (SOR 1.c); medical accounts in collection for $558 (SOR 
1.d), $550 (SOR 1.e), $527 (SOR 1.f), $328 (SOR 1.g), $250 (SOR1.h), $135 (SOR 1.i), 
$123 (SOR 1.j), and $114 (SOR 1.k); a judgment for $6,013 (SOR 1.l); a judgment on a 
medical account for $289 (SOR 1.m); a traffic ticket in collection for $205 (SOR 1.n); a 
debt to an insurance company for $160 (SOR 1.o); and a health club account in 
collection for $82 (SOR 1.p). The total amount of the delinquent debt is approximately 
$15,480. The SOR also lists as personal conduct security concerns job terminations in 
2013 (SOR 2.a) and 2009 (SOR 2.b). Applicant admits the debts at SOR 1.b, 1.d, 1.f 
through 1.j and 1.p without explanation. He admits the two personal conduct allegations. 
Applicant listed only one delinquent debt that he was paying on his e-QIP.  
 
 Applicant admits he was terminated from his job in a restaurant because, as he 
reported, he did not “fit the niche.” He presented no other information on reasons why 
he was terminated. He was terminated from his job caring for a special-needs person in 
2013 because of an incident involving his girlfriend. He permitted the special needs 
person to be involved in a personal dispute he had with the girlfriend. He attributes most 
of his delinquent debt to losing this job. He did not present any documentation to 
indicate payments or resolution of any of his debts.  
 
 In the January 2017 PSI, Applicant noted the car loan debt at SOR 1.a and 
stated he will make monthly payments when he could to satisfy the debt. He said he 
would resolve the cell phone debt at SOR 1.b by February 2017. Applicant stated he 
had little knowledge of the other debts. He does not have health insurance so he has 
unpaid medical debt. He does not know when these unpaid debts will be paid. He has 
not received any financial counseling or education, and has not participated in any debt 
consolidation programs. He does not have the details for his debts but will research and 
pay them. Applicant did not present any information or documents in response to either 
the SOR or the FORM to indicate that he contacted creditors or paid any debts. (Item 5, 
PSI, January 18, 2017) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.    
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified and sensitive information) 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) An 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet his or her financial 
 
5 
 
 
obligations. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage 
his or her finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 Even though Applicant denied half of the SOR debts without any explanation, the 
Government presented sufficient information in the form of credit reports and court 
documents to establish all of the SOR delinquent debts. Applicant also admitted that he 
had multiple delinquent debts. The information is sufficient to raise issues about 
Applicant’s willingness and ability to meet his financial obligations, and raises security 
concerns under the following Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions at AG ¶ 
19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts,  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Once the Government has established the adverse financial issue, the Applicant 
has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. Based on the information provided 
by Applicant, I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible sources, such as a non-profit credit counselling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous and are 
not resolved so they are recent. Applicant did not provide information concerning 
financial counseling or participation in debt consolidation programs. Good faith means 
 
6 
 
 
acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty 
and obligation. Applicant is not required to be debt-free nor must his plan require paying 
off all debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that Applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances. Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable 
plan to resolve financial problems, and that he has taken significant action to implement 
that plan. Applicant’s plan must show a systematic method of handling debts, and 
Applicant must establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. A meaningful track 
record of debt payment can be established by evidence of actual debt payments or 
reduction of debt through payment of debts. A promise to pay delinquent debts is not a 
substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a 
financially responsible manner.  
 
Applicant did not provide information to establish that he resolved the debts 
alleged in the SOR. Applicant presented no evidence of debt payments or resolution of 
any debts. He is gainfully employed and appears to have the ability to resolve his 
delinquent debts. He has not acted responsibly because he has not developed plans to 
pay his delinquent debts. He did not provide documentation to show proof of payments, 
correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact, copies of 
debt disputes, evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, or other evidence of 
progress or resolution. There is no clear evidence that his debt problems have been 
resolved, so his finances are not under control. There is insufficient evidence to 
establish why Applicant was unable to make greater progress resolving his debts.  
 
 The available evidence shows that Applicant has been employed since 
November 2015, so the ability to resolve his financial problems are within his control. He 
did not present a plan to resolve his financial problems or any efforts to pay or resolve 
his delinquent debts. Accordingly, he has not established a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His lack of reasonable and responsible actions towards his finances is a strong 
indication that he will not protect and safeguard classified or sensitive information. He 
did not present information to show a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. Applicant did 
not present sufficient information to mitigate financial security concerns. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or adjudicative 
processes. (AG ¶ 15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because it 
indicates whether the person’s past conduct justifies confidence that the person can be 
trusted to properly safeguard classified or sensitive information.  
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was twice terminated for cause, in 2009 and in 
2013. This information is sufficient to raise security concerns under Personal Conduct 
Disqualifying Condition  AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative 
 
7 
 
 
issue area that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 In 2009, Applicant was terminated from a job in a restaurant because, as he 
reported, he did not “fit the niche”. He was terminated in 2013 from a job as a caregiver 
for a special-needs person because he permitted his then girlfriend to have an issue 
with the special-needs person. The incidents raise questions about Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness and willingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. Applicant has not presented any information that would explain or mitigate 
the character questions and security concerns raised by his terminations. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant failed to pay delinquent 
debts and he was terminated from two jobs which question his judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to comply with rules and regulations. In requesting an 
administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, 
he failed to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
financial circumstances and his judgment and reliability, to adequately articulate his 
positions and other reasons for his terminations, and to provide facts to mitigate the 
financial and personal conduct security concerns. In short, the file lacks sufficient 
evidence to establish that he paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, disputed, or 
otherwise resolved his delinquent accounts. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantiating documents and details to explain his finances. The record does not 
 
8 
 
 
provide information to mitigate the two terminations. Applicant’s failure to appropriately 
manage his finances and resolve financial issues, as well as his failure to mitigate the 
terminations indications that he may not adequately safeguard classified information. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts concerning 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his 
suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial situation and 
personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
