 
1 
  
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00533 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on March13, 2017, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. On May 1, 
2017, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided without a 
hearing. On May 22, 2017, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department 
Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM). 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (Sept. 1, 2006 AG) effective 
within the DoD on September 1, 2006, and as amended on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
The FORM contained six attachments (Items). On May 23, 2017, Applicant received a 
copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to object to the Government’s 
evidence and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying 
conditions. He had 30 days from his receipt of the FORM to submit any additional 
information in response to the FORM. The response was due on June 25, 2017. No 
additional information was received from Applicant. On October 1, 2017, I was assigned 
the case.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the six delinquent obligations set 
forth in the SOR totaling more than $163,000. The delinquent obligations are shown in 
Applicant’s credit reports of January 2017 (Item 4) and January 2016 (Item 5). In his SOR 
Answer, he denied one of the SOR debts (SOR 1.f, $12,638) indicating that the “amount 
seems incorrect.” His SOR answer provided no additionally information on the debts other 
than the amount in SOR 1.f being incorrect. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. 
After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old systems administrator who has worked for a defense 
contractor since December 1999, and he seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 3) In 
August 2014, he separated from his wife and was divorced in December 2015. (Items 3 
and 6) He has two children ages 5 and 14. (Item 6) He has not served in the military. 
In Applicant’s December 2015 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), he indicated his financial problems started when he separated from 
his wife. (Item 6) He stated he was “working toward consolidating [his] accounts and 
making some type of payment arrangement.” (Item 6) He also stated he was considering 
filing for bankruptcy protection. (Item 6) 
 In October 2016, during Applicant’s subject interview, he was questioned about 
the SOR delinquent obligations including the obligations on his first (SOR 1.a) and second 
(SOR 1.b) mortgages. (Item 6) At that time, he stated the mortgage obligations were 
settled in an August 2016 auction. No further information about the auction, his mortgage 
obligations, or payment on his debts was provided.  
                                                          
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
 
3 
 No response to the FORM was received from Applicant. He provided no 
documentation showing what efforts he undertook to pay, contact creditors, or otherwise 
resolve his delinquent debts, nor did he provide any documentation as to payment on or 
current status of his delinquent debts. 
 
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudication process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weight of a 
number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the whole-person concept.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide 
by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information . . . An individual who is financially overextended is at 
greater risk of having to engage in illegal acts or other questionable acts to 
generate funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding 
classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides 
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed upon 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, 
but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
any may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts” and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). The SOR alleged more than $163,000 
owed on six delinquent obligations. He provided no documentation refuting these 
delinquent obligations that were listed in his January 2016 and January 2017 credit 
reports and admitted to in his subject interview and SOR answer. 
 
The burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
 Five of the seven Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
 
5 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 During Applicant’s October 2015 interview, all of Applicant’s delinquent obligations 
were discussed. At that time, he stated he was considering filing for bankruptcy protection 
and was working to consolidate his debts and make some type of payment arrangement. 
He failed to document that he has filed for bankruptcy protection, consolidated his debts, 
made any payments on his debts, or contacted his creditors. He has provided no 
documentation about the auction of his home or the release of financial obligations from 
his mortgage lenders. 
 
 Applicant’s debts remain unpaid, obtaining the delinquent obligations did not occur 
under unusual conditions, and the failure to timely pay those obligations is not an unusual 
condition unlikely to recur. In August 2014, he separated from his wife and was divorced 
in December 2015. Other than stating the separation led to his financial problems, he 
provided no additional information showing the effect of the separation on his finances. 
He provided insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to 
recur. His delinquencies continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has been employed full time since December 1999, and the divorce 
occurred two years ago. He provided no evidence of what responsible steps he took to 
pay or resolve his debts. The second prong of AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
  
  There is no evidence of financial counseling or clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
6 
There is no showing of Applicant having made good-faith payments towards his 
delinquent obligations or evidence to establish that he is executing a reasonable ongoing 
plan to pay or resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant indicated the “amount seems incorrect” concerning the delinquent 
obligation in SOR 1.f. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because he has not provided 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute over this debt. AG ¶¶ 20(f) and 
20(g) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant has been aware of the Government’s security concern about his 
delinquent debts since his October 2016 interview when he was specifically confronted 
about his delinquent accounts. Additionally, the March 2017 SOR and May 2017 FORM 
put him on notice of the Government’s concern about his delinquent accounts. There is 
no evidence he has contacted his creditors. He provided no information regarding his past 
efforts to address his delinquent debt and has failed to present documentation to show 
he has established repayment agreements to address the delinquent debts. 
 
In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on only 
the very limited information in his SOR Answer, financial considerations security concerns 
remain.  
 
 
7 
The issue is not simply whether all the delinquent obligations have been paid—it 
is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
clearance. See AG & 2(e). Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  Against Applicant  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
