 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00697 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 7, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AGs implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered 
this case under the previous AGs implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same 
using either set of AGs.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 25, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. On June 1, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On July 14, 
2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the 
hearing was scheduled for August 15, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government exhibits (GE) 1-3 were admitted in evidence without objection. The 
Government’s exhibit list, discovery letter, and request for administrative notice were 
marked as hearing exhibits (HE) I-III. Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and 
offered exhibits (AE) A-G, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on August 23, 2017. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning Israel. Department Counsel 
provided supporting documents that verify, detail, and provide context for the requested 
facts. The specific facts noticed are included in the Findings of Fact.2 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.3 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from U.S Government reports.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations, with 
explanations.5 Those admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He is a native-born U.S. citizen. He has a bachelor’s 
degree. He has held a security clearance since 2007 without incident. He has been 
employed by his current federal contractor since February 2012. He is married with one 
child.6 
 
                                                          
2 The Government’s request and the supporting background documents were marked as hearing exhibit 
(HE) III. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). 
 
4 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
5 Applicant’s answer included an 18 page narrative and attachments that he identified as Exhibits A-R. 
 
6 Tr. at 6, 49; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant’s brother is a dual citizen of the United States 
and Israel, who lives in Israel, and serves in the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF); that 
Applicant’s father is a dual United States-Israeli citizen who previously served in the 
IDF; and that his father and mother are in the process of relocating to Israel. 
  
 Applicant has no affiliations with Israel. He only holds U.S. citizenship and has 
never been a dual citizen with Israel. He was born, went to school, and has always 
worked in the United States. His wife is a native-born U.S. citizen and their child was 
born here as well. Applicant owns a home in the United States valued at approximately 
$500,000. He has retirement accounts valued at approximately $235,000. He and his 
wife’s combined annual income is approximately $250,000. He estimated his net worth 
at approximately $1 million. He owns no property or other assets in Israel. He has no 
intention of living in Israel. He loves his parents and brother, but they are less significant 
to him than his wife and child, and his life in the United States.7 
 
 Applicant has worked in the defense industry and held a security clearance for 
approximately 10 years. He has never had a security incident. His work involved 
interfacing with “warfighters” on a regular basis. He is highly thought of by his 
company’s hierarchy. A company vice-president who served in the military for 27 years, 
testified that Applicant has an excellent reputation at work and has “unquestioned 
reliability and trustworthiness.” He is aware of the SOR allegations and has no concerns 
about Applicant and his relationship with his parents and brother. He endorses 
Applicant for a security clearance. He also provided a sworn statement in support of 
Applicant.8 
 
 Applicant’s facility security officer (FSO) also testified for Applicant. He has been 
the FSO at the company since 2015. He is fully aware of the SOR allegations in 
Applicant’s case. He is a former military officer and has 15 years’ experience with 
security-related issues. He explained that Applicant had self-reported his brother’s 
action regarding moving to Israel and he also kept the FSO office aware of his parent’s 
intention of moving to Israel. Applicant strictly adheres to security procedures, is 
trustworthy, and exercises good judgment in all work-related matters. He supports 
Applicant retaining his security clearance. He also provided a sworn statement in 
support of Applicant.9 
 
 Applicant’s former supervisor also testified and provided a sworn written 
statement in support of Applicant retaining his security clearance. Additionally, 11 other 
co-workers provided sworn statements supporting Applicant’s retention of his security 
clearance. Applicant is characterized by these statements as loyal, honest, hard-
working, dedicated to the warfighter, trustworthy, respected by his military customers, 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 40, 48-52, 60; Answer; AE E. 
 
8 Tr. at 74, 76, 79, 82-83; Answer, Exhibit B. 
 
9 Tr. at 64, 66-69, 71-72; Answer, Exhibit A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
and a proud patriot of this country. All universally recommend that Applicant retain his 
security clearance. None of the listed supporters believe Applicant’ connection to his 
parents or brother would cause Applicant to further his relatives’ interests over those of 
the United States. Applicant’s work performance appraisals for 2014 through 2016 rate 
him as either a highly effective performer or an exceptional performer.10 
 
 Applicant’s only brother (B) is younger than Applicant. He decided to move to 
Israel after taking a “discovery” trip there when he finished college. He moved there 
about three years ago and became a dual U.S.-Israeli citizen. B was required to serve in 
the Israeli Defense Force (IDF), completed his service, and received a discharge, which 
Applicant has documented. B currently works security for a hotel in Israel and is taking 
classes in pursuit of a master’s degree. Applicant testified that he is not particularly 
close to B and he has only intermittent telephone contact with him. Applicant has no 
intention of moving to Israel because his brother is there. Although Applicant has given 
B a gift of $200 and $400 to assist with his student loans, he does not provide any 
regular financial support to B.11 
 
 Applicant’s father was born in Poland and moved to Israel as a child. He grew up 
in Israel and served in the IDF in 1967 and later in 1973. He has not had an IDF 
obligation in over 40 years. He moved to the United States in the late 1970s. He 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1983. Applicant’s father holds dual U.S.-Israeli 
citizenship, although he only has a current U.S. passport. Applicant’s father is a CPA 
who ultimately started his own business. Applicant’s mother is a native-born U.S. 
citizen. Applicant’s parent’s currently reside in the United States, but are contemplating 
a permanent move to Israel. They would move for two reasons. First, to be closer to 
their youngest son and second, to secure cheaper healthcare for Applicant’s mother 
who has been diagnosed with terminal cancer. Applicant’s mother is facing cancellation 
of her U.S. healthcare insurance policy and her chemotherapy prescription costs 
approximately $14,000 per month. Applicant does not provide any financial support to 
his parents.12 
 
 Israel is a parliamentary democracy with strong historic and cultural ties with 
the United States. Commitment to Israel’s security has been a cornerstone of U.S. 
Middle East policy since Israel’s inception. Both countries have a mutual interest in 
a peaceful, secure Middle East. On July 27, 2012, President Obama signed the 
United States-Israel Enhanced Security Cooperation Act. The goal of this legislation is 
to strengthen the military edge that Israel enjoys over its regional enemies.  
 
Israel aggressively targets sensitive U.S. technology. There have been some 
cases of U.S. government employees who have been prosecuted and convicted of 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 85-87, 90-92; Answer, Exhibits C-O. 
 
11 Tr. at 33-34, 41, 49-50, 53-56; Answer; AE A-C. 
 
12 Tr. at 34-39, 58; AE D. 
 
 
5 
 
 
spying against the U.S. for Israel. In 1998, Israel acknowledged that one of these 
individual’s had been its agent.  
 
The threat of terrorist attacks is growing in ungoverned or minimally 
governed areas near Israel’s borders with Syria, Lebanon, the Sinai Peninsula, and 
Libya. However, some unconventional security threats have been reduced because 
of factors such as heightened security measures vis a vis Palestinians, missile 
defense systems, and cyberwarfare capabilities.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
6 
 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” as 
follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member or friend is associated with or dependent upon the 
 
7 
 
 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against 
the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. The 
relationship between Israel and the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his relatives living in Israel does not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist his relatives living in Israel who might be coerced by 
governmental entities, or pressured to assist Israel.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”13 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Israel seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or his brother living 
in Israel, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) do not apply to Applicant’s mother because she is currently 
a citizen and resident of the United States. Because Applicant’s father is a dual U.S.-
Israeli citizen and his brother is a dual U.S.-Israel citizen currently residing in Israel, AG 
¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply to Applicant’s relationship to them.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns, 
including:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant credibly testified that his wife, child and U.S. lifestyle are the priorities 
in his life. He presented sufficient evidence to establish that it is unlikely that he would 
be placed in a position to choose between the interest of his family living in Israel and 
those of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) applies. 
 
Applicant has met his burden to establish his “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He is a native-born U.S. citizen and has lived 
here all his life. He owns a home and is raising his family here. His U.S.-based net 
worth is approximately $1 million. He has worked for a U.S.-based organization for over 
10 years, all while holding a security clearance. His supervisors and coworkers attest to 
his loyalty, dedication to the warfighters, and overall trustworthiness. The evidence 
supports that Applicant has longstanding ties to the United States and would resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support granting Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
towards denying his clearance. I considered the recommendations of his FSO, the 
company vice president, and his coworkers who all resoundingly recommend that 
Applicant retain his security clearance. I considered Applicant’s self-reporting of his 
family’s activities as an indicator of putting the interests of the United States before 
those of his family. I also considered his strong ties to this country, thereby 
demonstrating his longstanding loyalty to the United States. Therefore, he provided 
sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude that the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign influence 
concerns were either not established or mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs     1.a: - 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
