 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 17-00468 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Koroian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his financial situation. After receiving a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 2006, 
Applicant accumulated a substantial amount of past-due debt, including $60,000 in 
delinquent student loans. Despite gainful employment since January 2015, he has yet to 
take responsible action to address and resolve his past-due debts. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 21, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
Specifically, the SOR alleges that Applicant incurred approximately $75,000 of delinquent 
debt after receiving a Chapter 7 discharge in 2006.  
 
On May 22, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR. He admitted the SOR allegations 
and requested a determination on the administrative (written) record. 
 
 On June 30, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant a file of (allegedly) relevant 
material (FORM). With the FORM, Department Counsel forwarded to Applicant six 
exhibits, which were pre-marked Items 1 – 6, that the Government offers for admission 
into the record. Applicant submitted a Response to the FORM. With his Response, 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant submitted a number of documents for the record. Applicant’s Response and the 
accompanying documents were collectively marked Item 7. The exhibits offered by the 
parties, Items 1 – 7, are admitted into the record without objection. 
 
 On November 3, 2017, I was assigned the case. Subsequently, I received written 
confirmation that Applicant remains sponsored for a security clearance.1 Accordingly, I 
have jurisdiction to issue a decision. ISCR Case No. 14-03753 (App. Bd. Sep. 23, 2016). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 54, served in the U.S. military from 1990 – 1999. He served in Operation 
Desert Shield / Desert Storm. He received awards for his military service and was 
promoted to sergeant before being honorably discharged in 1999. After leaving the 
military, Applicant earned an associate’s and then a bachelor’s degree. He attended 
graduate school from 2013 – 2015, but, as of the date of the submission of his security 
clearance application (SCA) in June 2015, had not been conferred another degree.  
 
Applicant is on his fourth marriage. He and his current wife married in 2012 and 
together they have five children. Applicant received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 
February 2006. His current financial problems began in approximately 2011, when he left 
his employment as a security guard at an airport under adverse circumstances. In his 
SCA, Applicant states that he left “for making a mistake in company policies and 
procedures.”2 He subsequently explained to a security clearance investigator that he 
gave his wife, who had just started working at the same location, his badge to get into the 
employee parking lot since she had not yet received her own employee badge. He knew 
it was a violation of company policy to give or loan anyone his badge. His wife was fired 
for the incident and he was given the option to voluntarily leave or be fired. He left and 
was unemployed from approximately October 2011 to about December 2014.3  
 
While unemployed, Applicant returned to school to improve his job prospects. Also, 
during this period, Applicant defaulted on a significant amount of delinquent debt. Notably, 
Applicant defaulted on his student loans, which total approximately $60,000. He also 
accrued about $15,000 in other delinquent debt. In 2012, one of Applicant’s creditors 
secured a $7,800 judgment and wage garnishment against him. The creditor recently 
made a business decision to close the account. This debt is referenced in SOR 1.l. It is 
the only debt, of the 16 SOR debts, that has been resolved. Applicant was made aware 
of the SOR debts during his September 2016 security clearance interview.4 
 
In January 2015, Applicant was hired by his current employer and a few months 
later submitted an SCA in connection with the job. In response to questions regarding his 
                                                          
1 Appellate Exhibit I. 
 
2 Item 3 at 13.  
 
3 Item 3 at 12; Item 6 at 6.  
 
4 Item 3; Item 5 – Item 7.  
 
3 
 
 
financial history, Applicant reported the debt in 1.l and his delinquent student loans. He 
claimed that his student loans totaled about $11,000.5 A subsequent credit check 
revealed that Applicant’s delinquent student loans totaled about $60,000. The credit 
check also disclosed a number of other delinquent accounts.6 
 
In September 2016, Applicant discussed his delinquent accounts with a security 
clearance investigator. He told the investigator that he had received collection notices 
from many of the creditors for the delinquent accounts listed on the SOR, including notices 
about his student loans. These collection notices informed Applicant that his delinquent 
student loans totaled about $60,000. Applicant also told the investigator that he tried to 
resolve his student loan delinquency, but the creditor was unwilling to work out a 
reasonable payment schedule.7  
 
Applicant submitted reference letters from community members, coworkers, and 
supervisors. These references state that Applicant is hardworking, reliable, and 
trustworthy. 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 
2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and 
standards).8 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
                                                          
5 Item 3 at 42.  
 
6 Item 5.  
 
7 Item 6 at 5, 13.  
 
8 Nonetheless, I have considered the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines and my ultimate 
decision in this case would have been the same.  
 
4 
 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.9 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4), ¶ E.4. Additionally, 
the Supreme Court has held that responsible officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                                          
9 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.10  
 
The security concern here is not limited to a consideration of whether a person 
with financial issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in 
other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances 
giving rise to delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other 
qualities essential to protecting classified information.11 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions listed under Guideline F, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem . . . and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free. They 
are also not required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present evidence 
to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their circumstances, to include 
the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of showing that they 
manage their finances in a manner expected of those granted access to classified 
information.12 Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof and persuasion. 
 
                                                          
10 AG ¶ 18. 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
12 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 15-02585 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 20, 2016) (“It is reasonable for Judges to expect applicants to present documentation about the 
satisfaction of individual debts.”)  
 
6 
 
 
Applicant accumulated a sizeable amount of delinquent debt after receiving a 
Chapter 7 discharge in 2006. The disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
apply. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to establish any of the mitigating 
conditions. Notably, notwithstanding gainful employment since January 2015, the only 
SOR debt that has been resolved is one where the creditor was forced to seek a court 
order. Applicant’s inability or unwillingness to responsibly address his delinquent 
accounts and take control of his financial affairs raises unmitigated security concerns that 
I must resolve in favor of protecting national security. Overall, the record evidence 
regarding the manner in which Applicant handles his personal financial obligations leaves 
me with doubts and concerns about his ability and willingness to follow rules and 
regulations for the proper handling and safeguarding of classified information.13 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a –1.q:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
13 In reaching this adverse decision, I considered the whole-person concept. See generally AG ¶ 2. I also 
considered the exceptions listed in SEAD-4, Appendix C, but none are warranted in this case.  
