 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-02020 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 17, 2016. On June 
28, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.1  
 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines for all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. The changes resulting 
from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 24, 2017, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on September 8, 2017. On September 11, 2017, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on September 15, 2017, and did not respond.2 The case was 
assigned to me on January 17, 2018. 
  
Findings of Fact3 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations and 
asserted that all the debts alleged in the SOR had been resolved. His admissions are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old pipefitter employed by a defense contractor since May 
1989. He was employed as an outside mechanic at a naval shipyard from February 1986 
to April 1989. He served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force from January 1977 to 
September 1985 and was honorably discharged. (FORM Item 3 at 3.) He married in 
March 1977. He has held a security clearance since February 1987. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s home mortgage loan is past due for $2,218, with 
a total loan balance of $74,539 (SOR ¶ 1.a). It also alleges that a state tax lien for $514 
was entered against him in January 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.b); two federal tax liens were entered 
against him in March 2008 for $9,987 and $17,607 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d); and five liens 
for sewer service were filed against him between 2009 and 2014, totaling about $1,365. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.i). 
 
 When Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator in March 2017, he told 
the investigator that he and his spouse fell behind on their federal taxes because of her 
part-time work and her medical issues. He did not provide any further details. He also told 
the investigator that he was in a payment plan with the Internal Revenue Service. In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that his home mortgage loan was current and that 
all the federal and local liens had been paid. He submitted no documentary evidence to 
support his statements.  
 
                                                          
2 The FORM included Item 3, a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) conducted on March 27, 
2017. The PSI was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed 
Applicant that he was entitled to comment on the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, 
additions, deletions or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI on the ground that it was not 
authenticated. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I conclude that he waived any objections to the PSI 
summary. Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely 
and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive. ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
3 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
 In Department Counsel’s submission of the government’s case, he specifically 
commented on Applicant’s failures to provide documentary evidence. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM, thereby failing to take advantage of an opportunity to document 
his claims. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 4
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM establish the 
following disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required. 
 
 
 5
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s conduct was recent, frequent, and did 
not occur under circumstances making it unlikely to recur. 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(d), and 20(g) are not established. Applicant’s vague reference to 
medical issues and his claims that he resolved all the debts are unsupported by 
documentary evidence. Applicants are expected to present documentary evidence 
showing resolution of specific debts. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-03363 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 19, 2016). In the FORM, Department Counsel alerted Applicant to the need for 
documentary evidence, but Applicant did not respond to the FORM.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4  
 
                                                          
4 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 6
Because Applicant requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I 
had no opportunity to evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR 
Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by 
his delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
