 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 17-00680 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s information is sufficient to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised 
by her financial problems. Her request for eligibility to occupy a position of trust is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On June 22, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position for his job 
with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators were unable to determine that 
 
 
2 
 
 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request 
for a position of trust.1  
 
 On May 22, 2017, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
facts raising trustworthiness concerns addressed through the adjudicative guideline (AG)2 
for financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR 
(Answer) and requested a hearing.  
 
 I received the case on August 4, 2017, and scheduled the hearing for September 
27, 2017. The parties appeared as scheduled. I admitted Government Exhibits (GX) 1 – 
6 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A – I. Applicant also testified. I received a transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on October 6, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in January 2016, and that the petition was dismissed later that year (SOR 1.j); 
and that she owed $60,597 for 13 delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.i, 1.k – 1.n). 
In response, Applicant denied, with explanations and supporting documents, the debts at 
SOR 1.a, 1.g – 1.i, 1.l – 1.n. She admitted, with explanations, the remaining allegations. 
In her e-QIP, she disclosed the Chapter 13 petition alleged at SOR 1.j and the debts 
alleged at SOR 1.c and 1.e. She further explained that she and her husband started 
experiencing financial problems in about October 2012. At hearing, the Government 
presented two credit reports and a summary of a September 2016 subject interview that 
established all of the SOR allegations.3 Additionally, Department Counsel moved to 
amend the SOR to conform to the record by withdrawing SOR 1.l as a duplicate of SOR 
1.g. I granted the motion without objection.4 (Answer; Gx. 1 – 4; Tr. 81) In addition to the 
facts established by the Government’s information and by Applicant’s admissions, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old, has a BS in mathematics, and works for a defense 
contractor in a position that requires eligibility for a position of trust. Applicant’s employer 
supports management of the health care system used by members of the military, and 
her duties include safeguarding personally identifiable information (PII) associated with 
the health care system’s constituents. Applicant has worked for her current employer 
                                                 
1 Required by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive). 
 
2 At the time they issued the SOR, DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National 
Intelligence issued a new version of the adjudicative guidelines, to be effective for all adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. Publication of DOD Manual 5200.02 did not affect the adjudicative guidelines applicable 
to this case. In this decision, I have considered and applied the new adjudicative guidelines. My decision in 
this case would have been the same under either version. 
 
3 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
 
4 See Directive, E3.1.17. 
 
 
3 
 
 
since July 2001, and she has been eligible to hold a position of trust for most of her 
employment there. Her eligibility was last renewed in June 2006. Applicant’s performance 
has been superior, and she enjoys an excellent reputation in the workplace for 
professionalism, reliability, and trustworthiness. She also is active in community and 
church affairs. (Answer; GX 1; GX 2; Ax. I; Tr. 37) 
 
 Applicant has been married twice. She separated from her first husband, with 
whom she had two children who are now adults, in September 1997. They divorced in 
December 1998. Shortly thereafter, Applicant married her current husband. Together they 
have two children, ages 18 and 16. Applicant’s first husband did not meet his child support 
obligations for Applicant’s two older children, something for which Applicant engaged him 
in civil litigation. (GX 1; AX A) 
 
 In 2012, Applicant experienced medical problems that caused her to miss work 
and income for extended periods. This resulted in difficulties meeting payments on some 
of her credit accounts. At the same time, her husband’s income decreased. He was 
working in a sales position he had held successfully for several years. In late 2012, his 
income began to decline due to decreased sales and, as a result, decreased 
commissions. In January 2014, he left that job and started his own business hauling cars 
for automobile dealers. His business failed when he unexpectedly learned he would have 
to obtain a commercial driving license (CDL). He originally thought he did not need a CDL 
as the size and load of his truck did not meet the requirement for such a certification. He 
interrupted his business to study for his CDL but he was unable to pass the test. In March 
2015, with the loss of his income, he also could not afford to take a CDL training course 
and had to abandon the business. Since then, he has worked a series of jobs to continue 
earning income, even if that income is greatly below pre-2014 levels. His current job 
began in August 2017 and represents an increase in his income. (GX 2; Tr. 47 – 48, 59 
– 61) 
 
 In January 2016, Applicant and her husband filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition 
as a means to resolve their debts. They declared $362,000 in liabilities against $251,000 
in assets. They agreed to a repayment plan that required them to pay about $1,800 each 
month, which they could afford. That plan was based on Applicant’s income and whatever 
her husband was making at the time. A few months later, Applicant’s husband found a 
job that paid significantly more than before. As a result, the required monthly payment 
increased by $2,000. This they could not afford along with unexpected car repairs and a 
medical procedure for one of their children. In June 2016, Applicant and her husband 
voluntarily withdrew their Chapter 13 petition. (Answer; GX 1; GX 2; GX 6; Tr. 48 – 53, 73 
– 74) 
 
 Through their bankruptcy petition, Applicant and her husband sought to reaffirm 
their car loan. Although they made their required payments to the bankruptcy trustee while 
the petition was active, most of that money went to pay their attorney fees before it was 
directed to their car loan. As a result, when they withdrew their petition, the car loan went 
into default. That creditor demanded payments to recoup the arrearage that Applicant 
could not afford. She and her husband returned the car to the dealer, and they incurred 
 
 
4 
 
 
the delinquency addressed at SOR 1.c. Applicant and her husband are now repaying the 
collection agency holding that account $121 each month. (Answer; GX 2 – 4; GX 6; AX 
C; Tr. 54 – 55, 70 – 72) 
 
 The debts alleged in the SOR arose from Applicant’s medical problems and her 
husband’s loss of sufficient employment. The debts at SOR 1.a and 1.b represent their 
first and second mortgages, respectively. Applicant established that they have resolved 
the past-due amounts on their first mortgage through a mortgage modification. The lender 
on their second mortgage has not agreed to their requests to modify that mortgage 
account and has demanded repayment of the past-due amounts in terms Applicant 
cannot afford. Nonetheless, on the advice of a financial counselor Applicant is using, she 
and her husband recently resubmitted their request for a mortgage modification. (Answer; 
AX B; Tr. 30 – 31, 53 – 54, 70) 
 
 In addition to SOR 1.a and 1.b, Applicant established in response to the SOR and 
at hearing that she and her husband have paid or otherwise resolved the debts at SOR 
1.g, 1.m, and 1.n. She also established that she is in regular and consistent repayment 
of the debts at SOR 1.c – 1.f, 1.h and 1.k. (Answer; AX C – H; Tr. 31 – 41, 81, 84 – 85) 
 
 Applicant’s current finances are sound. She has worked with a financial advisor to 
establish a monthly budget to manage her household finances. After all expenses, 
including monthly debt payments documented in her exhibits, Applicant estimates she 
and her husband have about $140 remaining each month. They have not incurred any 
new delinquencies since 2015. (Answer; AX A; Tr. 55 – 56, 68 – 69) 
 
Policies 
 
 Eligibility for a position of public trust must be based on a determination that it is 
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.5 All such adjudications 
must adhere to the procedural protections in the Directive before any adverse 
determination may be made. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors, commonly referred to 
as the “whole-person” concept, listed in the guidelines at AG ¶ 2(d).7 The presence or 
absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, 
                                                 
5 Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, Appendix A, Paragraph 1(d).  
 
6 Directive, 6.3. 
 
7  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, 
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's 
age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the 
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
5 
 
 
specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of eligibility 
for a position of trust. 
 
 The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on 
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an 
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a position of 
trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A person who has access to 
sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on 
trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will 
protect sensitive information as his or her own. Any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s 
suitability for access should be resolved in favor of the Government. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The facts established by this record reasonably raise a trustworthiness concern 
about Applicant’s finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
  Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). Applicant’s financial problems arose in 2012 because of medical 
problems, and because of her husband’s loss of income and failed business. Their debts 
persisted through 2016 with the failure of their Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. One of 
their still unresolved debts is also one of their largest.  
 
I have also considered the following AG ¶ 20 mitigating: 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) applies in part. Although some of her debts remain unresolved and 
must be considered as recent, all of her financial problems arose from unforeseen 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur. For the same reason, AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
Applicant’s financial troubles began in 2012 when she experienced medical problems that 
hindered her ability to work. Later that year, her husband began to lose income due to 
falling sales commissions. His attempt to restore his income through a small business 
start-up failed and he is only now beginning to earn a level of income close to what he 
earned previously. Available information further supports application of AG ¶ 20(b) 
because it shows Applicant has acted responsibly in addressing her financial problems. 
She and her husband likely would have successfully completed their Chapter 13 
bankruptcy petition had the required payments not increased. After they withdrew their 
petition, they took steps to address their debts and have either resolved or are repaying 
all but one of their debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) also applies. Based on consultations with a financial counselor, 
Applicant and her husband have established a viable budget and a plan to resolve their 
debts. They have not incurred any new debts, and available information supports a 
conclusion that they will pursue their debt resolution efforts to completion. On balance, 
the record evidence as a whole is sufficient to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
raised under this guideline. 
 
 I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors 
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-
person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant produced sufficient reliable evidence to 
resolve the doubts about her trustworthiness and judgment raised by the Government’s 
information. Applicant has a solid reputation in the workplace, and a long and 
unblemished record of safeguarding sensitive information during her tenure as a defense 
contractor. All of the foregoing supports a fair and commonsense assessment that the 
Government’s doubts about her trustworthiness have been satisfactorily addressed.  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.n:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for public trust 
eligibility is granted. 
 
 
____________________ 
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
