 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-02093 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 18, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
On August 8, 2017, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR, and she elected 
to have her case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and 
it was received on September 6, 2017. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
 
2 
receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government's evidence, which are 
identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant did not submit any documents or additional 
information. The Government’s documents are admitted into evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on December 20, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶¶ 1.ccc, 1.eee, and 
1.fff. Her admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. She earned a diploma from a technical institution in 
1982 and an Associate’s degree the same year. She married in 1986 and was widowed 
in 2006. She has two adult children from the marriage, ages 28 and 25 years old.1  
 
 Applicant admits she owes 59 of the 62 debts alleged in the SOR. At least 47 of 
the debts are medical. Applicant disclosed in her April 2016 public trust application that 
she made arrangements with the creditor for her medical debts to have them 
consolidated into one account, and she would begin paying $50 a month in April 2016, 
until the consolidated debt was satisfied. She disclosed the consolidated amount was 
$8,022. During her March 2017 background interview with a government investigator, 
she stated that she had been making the $50 monthly payments. In her answer to the 
SOR, she stated that she was unable to pay the medical accounts and offered no 
additional evidence.2  
 
 Applicant disclosed other delinquent debts in her public trust application and 
stated she had contacted the creditors and had made arrangements to make monthly 
payments. During her background interview, she stated she was unable to follow 
through with any of the payments. In her answer to the SOR, she stated she was unable 
to pay her delinquent debts.3  
 
 Applicant told the investigator that her financial difficulties began when her son 
moved out of the house, and she no longer had his income to help her pay the bills. It is 
unclear when her son moved out of the house. There are two dates mentioned in her 
statement to the investigator, one is 2010 and the other is 2014. Some of Applicant’s 
delinquent debts began before 2010. Applicant disclosed in her public trust application 
that she vacationed in a foreign country for six to ten days in October 2014. In addition 
to medical debts, Applicant’s debts include furniture loans, credit card accounts, a 
personal loan, a defaulted car loan, unpaid insurance, and other accounts. Credit 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3.  
 
2 Items 2, 3, 4. 
 
3 Items 2, 3, 4. 
 
 
3 
reports from July 2016 and May 2017, along with Applicant’s admissions corroborate 
the delinquent debts.4  
 
 Applicant stated that she has been a loyal employee for 23 years. Her public trust 
application discloses that she was widowed in 2006, but she stated that she was a 
single mother and the father never “was supportive for the care of our children.”5 She 
explained that she does not earn enough income to pay all of her debts. She also stated 
that she “was not raised on how to handle my finances and I am in the process of 
seeking credit counseling for guidance.”6 
 
Policies 
 
The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, states that the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that the 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” 
The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
4 Items 3, 4, 5, 6. 
 
5 Item 2. 
 
6 Item 2.  
 
4 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that began accumulating in at least 2010 that she 
is unable or unwilling to pay. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant debts are numerous and ongoing. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude they are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to insufficient income and her son 
moving out of the house and no longer having his income to help pay the bills. These 
factors were beyond her control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must 
have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant indicated that she had 
consolidated her medical debts and was making monthly payments. She did not provide 
documentary evidence showing that consistent monthly payments were made. She 
indicated in her answer that she was unable to pay her debts. Although she initially 
made an effort to pay her medical bills, without explanation she abandoned that effort 
and indicated she was unable to make the $50 payment she had arranged with the 
creditor. She did not provide information about her monthly expenses, a budget, or 
changes she made after her son moved out. There is insufficient evidence to conclude 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.   
 
 Applicant indicated she intends to seek financially counseling, but had not. There 
is insufficient evidence to conclude her finances are under control. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude she has made a good-faith effort to repay her creditors or 
otherwise resolve her delinquent debts. Applicant denied three debts alleged, but did 
not provide evidence as to her actions to dispute their legitimacy or documented efforts 
to resolve them. There is insufficient evidence to apply AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), or 20(e).  
 
 
 
 
6 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is a 57 years old. She has two grown children. She accumulated 
numerous medical and other debts that remain unresolved. At one point, Applicant 
consolidated her medical debts and the creditor agreed to accept a monthly payment of 
$50. It is unknown how long Applicant made the payment, but she abandoned the plan 
and stated she was unable to pay any of her delinquent debts. Applicant has an 
unreliable financial track record, which raises questions and doubts about her eligibility 
and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
failed to mitigate the Guideline F, financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.jjj:   Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances it is not clearly consistent with national security 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
