 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [READACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  17-00250 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Brian Bodansky, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement and Substance Misuse), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 14, 
2015. On March 1, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guidelines H and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 21, 2017, and requested a decision 
based on the administrative record. On May 17, 2017, he requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 25, 2017, 
and the case was assigned to me on October 26, 2017. On November 15, 2017, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for December 6, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
2 
 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The Government’s exhibit list was appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and 
B, which were admitted into evidence without objection. One witness testified on behalf 
of Applicant. At Applicant’s request, I left the record open until December 13, 2017. 
Applicant timely provided an additional document that was admitted into evidence as AE 
C, without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 21, 2017. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG.1 Accordingly, I have applied 
the June 2017 AG.2 However, I have also considered the September 2006 AG because 
they were in effect on the date the SOR was issued. I conclude that my decision would 
have been the same under either version. 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant is 40 years old. He married his wife in 2007. He has one child, age 11. 
He received his bachelor’s degree in 1999. He has been employed, as a senior wireless 
technician, by a defense contractor since November 2015. This is his first application for 
a security clearance.4  
 
The SOR cross-alleged, under Guidelines H and E, that Applicant used 
marijuana with varying frequency from approximately 2002 through at least 2015 (SOR 
¶ 1.a/2.a); that he was charged with marijuana-related criminal offenses in April 2011 
(SOR ¶ 1.b/2.a); and that he then continued to associate with individuals who use 
marijuana (SOR ¶ 1.c/2.a). Applicant admitted to each of the SOR allegations. 
 
In April 2011, Applicant was travelling in a van with members of his band, while 
touring for music events in which they were playing. On April 22, 2011, a police officer 
pulled over the van for speeding and eventually charged each of the occupants, 
including Applicant, with possession of marijuana and possession of drug 
paraphernalia. Applicant and the other occupants had been smoking marijuana 
approximately an hour before the police officer stopped the van. Applicant permitted the 
police officer to search his backpack in which he found a clear sandwich baggie that 
contained marijuana.  Applicant pled guilty to the charges with a stipulation that his case 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR Answer and his SCA (GX 1). 
 
4 See also Tr. at 5-6, 15, 33. 
 
 
3 
 
would be handled through a diversion program. After he successfully completed the 
program (including passing a random drug test, attending an eight-hour drug education 
course, completing 60 hours of community service, and paying a $600 fine), his case 
was dismissed. Applicant has not been arrested or cited for any drug-related offense 
since April 2011.5  
 
Applicant began using marijuana at the age of 23 or 24. The frequency of his use 
during the first two years was four times per year, and then it increased to twice per 
month. In 2004, he began using it six to twelve times per year. He stopped using 
marijuana after his 2011 arrest, while he was in the diversion program. Once he 
completed the program, he resumed using marijuana until March 2015, when he 
stopped using it in anticipation of seeking employment that would not permit drug use. 
During that time, he also quit his band. Applicant attributed his marijuana use to his 
association with his band. Applicant has not used marijuana since March 2015.6  
 
Applicant does not associate with anyone who uses drugs and has no intent to 
associate with anyone who uses drugs in the future. If he were to encounter anyone 
using drugs, Applicant would immediately leave that space and, if it was someone he 
knew, explain that he is not able to continue that association. He spends his free time 
working on home projects, working to further the technical knowledge required of his 
profession, tinkering with his motorcycle, and travelling with his family.7 
 
In connection with his 2011 diversion program, Applicant submitted to a drug 
evaluation that concluded that he did not have any dependency towards marijuana.8 
Applicant tested negative for drug use, including marijuana, on a pre-employment drug 
screen in November 2015 and on a random drug screen in January 2017.9 In December 
2017, Applicant submitted a statement of intent to refrain from use of illegal drugs and 
swore that he would not use any illegal drugs in the future, subject to automatic 
revocation of his security clearance for any violation.10 Applicant’s former supervisor of 
almost two years praised Applicant’s work performance and character.11 
 
                                                          
5 GX 2 at p. 9 and 10; Tr. at 19-20, 27-29. 
 
6 SOR Answer; GX 2 at p. 10-11; Tr. at 16-17, 24. 
 
7 Tr. at 20-23, 35. 
 
8 GX 2 at p. 10; Tr. at 35. 
 
9 AE A and B; Tr. at 17-18. 
 
10 AE C. 
 
11 Tr. at 11-14. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”12 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”13 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”14 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”15 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.16 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”17 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
                                                          
12 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
13 Egan at 527. 
 
14 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
15 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
16 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
17 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
5 
 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.18 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.19 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.20 
  
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”21 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”22 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: “The illegal use of 
controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription and non-prescription drugs, 
and the use of other substances that cause physical or mental impairment or are used 
in a manner inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to 
physical or psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person's 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled substance 
means any "controlled substance" as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the 
generic term adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above.”  
 
Applicant’s marijuana use, including his 2011 marijuana-related criminal charges, 
establish the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any substance misuse (see above definition); and  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal possession of a controlled substance, including 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are established: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
                                                          
18 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
19 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
20 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
21 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
22 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
 
Applicant acknowledged the incompatibility of marijuana use with his current 
lifestyle and goals. Applicant has substantially changed the behaviors and 
circumstances underlying his past marijuana use. As such, I conclude that it is not likely 
to recur, and does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
The concern under this guideline, as set out in AG ¶ 15, includes: “Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.”  
 
Applicant’s marijuana use, including his 2011 marijuana-related criminal charges, 
establish the following disqualifying condition under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his past marijuana use. 
Accordingly, I conclude that it does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
 
7 
 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline H and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his past marijuana use. Accordingly, I conclude that he has carried 
his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse): FOR 
APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
