 
1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 17-00572 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial situation was good until her late husband became terminally 
ill. She incurred credit card debt for his care. After her husband died, and notwithstanding 
the modest income she earns from her full-time job, Applicant responsibly paid most of 
the debts she incurred for his care, except for the credit cards. She pays her recurring 
financial obligations on time, including the mortgage on the home that she has lived in 
since 1979. She honestly reported the credit card debt on her security clearance 
application and has been candid about her financial situation throughout the security 
clearance process. She has held a security clearance without issue for over ten years. A 
conditional clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 3, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a determination on the administrative 
(written) record. 
 
 On May 31, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant a file of relevant material 
(FORM). With the FORM, Department Counsel forwarded to Applicant six exhibits, pre-
marked Items 1 – 6, which the Government offers for admission into the record. Applicant 
received the FORM on March 30, 2017. (Appellate Exhibit I.) She was given 30 days to 
raise any objection to the material offered by Department Counsel and submit her own 
 
2 
evidence in support of her request for a security clearance. She did not file any objections 
or submit a response. Without objection, Items 1 – 6 are admitted into the record.  
 
 On November 3, 2017, I was assigned the case. Subsequently, I received written 
confirmation that Applicant remains sponsored for a security clearance. (Appellate Exhibit 
II.) Accordingly, I have jurisdiction to issue a decision. ISCR Case No. 14-03753 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 23, 2016). 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 69, is employed as a receptionist. She has worked as a federal 
contractor since 2005, and was first granted a security clearance in about 2006. She 
submitted a security clearance application in February 2016 in connection with her job. In 
response to questions on the application regarding her financial history, Applicant 
reported she had a number of delinquent credit card accounts. She later explained, during 
her security clearance interview and in her response to the SOR, that she incurred the 
debts caring for her late husband. He died in 2007. She paid other debts related to his 
care and for funeral-related expenses, but was financially unable to pay the credit card 
debt. She attempted to resolve the credit card debt in 2010 through a debt consolidation 
plan, but after a time was unable to make the monthly payments on her limited income. 
She earns less than $15 per hour, and uses her income to pay her mortgage and other 
recurring debts. She has lived in her home since about 1979 and expects to pay off the 
mortgage in 2019.  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 
2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards). 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
 
3 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4), ¶ E.4. Additionally, 
the Supreme Court has held that responsible officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18.) 
 
The security concern here is not limited to a consideration of whether a person 
with financial issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in 
other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances 
giving rise to delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other 
qualities essential to protecting classified information. See generally ISCR Case No. 11-
05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
  
 
4 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the applicable disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. 
 
 Applicant’s finances were in good order before her husband became terminally ill. 
She turned to credit cards to pay ever-increasing medical bills and other expenses for his 
care. After Applicant’s husband died, she was left to pay the bills. She earns a modest 
income from her full-time position as a receptionist. Notwithstanding her limited financial 
means, Applicant has timely paid her recurring debts, including the mortgage on the home 
that she has lived in continuously since 1979. She tried to address and resolve the credit 
card debt, but was unable to because of her limited financial means. Her financial situation 
is not due to lack of self-control, irresponsibility, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations. In short, the record reflects that Applicant has responsibly managed her 
finances within her means. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept / Conditional Clearance 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. AG ¶ 2. An administrative judge should 
consider the whole-person factors listed at AG ¶¶ 2(d) and 2(f). I hereby incorporate my 
above analysis and highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
Applicant was honest and candid about her financial situation from the outset of 
the security clearance process. She has held a security clearance without issue since 
2006. The record reflects that the only delinquent debt Applicant has incurred in the past 
10 years are for credit cards she used to pay for medical bills and funeral expenses for 
her late husband. The record does not reflect that Applicant incurred any other delinquent 
debt. At the same time, a large amount of credit card debt remains and the record 
evidence does not completely mitigate the security concerns raised by such debt.  
 
Pursuant to the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, an administrative judge 
is authorized to grant initial or continued eligibility for a security clearance, despite the 
presence of an issue(s) that can be partially but not completely mitigated, with the 
provision that additional security measures shall be required to mitigate the issue(s). See 
SEAD 4, Appendix C (emphasis added).1 In light of the sizeable amount of credit card 
                                                          
1 See also Memorandum, Director for Defense Intelligence (Intelligence and Security), dated January 12, 
2018 (“Appendix C identifies authorized exceptions that are to be utilized when making adjudicative 
decisions to grant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or to hold a sensitive 
position . . . Effective immediately, authority to grant clearance eligibility with one of the exceptions 
enumerated in Appendix C is granted to any adjudicative, hearing, or appeal official or entity now authorized 
to grant clearance eligibility when they have jurisdiction to render the eligibility determination.”) In exercising 
this new discretionary authority, I have carefully considered and weighed the security concerns at issue, 
 
5 
debt at issue, I find that granting a conditional clearance will appropriately address any 
remaining concerns. Specifically, Applicant’s continued eligibility for a security clearance 
is conditioned on the following: 
 
(1) Applicant will continue to pay her debts as they come due; 
 
(2) Applicant will not incur any new past-due debts;  
 
(3) Within six months of this decision, Applicant will obtain financial counseling 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service or through an employer-provided assistance program;  
 
(4) Applicant will provide her facility security officer (FSO): 
 
a. a copy of this decision or, at minimum, this page, so the FSO can be 
aware of the conditions imposed on her security clearance;2 
 
b. documentation showing she obtained the required credit counseling; 
and  
 
c. a credit report every six months for the next two years, so that the FSO 
can independently verify that Applicant remains financial stable. 
(Applicant can once a year request a free copy of her credit report from 
one of the three major credit reporting agencies.); and, 
 
(5) If Applicant becomes delinquent on any new debt, she will immediately report 
this information to her FSO.  
 
Furthermore, Applicant is hereby warned that her failure to comply with these 
conditions or the receipt of other derogatory information raising a security concern under 
any of the adjudicative guidelines may result in the revocation of her clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:         For Applicant 
  
                                                          
the facts and circumstances giving rise to said issues, and other relevant factors. After doing so, I find that 
the grant of a conditional clearance is consistent with the national security interests of the United States. 
 
2 Although it is beyond the authority granted to me by the Directive and the Adjudicative Guidelines, to 
require a third party, such as Applicant’s employer, to independently monitor Applicant’s compliance with 
the conditions set forth herein, an FSO has an independent obligation to report any adverse information 
that comes to his or her attention to the Government (DoD Consolidated Adjudications Facility).  
 
6 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant Applicant a conditional security clearance. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
