 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 . )  ISCR Case No. 17-02130 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne M. Driskill Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
01/30/2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by 
his past financial problems. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 19, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under the financial considerations guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a decision on the administrative (written) record (Answer). 
 
 On October 3, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant seven exhibits for admission into the record. Applicant 
did not submit a response to the FORM (Response). The exhibits accompanying the 
                                                          
1 The CAF took this action under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
2 
 
FORM and the documents Applicant submitted with his Answer are admitted into the 
record.  On January 17, 2018, I was assigned the case for decision.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 42, is employed as a network administrator for a defense contractor. 
He obtained his undergraduate degree in 2010. He is twice divorced and has five 
children. He completed his security clearance application in 2015. (Item 2) He has been 
with his current employer abroad on contract the last year, but he has been a contractor 
since 2008. He has maintained two jobs to keep his financial accounts current for the 
last two years.  (Item 2) He has held a security clearance since 2010. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has a charged-off account in the amount of 
$28,927; a collection account in the amount of $844 and that he filed a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in January 2002 and in July 2012. The debts were respectively discharged 
in 2002 and 2013. 
 
Applicant and his wife separated. She left the marriage, and he was the sole 
financial support for his family at that time of three children. His divorce was final in 
2003.  He had debts and had to provide for his three children. The petition for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy was filed and the debts discharged in 2002. (Item 7) He had no financial 
difficulties after the discharge, until his second separation and divorce, as referenced in 
his credit report dated, May 2017.    
 
As to SOR 1.a, the judgment was satisfied in November 2013. This was the 
result of owing $28,927 for a car loan. He submitted documentation, including the title 
for the vehicle, which shows there is no lien. (Attachment to Answer)  
 
As to SOR 1.b, a collection account in the amount of $844, has been paid. He 
paid this debt before the SOR was issued and presented the processed personal 
checks as proof of payment. (Attachment to Answer). 
 
AS to SOR 1.c, Applicant admitted that in July 2012, he filed for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy as a means to pay his legitimate debts. His second marriage had recently 
ended and financial decisions that were made jointly became his sole responsibility. He 
could not maintain the household expenses and bills with one income. A child custody 
legal issue exacerbated his financial issues. The debts were discharged in January 
2013. (Item 6) 
 
                                                          
2 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4 
(SEAD 4), revising the Adjudicative Guidelines. The revised adjudicative guidelines are applicable to all 
security clearance decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (hereinafter “AG”). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) 
(security clearance decisions must be based on current DOD policy and standards). 
 
 
3 
 
As to SOR 1.d, Applicant admitted that he filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy   in 
January 2002, as a result of his separation and impending divorce. He provided for his 
children, and incurred legal bills. (Item 7) 
 
 He submitted four letters of recommendation. Two letters from co-workers attest 
to the fact that Applicant is an extremely skilled worker and has an excellent work ethic. 
He learns quickly; is a team player; completes complicated tasks efficiently and has a 
high degree of personal responsibility. The co-workers have known Applicant since 
2012. They also have seen him in non-work situations and commented on his volunteer 
activities in the community and his coaching activities with youth football. (Attachment to 
Answer) 
 
Another co-worker, who has known Applicant since 2010, and worked with him at  
different companies, stated that Applicant does not avoid challenging situations.  He 
knows about the obstacles that Applicant has faced in the past years. The co-worker 
noted that Applicant is someone who he vouches for on a personal and a professional  
level. 
 
Applicant’s program manager hired him in 2016 on a part-time basis. Applicant  
presented as a reliable,  flexible, and eager worker. He would gladly re-hire him. The 
final letter confirmed that Applicant can work independently, and consistently follows 
through to get a job done. He has an ability to troubleshoot matters and perseveres with 
a problem to its resolution.  
 
The credit reports confirm that since the 2012 bankruptcy discharge, Applicant 
has not incurred delinquent debt. His credit reports reflect many accounts as “pays as 
agreed.” He is now current with his student loans. (Item 4) 
 
 As of the submission of the case for decision, the delinquent debts in the SOR 
allegations are resolved. Applicant’s credit reports do not reflect any other delinquent 
accounts that are not resolved. (Item 4) 
 
Law & Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified 
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
 
4 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges make certain that applicants: (a) receive fair notice of the 
issues, (b) have a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) are not 
subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). In deciding a case, a judge must resolve any doubt raised by the 
evidence in favor of the national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Moreover, 
the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2002 and 2012. Both bankruptcy 
debts were discharged. He incurred delinquent debt when he was separated and 
divorced.  The presence of delinquent debt can raise the Guideline F security concern, 
which is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other 
illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances 
giving rise to delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and 
other qualities essential to protecting classified information.3 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, including the following pertinent ones: 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, . . . or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, . . .), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s past financial problems and two bankruptcies with subsequent debt 
problems were attributable to separations and divorce. He has five children for whom he 
provides. He filed for bankruptcy in 2002 and 2012. He acquired two other delinquent 
accounts as reflected in the SOR.   
 
Applicant did not simply walk away from his debts. Instead, he responsibly 
addressed each of his debts. He filed for bankruptcy, which is a legitimate means of 
resolving debt. His past financial problems are not attributable to not living within his 
means. He incurred debt trying to support his children on his income alone after his 
marriages fell apart. He made good-faith efforts to resolve his debts. He had legal 
expenses related to the custody of his children, which did not help his financial situation 
and he had student loans. He presented documentation showing that he is current on 
his student loans. 
 
The circumstances giving rise to Applicant’s past financial problems do not cast 
doubt on his ability and willingness to continue to properly handle and safeguard 
classified information. Additionally, the manner in which he addressed the debts that he 
incurred following his latest bankruptcy raises favorable inferences regarding his 
continued suitability. Applicant’s present financial situation does not raise a security 
concern. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) apply.  
 
After a complete and thorough review of the record evidence, including 
considering the whole-person factors set forth in AG ¶ 2, I find that Applicant met his 
heavy burden of proof and persuasion in mitigating the security concerns at issue. 
Furthermore, he established his eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Noreen Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
