 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 17-00265 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided insufficient evidence that he was unable to make greater 
progress resolving the delinquent debts on his statement of reasons (SOR). Financial 
considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On March 2, 2016, Applicant signed a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Government Exhibit (GE) 1. 
On February 27, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 
1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006. Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) 2. The SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline. HE 2. 
 
On March 22, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he requested 
a hearing. HE 3. On May 3, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On July 
17, 2017, the case was assigned to an administrative judge, and on September 12, 2017, 
 
2 
                                         
 
the case was transferred to me. On August 22, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for September 18, 2017, 
using video teleconference. Transcript (Tr.) 10; HE 1. Applicant waived his right to 15 
days of notice of the date, time, and location of his hearing. Tr. 10-11. Applicant’s hearing 
was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits; Applicant offered 
three exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Tr. 16-20; GE 1-5; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-C. On October 5, 2017, DOHA 
received a copy of the hearing transcript. After the hearing, Applicant provided 10 exhibits, 
which were admitted without objection. AE D-M. On January 9, 2018, Applicant provided 
one exhibit, which was admitted without objection. AE E; AE N. 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position on or after June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the previous AGs, and I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.h. 
He also provided mitigating information. HE 3.   
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a government contractor. Tr. 5; GE 1. In 
2001, Applicant graduated from high school, and he joined the Air Force that same year. 
Tr. 6. He served on active duty in the Air Force from 2001 to 2009, and his specialty was 
aircraft weapon systems and nuclear systems. Tr. 6. When he left the Air Force, he was 
a staff sergeant (E-5). Tr. 7. He received an honorable discharge. Tr. 25. He held a top 
secret security clearance when he was in the Air Force. Tr. 6. There is no evidence of 
any security violations. Applicant has taken some college courses; however, he has not 
received a degree. Tr. 7-8. Applicant has never married, and he does not have any 
children. Tr. 7.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant was unemployed from May 2009 to September 2010, and in 2013. Tr. 
22-23. From April 2016 to July 2017, Applicant worked on a contract for a DOD contractor, 
and in July 2017, the DOD contractor hired him as an employee. Tr. 21. His current annual 
salary is $57,000. Tr. 21. Applicant’s fiancée is totally disabled, and she is receiving 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.    
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
disability. Tr. 24. Applicant has filed his federal and state tax returns, and he does not 
owe any delinquent taxes. Tr. 24. Applicant has received financial counseling, and he 
utilizes a budget. Tr. 25. He does not know how much money remains at the end of each 
month after he pays his debts. Tr. 25. Applicant has $300 in his 401(k) account. Tr. 26. 
He has a total of about $1,500 in his bank accounts. Tr. 27. Applicant has no personal 
loans or car payments. Tr. 27. In 2011, Applicant was the victim of identity theft. Tr. 44. 
 
The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts totaling $17,715, and the record 
establishes the status of Applicant’s accounts as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a charged-off debt for $8,253. In April 2011, Applicant obtained 
a consolidation loan, and in April 2012, he left his employment to help a relative on a farm. 
Tr. 28-29. In 2012, he told the creditor that he could not make payments. Tr. 30. He did 
not communicate with the creditor for several years. Tr. 30. He said he called the creditor 
in April 2017, and he asked for the status of the debt. Tr. 31-32. At the hearing, Applicant 
said he would contact the creditor, learn the status of the debt, and arrange a payment 
plan. Tr. 31-33. On November 27, 2017, the creditor wrote that Applicant agreed to make 
$115 monthly payments, and the first payment was due on November 30, 2017. AE I. 
There was no proof of any payments made to the creditor, such as a cancelled check, 
checking account statement, or acknowledgement of receipt from the creditor. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a debt owed to the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) for 
$4,626. The VA overpaid an education stipend to Applicant. Tr. 34. He arranged a 
payment plan 30 months ago. Tr. 34. He provided proof of $65 monthly payments from 
March 2016 to January 2018. Tr. 34; AE N. On November 22, 2017, the VA wrote that he 
owed $4,324, and based on his December 1, 2017 authorization, the collection company 
would withdraw $65 from his account. AE L. Applicant is credited with mitigating this debt 
because he provided proof that he has an established payment plan, and documentary 
proof he is making the required payments. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.h allege three charged-off debts for $2,272, $853, and 
$438, and one judgment for $892 owed to the same bank. The SOR ¶ 1.e debt originated 
from a store credit card. Applicant said he only had one credit card with the bank, and in 
early 2017, he paid $878 to the creditor. Tr. 37, 41-42. He said he had proof of the 
payment. Tr. 38. On October 23, 2017, the bank-creditor wrote that there were “no signs 
of fraud” on his account. AE J. I have credited Applicant with mitigating the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.d for $853 because it is probable that the debt duplicates the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.h 
for $892. He is not credited with paying the judgment because he failed to provide 
documentation showing proof of payment or documentation showing release or 
satisfaction of the judgment.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g allege debts placed for collection for $227 and $154. Applicant 
said the two debts related to cable and utility bills for an apartment, and he believed the 
new tenant was supposed to pay them. Tr. 39-40. Applicant did not contact the creditors. 
Tr. 40.    
 
 
4 
                                         
 
Applicant promised to provide documentation showing payment plans and the 
status of his debt. Tr. 49. I suggested Applicant provide federal income tax information 
for five years to corroborate his statements about lack of income. Tr. 49-50.  
 
Applicant provided his IRS tax transcripts for his 2013-2015 federal income tax 
returns. AE F-H. Those three IRS tax transcripts are the sources for the information in 
this table. 
 
Year Filing Date Adjusted 
Gross Income 
Refund or Payment 
2013 Apr. 15, 2014 $33,362 Refund $1,610 (AE H) 
2014 Apr. 15, 2015 $37,691 Owe $684 (AE G) 
2015 Apr. 15, 2016  $45,249 Refund $317 (AE F) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s Air Force performance evaluations and his supervisor lauded his 
diligence, professionalism, leadership, and contributions to mission accomplishment. 
SOR response; AE C. Applicant received the following Air Force decorations, medals, 
badges, citations and campaign ribbons: Outstanding Unit Award with Valor Device; Air 
Force Good Conduct Medal with one oak leaf cluster; National Defense Service Medal; 
Global War on Terrorism Service Medal; Korean Defense Service Medal; Air Force 
Overseas Ribbon  Long; Air Force Longevity Service; USAF NCO PME Graduate Ribbon; 
and Air Force Training Ribbon. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
5 
                                         
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 
6 
                                         
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG           
¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,3 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
                                            
3 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
Underemployment, unemployment, identity theft, and his fiancée’s disability 
adversely affected Applicant’s finances. These are circumstances beyond his control. 
Applicant receives some mitigating credit under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts totaling $17,715. Applicant admitted 
responsibility for these debts in his SOR response. The only documentary evidence of 
any payments to address these SOR debts is proof that he was making $65 monthly 
payments to address his VA debt. I have credited Applicant with mitigating the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.d for $853 because it is probable that the debt duplicates the judgment in SOR 
¶ 1.h for $892. He is also credited with communicating with his SOR creditors in 2017, 
and with arranging payment plans for two large debts. He has taken some significant 
steps towards mitigating his debts.  
 
Applicant provided excellent documentation and established mitigating of the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant did not provide enough details and documentation about what he 
did to address his other SOR debts such as: (1) proof of payments, such as checking 
account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he 
paid or made any payments to the creditors; and (2) correspondence to or from the 
 
8 
                                         
 
creditors between 2013 and 2016 to establish maintenance of contact.4 Applicant failed 
to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because he did not provide documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of any debt disputes. His statement that he was the victim of identity 
theft is not sufficient because he did not establish that any of the SOR debts resulted from 
identity theft. In his SOR response, he admitted responsibility for all of the SOR debts.  
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
progress resolving the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.e through 1.h. There is insufficient 
assurance that these debts are being resolved. Under all the circumstances, he failed to 
establish that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a government contractor. He served on 
active duty in the Air Force from 2001 to 2009, and his specialty was aircraft weapon 
systems and nuclear systems. When he left the Air Force, he was a staff sergeant. He 
received an honorable discharge. He held a top secret security clearance when he was 
in the Air Force. Applicant has taken some college courses; however, he has not received 
a degree. There is no evidence of security violations. 
 
                                            
4 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
9 
                                         
 
Applicant’s Air Force performance evaluations and his supervisor lauded his 
diligence, professionalism, leadership, and contributions to mission accomplishment. 
Applicant received some important Air Force decorations, medals, badges, citations and 
campaign ribbons. 
 
The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts totaling $17,715. Applicant provided 
excellent documentary evidence of his payments to address the VA debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
His finances were adversely affected by circumstances beyond his control including 
unemployment, underemployment, identity theft, and his fiancée’s disability. I have 
credited Applicant with mitigating the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d for $853 because it is probable 
that the debt duplicates the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.h for $892. He also receives some 
credited with communicating with his SOR creditors in 2017, and with arranging payment 
plans for two large debts. 
 
Applicant provided insufficient corroborating or substantiating documentary 
evidence of payments and established payment plans for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 
and 1.e through 1.h. He did not establish he had insufficient income to make more 
progress sooner on more of his SOR debts. His actions show lack of financial 
responsibility and judgment and raise unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More 
information about inability to pay debts, financial history, or documented financial 
progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his past-due 
debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he may well be able 
to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration concerns are not mitigated, and it is not clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. Financial 
considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
 
  
 
10 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
