 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00298 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 18, 2016. 
On March 24, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline B. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 25, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 24, 2017. 
The case was assigned to me on October 17, 2017. On November 15, 2017, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for December 5, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
 
2 
 
At the hearing, Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted into evidence, 
without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I, and its request for administrative notice of relevant facts about Jordan 
and Israel as HE II and III. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through L, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
December 20, 2017. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG.1 Accordingly, I have applied 
the June 2017 AG.2 However, I have also considered the September 2006 AG because 
they were in effect on the date the SOR was issued. I conclude that my decision would 
have been the same under either version. 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He has been married for 12 years. He and his wife 
have a child, age 3, and they await the birth of another child in early 2018. Applicant 
received his bachelor’s degree in 2006 from a university in Jordan, and his master’s 
degree in 2011 from the U.S. university for whom he is currently employed full time 
while working on his Ph.D. degree. He also interns part time for a U.S. engineering 
company. In 2016, a U.S. defense contractor offered Applicant a full-time position as an 
electrical engineer, contingent on him obtaining a security clearance.4  
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 2005, as a citizen of Jordan. He 
returned to Jordan to finish his last semester of university, and then returned to the 
United States, where he has resided full time since 2006. In 2010, he became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen, retaining dual citizenship. His three-year old is a U.S. citizen by 
birth as will be his expected child. His wife became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
September 2017.5 
 
Applicant’s parents, four of his five brothers, and his wife’s parents are citizens 
and residents of Jordan (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c). Applicant’s father and one of his four 
Jordanian-citizen brothers (Brother 1) also maintain dual U.S. citizenship. His fifth 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer and his SCA (GE 1).  
 
4 See also AE G; Tr. at 7-8, 48, 65-68, 110-111.  
 
5 See also AE G, H; Tr. at 44-47. 
 
 
3 
 
brother resides in the United States and maintains dual citizenship with the United 
States and Jordan (Brother 5). His sister is a citizen of Jordan residing in Israel (SOR ¶ 
1.b). None of these family members had careers affiliated with a foreign military or 
government except for his father, who may have been employed by the government of 
Jordan as a teacher.6  
 
 Applicant’s mother, age 70, has never worked outside of the home. Applicant 
communicates with her daily, primarily by phone and sometimes via video call. She has 
visited him in the United States twice since 2006, most recently in 2015. On her visits, 
which were approximately one to two months long, she stayed with Applicant and 
Brother 5.7 
 
 Applicant’s father, age 74, immigrated to the United States on his own in the late 
1990s intending to live permanently and eventually migrate the rest of his family. 
However, he relocated back to Jordan in 2010 to rejoin Applicant’s mother, who had no 
particular disdain for the United States or its policies, but preferred to remain in Jordan. 
Prior to his retirement, Applicant’s father worked as a teacher in Jordan and as a grocer 
in the United States. Applicant believed, but was not certain, that his father taught at a 
public school, and as a result, is receiving a government pension of an unknown 
amount. Applicant’s father owned two properties in the United States until 2015 when 
he transferred them to Brother 1’s daughter. Applicant communicates with his father 
approximately once every other week, primarily by phone, and on occasion, during his 
video chats with his mother.8 
 
 Brother 1, age 48, immigrated to the United States in either the late 80s or early 
90s. He lived in the United States with his family until approximately 2000 when he 
returned to Jordan, due to financial issues. Three of Brother 1’s sons reside  in the 
United States, and Brother 1 plans to return to live and work in the United States at 
some point in the foreseeable future. While in the United States, Brother 1 owned and 
operated a grocery store until he transferred it to Brother 5. In Jordan, Brother 1 is self-
employed in the construction field. Since 2000, Brother 1 has visited the United States 
one time, in 2015 during the same visit as his mother. Applicant communicates primarily 
by phone with Brother 1, approximately once every two months, including sometimes 
when he is present during Applicant’s phone calls with his mother.9 
 
 Brother 2, age 46, is self-employed as a taxi driver. Applicant communicates with 
Brother 2 once every two months, by phone, text, or social media.10 
                                                          
6 See also Tr. at 37-44, 49, 76. 
 
7 See also Tr. at 70-71, 74-76. 
 
8 AE K and L; See also Tr. at 36-37, 48-49, 69, 71-88, 118-119.  
 
9 AE K and L; Tr. at 36-37, 48-49, 82-88, 117-118.  
 
10 See also Tr. at 38, 88-93. 
 
 
4 
 
 Brother 3, age 42, is employed by a private insurance company. Applicant 
communicates with Brother 3 approximately once every three months, including 
sometimes when he is present during Applicant’s phone calls to his mother.11 
 
 Brother 4, age 40, is self-employed as an accountant. Applicant communicates 
with Brother 4 approximately once every two months, by phone, and approximately 
once or twice a week by text or social media.12 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law, age 49, has never worked outside the home. His 
father-in-law, age 56, is self-employed in the construction field. His mother-in-law visited 
the United States once when her granddaughter was born in 2014 for approximately a 
month and a half. Applicant has limited contact with his father-in-law, but communicates 
with his mother-in-law approximately once every two months by either phone or video 
chat.13 
 
 Applicant’s sister, age 44, has never been employed outside of the home. Her 
husband is employed as a graphic designer. Applicant communicates with her 
approximately once every two months by phone, and approximately once a month by 
text or social media.14 
 
 Since 2006, Applicant has travelled to Jordan to visit his family four times, most 
recently in 2013, and to Israel to visit his sister once in 2010. He does not have any 
current plans to travel to Jordan. His Jordanian-citizen brothers and parents reside in 
close proximity to each other, within a 10-minute drive from one another.15 
 
Applicant maintains all of his earned assets in the United States. In 2013, as part 
of the equitable distribution of his estate among his children, Applicant’s father gifted to 
Applicant two apartments located in Jordan. One is valued at approximately $50,000 
(Apt 1), and the other, which is also his parents’ primary residence, $90,000 (Apt 2). He 
does not value his gifted Jordanian assets over his earned U.S. assets. As they are 
neither financially or otherwise significant to him, Applicant has no interest in retaining 
these two properties. To that end, he placed Apt 1 for sale in 2013, and plans to sell Apt 
2 once his parents are deceased. He would be willing to forfeit his interest in them 
sooner if necessary.16 
 
                                                          
11 See also Tr. at 39, 93-94. 
 
12 See also Tr. at 40, 94-97. 
 
13 See also Tr. at 99-101. 
 
14 See also Tr. at 41, 97-99. 
 
15 See also Tr. at 93, 102-107-116. 
 
16 See also Tr. at 50-52, 111-116. 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant has chosen to establish his career and life in the United States, and 
has no plans to return to live in Jordan. There are no job opportunities for him in his field 
in Jordan. He and his wife plan to raise their family in the United States, and as soon as 
he attains financial security, they will purchase their first home. He registered for the 
U.S. selective service in 2005, is a registered U.S. voter, and has served on a U.S. 
jury.17   
 
Administrative Notice (Jordan) 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the U.S. Government’s pronouncements 
concerning Jordan in 2016, as outlined in HE II and the documents appended thereto, 
including the following: 
 
 The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (Jordan) is a constitutional monarchy. 
 
 The Jordanian government continues to infringe on citizens’ privacy rights. 
Impunity remains widespread. The most significant human rights problems are 
restrictions on the freedom of expression, including detention of journalists, which 
limited the ability of citizens and media to criticize government policies and 
officials; citizens’ inability change their government peacefully; and mistreatment 
and allegations of torture by security and government officials. 
 
 The threat of terrorism remains a major concern.  
 
 Jordan remains a key U.S. ally in countering terrorism and violent extremist 
ideology. Jordan’s location in a tumultuous region makes it vulnerable to a variety 
of threats, yet also facilitates its regional leadership in confronting them. 
 
 Jordan has advanced capabilities to detect, deter, and prevent terrorism within its 
territory, and has remained committed to securing its borders and denying safe 
haven to terrorists.  
 
 Jordan’s interagency anti-extremist strategy remains under-resourced and 
unstaffed, its leaders are reticent to acknowledge domestic radicalization, 
including self-radicalizations, and its efforts to improve counter-radicalization in 
schools and mosques were rarely well coordinated across government agencies. 
 
Administrative Notice (Israel) 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the U.S. Government’s pronouncements 
concerning Israel in 2006, 2015, and 2016, as outlined in HE III and the documents 
appended thereto, including the following:  
 
                                                          
17 AE B, C, and I; Tr. 43-48. 
 
 
6 
 
 Although the United States has provided regular military support to Israel, there 
is a significant documented history of classified information and controlled 
technologies being illegally imported by private Israeli entities. Illegal technology 
transfers, even to private Israeli entities, are a significant concern because 
foreign government entities – including intelligence organizations and security 
services – have learned to capitalize on private-sector technology acquisitions. 
 
 The U.S. Department of State warns all persons seeking to enter or depart Israel, 
the West Bank, or Gaza that they are subject to security screening, including 
prolonged questioning and physical searches, and may be denied entry or exit. 
Israeli security officials have also on occasion requested access to travelers’ 
personal e-mail accounts or other social media accounts as a condition of entry. 
In such circumstances, travelers should have no expectation of privacy for any 
data stored on such devices or in their accounts. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”18 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”19 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”20 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
18 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
19 Egan at 527. 
 
20 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
7 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”21 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.22 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”23 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.24 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.25 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.26 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”27 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”28 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
The security concern under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) is set out in AG ¶ 6, 
as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
                                                          
21 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
22 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
23 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
24 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
25 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
26 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
27 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
28 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
8 
 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially 
relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology;  
 
AG ¶ 7(e): shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation or personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant’s direct ties to his parents, four brothers, sister, and in-laws establish 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b), and his indirect ties to his in-laws through his wife establish AG ¶ 
7(e). His interest in the two apartments gifted to him by his father establishes AG ¶ 7(f). 
The human rights and terrorism problems existent in Jordan and Israel, the U.S. 
Department of State’s security concerns with respect to Israel’s infringements on 
privacy rights, and the concerns regarding Israeli espionage against the United States 
establish a “heightened risk” with respect to both countries.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are established: 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, 
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
 
9 
 
AG ¶ 8(f): the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
Applicant chose to make the United States his permanent home over 11 years 
ago. He and his wife are both naturalized U.S. citizens. They plan to raise their U.S. 
born children in the United States. All of the assets of value to Applicant are in the 
United States. Applicant sought both of his post-graduate degrees from U.S. 
universities, and chose to begin and continue his career in the United States. None of 
his foreign family members has any security-significant connection to a foreign military 
or government. His father, Brother 1, Brother 1’s three sons, Brother 1’s daughter, and 
Brother 5 have their own connections to the United States as residents, citizens, or 
property owners. While Applicant has close ties to family who are citizens and residents 
of Jordan, including his sister who resides in Israel, his stronger ties are in the United 
States. Therefore, I conclude that Applicant would resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest. I find the nature and value of the two apartments in Jordan are 
such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to 
influence, manipulate, or pressure Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant was candid, sincere, 
and credible at the hearing. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions 
under Guideline B, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person 
and the “heightened risk” associated with Jordan and Israel, I conclude that Applicant 
has mitigated the foreign influence concerns raised by his family ties and assets. 
Accordingly, I conclude that he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
