1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
           ----------------------------  ) ISCR Case No. 17-01051 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for access 
to classified information. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern raised by his 
problematic financial history. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on May 8, 2016. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. On June 21, 2017, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant his eligibility for access to classified information.1 It detailed the factual reasons for 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
2 
 
the action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations. 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 8, 2017, and requested a decision based on the 
written record without a hearing.   
 
On August 15, 2017, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant material  
(FORM).2 The FORM was mailed to Applicant August 17, 2017. He was given 30 days to 
file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. Applicant received the FORM on August 31, 2017. He did not respond to the 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on December 7, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
  Included in the FORM were four items of evidence, which are marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and are admitted into evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 37 years old, never married and has two children (a son 9 and a 
daughter 14). He is a high school graduate with post-high-school technical training from 
April 2007 to April 2009. Since April 2016, he has worked for a defense contractor.3 
 
The SOR alleges seven delinquent student loans totaling about $38,000.4 
Applicant admits those allegations but claims that he was defrauded by the institute where 
he received his technical training. He claims, in addition, that he is in the process of having 
the loans discharged, and failing that he will have the loans consolidated and resume 
making payments.5 The credit report indicates that the loans became delinquent between 
October 2013 and December 2014.6  
 
Law and Policies 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.7 As noted by the 
Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
                                                          
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. The AG were published in the Federal 
Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2016).   
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation  
that are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 GE 3.  
 
4 GE 1.  
 
5 GE 2.  
 
6 GE 4.  
7 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
3 
 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”8 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.9 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.10 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.11 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.12 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.13 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.14 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.15 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.16 
 
Discussion 
  
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,17 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
                                                          
 
8 484 U.S. at 531 
 
9 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
10 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
12 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
13 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
14 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
15 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
17 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
4 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information . . . .18 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying  
conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 AG ¶ 19(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.   
 
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has had a problematic financial 
history with respect to his student loans, and those financial problems continue to this 
                                                          
18 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
day. Security concerns are raised under AG ¶¶ 19(a), (b), and (c).  The next inquiry is 
whether any mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Although the student loans became delinquent three to four years ago, they remain 
in default and unresolved to this day. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant claims that he was the victim of fraud perpetrated by the school where 
he received technical training from 2007 to 2009. Although he produced no evidence to 
support that claim, for purposes of discussion here, I will assume that he was such a 
victim, which would be a circumstance largely beyond his control, thus triggering the 
application of AG ¶ 20(b). That, however, does not end the inquiry.  
 
Applicant needs to establish that he acted responsibly under those circumstances. 
Applicant does not specify when the fraud was committed, but it is reasonable to assume 
that his discovery of the fraud prompted him to stop making payments in October 2013 
and December 2014. Since then, however, Applicant has not produced any evidence of 
his attempts to have the loans discharged or that he had them consolidated and resumed 
payments. In fact, beyond his claim of fraud and his hope to have the loans discharged 
or consolidated, the record is barren of any evidence of responsible conduct by Applicant.  
AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Nor do AG 20 ¶¶(c) and (d) apply.  
 
The record raises doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good 
judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.19 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant failed to meet his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the SOR allegations: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:                  Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
19 AG ¶¶ 2(d)(1)-(9) and 2(f)(1)-(6).  
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
