 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01659 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On May 30, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on September 14, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on September 20, 2017, 
and had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and she provided a 
two-page response to the FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 
through 6, is admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on 
January 17, 2018.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 69 years old. She obtained a bachelor’s degree online in 2010 and a 
master’s degree in 2012. Applicant has been employed by a federal contractor since 
February 2016. She has been married since 1984. Applicant had one adult child, and 
she is raising two grandchildren. Applicant served in the U.S. Navy from 1978 to 1988 
and received an honorable discharge. Applicant reported a previous security clearance 
from 2004. She has previously worked for federal contractors and she had one period of 
unemployment from June 2012 to November 2012. She reports that her employer 
debarred her from federal-contractor service in 2008 because she reported two earlier 
degrees in her application for employment. It turned out that those two degrees were 
from an un-accredited university. When this was discovered, she lost her job. In her 
personal subject interview in March 2016, Applicant explained that she felt “duped” by 
that university.  
 
Applicant did not report delinquent debts including student loans in section 26 of 
her security clearance application (SCA).2 The total amount that she owes for the 
student loans is $119,350. In her June 13, 2017 answer to the SOR, she admitted to the 
delinquent student loans at SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.f and 1.j – 1.n. She claimed that she 
consolidated all of these with one creditor and started a re-payment plan in July 2017. 
Applicant included attachments 1 to 4 with her answer. Attachment 3 confirmed that she 
owed the creditor $119,350 and entered into an agreement in July 2017 to make 
monthly payments of $141 for the delinquent student loans. This would require 852 
monthly payments and 71 years for Applicant to pay off this debt. Attachments 1, 2, and 
4 are June 12, 2017 credit bureau reports that she provided. Applicant denied the 
alleged debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i and attached documentary evidence showing that 
she paid off SOR ¶ 1.g. SOR ¶ 1.h was compromised and settled for $1,176 
(attachment 2). Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.i because she claims it fell off her credit 
reports.3 Yet, it was discussed in her personal subject interview and reflected in her 
March 2016 credit report.4 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s March 2, 2016 
Security Clearance Application (SCA). (Item 3) and Personal Subject Interview conducted on March 28, 
2016. (Item 5) 
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 The Appeal Board noted in ISCR case No. 15-02957 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2017): 
 
There is more than one plausible explanation for the absence of debts from a credit report, such as the 
removal of debts due to the passage of time, and the absence of unsatisfied debts from an Applicant’s 
credit report does not extenuate or mitigate and overall history of financial difficulties or constitute 
evidence of financial reform or rehabilitation. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-04425 at 3-4 (App. Bd. May 
17, 2002) and ISCR Case No. 03-05197 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2004). 
 
4 Items 4 and 5. 
 
3 
 
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the former adjudicative guidelines (AGs) effective 
on September 1, 2006. However, new AGs were promulgated in Security Executive 
Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017, and this decision 
is based on the new AGs.5 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
                                                          
5 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
4 
 
 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk that an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by her credit 
reports and answer to the SOR. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b) and 19(c), thereby shifting the 
 
5 
 
 
burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.6 Applicant has not met that burden. Her delinquent student loans have not been 
adequately addressed.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant endured one short-term period of unemployment when she was 
debarred and she has been raising her two grandchildren. Arguably, these conditions 
were beyond her control. She has produced no relevant or responsive documentation, 
either with her Answer to the SOR, or in response to the FORM, to satisfy me that she 
is making consistent payments on the delinquent student loans. She has not 
demonstrated that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has the 
burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that her financial problems are under 
control, and that her debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s credit reports and SOR 
list 14 delinquent debts totaling $124,000. Applicant did not provide enough details with 
documentary corroboration about what she did to address her student loans. She did 
not provide documentation including: (1) proof of payments, such as checking account 
statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor (2) correspondence to or 
from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact;7 (3) credible debt disputes 
                                                          
6 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
 
6 
 
 
indicating she did not believe she was responsible for the debts and why she held such 
a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement 
offers or agreements to show that she was attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) 
other evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant failed to establish mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(e) because she did not provide documented proof to substantiate the 
existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was necessary to 
provide corroborating or supporting documentation of resolution of the debts in the 
SOR. (FORM at 3) Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no 
documentary evidence that she has demonstrated a consistent track record of 
payments on the student loans pursuant to her repayment plan. She did not describe 
financial counseling or provide a budget. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for her financial 
problems and other mitigating information. The FORM informed Applicant that she had 
30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response 
setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. 
If you do not file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will 
be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the 
evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 3)  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
                                                                                                                                                                                           
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current.  
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Most importantly, Applicant has not addressed the 
specific allegations in the SOR concerning her student loans, which make up the 
majority of her delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. She has not met her 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:             Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.f:                                  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.e, 1.g and 1.h:             For Applicant  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.i through 1.n:               Against Applicant 
          
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
