 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02013 
 SSN: )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 29, 2010, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on May 6, 2010. The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and he 
received it on March 15, 2010. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant submitted a reply that 
was received by DOHA on June 16, 2010. The case was assigned to me on July 2, 
2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted ¶¶ 1.a - 1.f, and denied 1.g. After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old. He is single and has no children. Since June 2007, he 
has worked as a security guard for a defense contractor.1 He served on active duty in 
the Navy as an enlisted member from May 2002 until February 2005. He was 
involuntarily discharged from the Navy for a pattern of misconduct. He received a 
general (under honorable conditions) discharge.2   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) receiving nonjudicial 
punishment (Captain’s Mast) in 2004, for a variety of offenses including, unauthorized 
absence, missing movement, underage drinking, making a false statement, and altering 
a document; (2) receiving nonjudicial punishment (Captain’s Mast) in 2005, for a variety 
of offenses including, unauthorized absence, underage drinking, driving while impaired, 
and wrongful appropriation of a vehicle and other property; (3) being discharged from 
the Navy on February 28, 2005, with a general discharge due to a pattern of 
misconduct; (4) being arrested in 2006,  and pleading guilty to disturbing the peace in 
St. Joseph, Missouri; (5) altering a doctor’s note in February 2007, and providing the 
forged note to his employer to support an absence from work; and, (6) resigning from 
his job in February 2007, after allegations of misconduct because of the forged doctor’s 
note provided to his employer.3 
  
 In explanation, Applicant attributes his misconduct in the Navy was attributed to 
his alcohol dependency. He further states that he requested treatment from the Navy, 
but because of impending deployments he was never allowed to enroll in any alcohol 
treatment programs. Applicant also claims he saw a counselor at Pearl Harbor but had 
to deploy soon thereafter and received no follow-on treatment.4 When interviewed by an 
investigator for his security clearance in December 2007, Applicant stated he did not 
                                                          
1 Item 5. 
 
2 Item 6. 
 
3 Items 4, 6, 9, 10 
 
4 Item 4: Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
 
3 
 
 
have an alcohol problem and continues to drink alcohol. There is no other evidence in 
the record concerning alcohol counseling or treatment for Applicant.5 
 
 Applicant relates that his post-Navy conduct of disturbing the peace was caused 
by drinking to much alcohol after graduating from a course he attended. Additionally, he 
admits to using “very bad judgment” when he chose to alter a doctor’s note that he gave 
to his employer to cover an absence from work. He explained that he didn’t have 
insurance at the time and couldn’t afford to go to the doctor. Because he needed a 
doctor’s note to return to work, he altered an earlier doctor’s note by changing the dates 
and submitting it to his employer. When confronted by his employer, he resigned from 
his position. Applicant also claims he did not intentionally omit his 2005 nonjudicial 
punishment from his security clearance application completed in June 2007. He states 
that by then he had moved on with his life and forgot the details about the event.6  
 
 Applicant presented two Navy fitness reports for the years 2002-2003 and 2003-
2004. Overall Applicant was a sailor who met Navy standards and was described by his 
rating officials as a “vital asset”, a “key player”, and someone who performed his duties 
in an exceptional manner with pride and professionalism.7 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
5 Item 8. 
 
6 Item 4; Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
7 Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire;  
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
 
5 
 
 
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; and 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
Applicant’s pattern of behavior, both while in the Navy and more recently while 
working in the civilian world, call into question his judgment, honesty and ability to follow 
rules. He was discharged from the Navy for a pattern of misconduct that included 
receiving discipline for under age drinking on two occasions, altering a document and 
making false official statement, among other things. Since he left the Navy, he resigned 
from a job because he altered a doctor’s note. All these actions represent a pattern of 
dishonesty and a lack of integrity calling into question Applicant’s fitness to hold a 
security clearance. AG ¶¶16(c), 16(d), and 16(e) apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.f. 
When Applicant completed his June 2007, SF-86, he failed to list his January 
2005, nonjudicial punishment. However, this does not prove Applicant deliberately failed 
 
6 
 
 
to disclose information about his Captain’s Mast. Applicant listed his earlier nonjudicial 
punishment received in 2004. Applicant denied any intentional falsification. Deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral 
statement to the Government, when applying for a security clearance, is a security 
concern. But every inaccurate statement is not a falsification. A falsification must be 
deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully. When 
Applicant completed his SF-86, he failed to remember his second nonjudicial 
punishment. I am persuaded that Appellant was not attempting to deceive the 
government when he neglected to list this information. AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply to 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g.   
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 Applicant’s actions in repeatedly breaking rules while in the Navy and engaging 
in behavior involving dishonesty, both in and out of the Navy, casts doubt on his overall 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered Applicant’s 
 
7 
 
 
positive fitness reports, written six and seven years ago, and his explanation that 
alcohol indulgence contributed to the problems he experienced while in the Navy. 
However, I also considered that a significant number of Applicant’s acts involved 
aspects of dishonesty (false statements, altering documents, wrongful appropriation, 
and providing a false doctor’s note). These acts are numerous and extend over a 
considerable time frame. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
