                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-06559 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 9, 2007, Applicant submitted his security clearance application (SF 
86). On August 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
C (Foreign Preference) and B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.   
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 17, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. I received the case assignment on December 2, 
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 2, 2009, setting the hearing for 
December 16, 2009. 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 16, 2009. Applicant waived 
the 15 day notice requirement in the Directive. (Tr. 11)  
 
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without 
objection. Under the general designation of Exhibit 6, 16 documents were also received 
into evidence pursuant to the Government’s request that I take administrative notice of 
information relating to Iran. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through CC, 
which were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
January 5, 2010. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open to submit copies 
of his exhibits.  
 
 I also kept the record open to receive any information on the reciprocity issue of 
Applicant’s security clearance issued by another government agency. (Tr. 11-13) If the 
clearance existed, DOHA may have to issue a clearance pursuant to the reciprocity 
provisions of the NISPOM Section 2-204. The Government submitted that information 
on July 14, 2010. Applicant responded to the proffer on August 4, 2010. The 
Government submitted rebuttal information on August 5, 2010. I marked those 
documents as Hearing Exhibits 1-3. The record closed on August 6, 2010. I reopened 
the record on August 12 and 13, 2010, to obtain the current status of the Iranian 
passport Applicant had. I received an email from Applicant and his security officer on 
August 13, 2010, with information on the passport. I marked that document as Hearing 
Exhibit 4. The government did not object to that document. Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iran. (Tr. 21) The request and the attached documents were 
admitted into evidence as Exhibit 6. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations the SOR, 
with explanations. He also provided additional information to support his request for 
eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant is 32 years old. He is unmarried. Applicant has a college degree, a law 
degree, and a graduate law degree from a Belgian university. He works for a defense 
contractor. He was born in Iran in 1977. His family immigrated to the United States in 
1983 when Applicant was six years old. Since then, he has lived in the United States 
continuously except for his year in Belgium studying law, and two trips to Iran in 2000 
and 2009. (Tr. 47-52, 60, 70; Exhibits 1, 3, 5, R-T) 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s father, mother, and brother live in the United States. His brother 
works for a private company in the United States.  His parents are retired and living in 
the United States. They are all naturalized U.S. citizens, as is Applicant. They are also 
dual citizens with Iran because Iranian law does not recognize the renunciation of that 
citizenship. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in January 2000. (Tr. 53, 70-72; 
Exhibits 1-5) 
 
Applicant had an Iranian passport issued before Applicant became a U.S. citizen. 
It was issued in 1998 and expired in May 2004, and was extended to June 2, 2008. 
After he became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2000, Applicant retained that passport until 
it expired. In 2008 Applicant signed an application for an Iranian passport given to him 
by his father. His father prepared and processed the necessary paperwork with the 
Iranian government to renew Applicant’s passport. The passport was issued in January 
2009 and is valid until 2014. Applicant’s passport was until August 12, 2010, in his 
parent’s safe deposit box or in Applicant’s possession at his home. Applicant’s parents 
and brother obtained Iranian passports at the same time. Applicant used the earlier 
passport to travel to Iran in the summer of 2000 to visit his father’s mother after he 
became a U.S. citizen in January 2000. They used the newly issued Iranian passports 
to visit the father’s mother in 2009 in Iran. Both visits lasted about three weeks and were 
family visits only. Applicant’s parents and brother went at the same time. Applicant’s 
grandmother, aunt and uncle, all of whom are his father’s relatives, live in Iran and are 
citizens of that country. His grandmother is 95 years old. The Iranian passport is used 
because entry into Iran is easier with it. Iranian law does not recognize dual citizenship 
and requires the use of the Iranian passport. (Tr. 52-57, 61-66, 74, 76; Exhibits 1-5, L, 
Hearing Exhibit 4)  
 
Applicant is not certain what property he might inherit in Iran from his father. His 
father will inherit from his mother. Applicant told the government investigator on January 
31, 2008, he did not want to renounce his Iranian citizenship at that time because of his 
inheritance potential. Applicant’s aunt is retired and has some land near the Caspian 
Sea in Iran. Applicant’s uncle is an engineering consultant. No one works for the Iranian 
Government. Applicant does not maintain any regular contact with his Iranian relatives 
except to call his grandmother every six months. (Tr. 61-66; Exhibit 3) 
 
Applicant would be willing to destroy his Iranian passport to obtain a security 
clearance. He has never voted in an Iranian election. He has not served in the Iranian 
military and has an exemption from service that his father arranged. Applicant does not 
intend to renew his passport. He has no present plans to travel again to Iran or strong 
interest in returning there. On August 12, 2010, I requested an update on the location of 
the Iranian passport. Applicant responded on August 13, 2010, that this passport was in 
his possession. Later in the day his security officer emailed that he now had control of 
the passport in his office. Applicant had nine months from the date of the hearing to 
surrender or destroy his Iranian passport and did not do so. (Tr. 55-59, 68, 76, Hearing 
Exhibit 4) 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant submitted letters of support for his clearance based on his skills 
needed by his employer. He submitted two employee evaluations showing he meets or 
exceeds expectations. Applicant included two “outstanding performance reward” 
certificates. (Exhibits M to V) 
 
Applicant proclaimed his loyalty to the U.S. He does not have any financial 
interests outside the U.S. He asserts he has no direct or strong ties to anyone in Iran. 
His life since the age of six years has been spent in the United States with his family. 
(Tr. 70, 76)  
 
Applicant received a secret security clearance in February 2007. That clearance 
was granted by the Defense Industrial Security Clearance Office. Based on that 
clearance, another agency granted Applicant a secret security clearance in February 
2007. Pursuant to National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM) 
Section 2-204, the Department of Defense is not required to grant a reciprocal security 
clearance based on the other agency’s clearance granted to Applicant. A year after 
obtaining his security clearance he applied for a new Iranian passport. (Hearing Exhibits 
1-3) 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding Iran: 
 
Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The U.S. has not had diplomatic 
relations with Iran since 1980. 1 
 
The U.S. Government has defined the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
(1) Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction; 
(2) Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; (3) Its support for violent 
opposition to the Middle East peace process; (4) Its dismal human rights record; and (5) 
Iran’s intervention in the internal affairs of Iraq.2 The U.S. has designated and 
characterized Iran as the most active state sponsor of terrorism. Iran provides critical 
support to non-state terrorist groups.3 
 
The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary 
executions, including of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary 
arrest and detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; 
severe restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement 
and privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and 
1 U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Iran, dated March 2008 and 2009. 
 
2 Id.  
 
3U.S. Department of State, State Sponsors of Terrorism, April 30, 2009, and December 14, 2009.  
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
legal and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.4  
 
The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the 
risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens, who were born in Iran and are the children of Iranian 
citizens, even those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian, 
are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under 
Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian 
government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship. U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter and depart Iran using their 
U.S. passports; they even had their U.S. passports confiscated upon arrival or 
departure. U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed by the Iranian 
government. Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. 
Hotel rooms, telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and personal 
possessions in hotel rooms be searched.5 (Exhibit 6, E, W-BB) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
4U. S. Department of State, 2009 Human Rights Report: Iran, Country Reports on Human Rights 
Practices, dated February 25, 2009.  
 
5 U.S. Department of State, Travel Warning: Iran, dated July 1, 2009. 
 
6 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference 
for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone 
to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests 
of the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying.  Two conditions apply: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
 becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
 member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country. 
 
 Applicant was born in Iran. He obtained an Iranian passport before he became a 
U.S. citizen in 2000. That passport was extended in 2004 until 2008. He obtained 
another Iranian passport in 2009 that expires in 2014. That passport was in the 
 
7 
 
 
possession of his parents in their safe deposit box until August 13, 2010. It is now in the 
possession of his security officer. AG ¶ 10 (a) 1 applies. 
 
Applicant renewed his Iranian passport at his father’s request to make it easier 
for him to enter Iran to visit his father’s family. He did so voluntarily after obtaining U.S. 
citizenship and he used the passport in 2009 after being granted a security clearance. It 
also allows Applicant to protect any property or financial interests he may have in 
property his grandmother, aunt and uncle own. AG ¶ 10 (a) 5 applies.  
 
After the Government raised a potential disqualification, the burden shifts to 
Applicant to establish any appropriate mitigating condition. AG ¶ 11 provides four 
conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in 
a foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or 
when the individual was a minor; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant was born in Iran. His citizenship is derived from that circumstance. His 
dual citizenship is based on the Iranian law that does not allow Iranian citizens to 
renounce their citizenship after obtaining citizenship in another country. He had an 
Iranian passport before becoming a U.S. citizen in 2000. AG ¶ 11(a) applies and AG ¶ 
11(c) partially applies for actions done before Applicant became a U.S. citizen. It does 
not apply to actions after 2000 when Applicant became a U.S. citizen.  
 
Applicant recently expressed a willingness to relinquish his Iranian passport, if it 
were necessary for him to do so to obtain a security clearance and maintain his 
employment. He did not state he would renounce the Iranian citizenship although he 
admitted he was an Iranian citizen at the same time he became a U.S. citizenship and 
had a security clearance. AG ¶ 11(b) does not apply. AG ¶ 11(e) does not apply 
because Applicant did not surrender his passport to his security officer, having left it in 
his parents’ safe deposit box, until August 13, 2010. Applicant showed his preference 
for his Iranian passport, and access to that country, on the passport by doing nothing for 
nine months after his hearing. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;6 and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 Applicant’s two trips, in 2000 and 2009, coupled with the Iranian government’s 
anti-American actions and statements, give rise to security concerns that if Applicant 
6 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative 
lives in a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor 
alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result 
in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
9 
 
 
had access to classified information he could be subject to a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion by the Iranian authorities. 
Applicant had access to classified information after he received a security clearance in 
2007. He travelled to Iran in 2009 while having that security clearance. AG ¶ 7 (a) and 
(b) apply.  
 
 Applicant’s parents and brother are dual citizens of the United States and Iran, as 
is Applicant. They live in the United States. His grandmother, aunt, and uncle live in Iran 
and are Iranian citizens. Their presence in Iran and Applicant’s work in the U.S. could 
create a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion by 
Iranian authorities based on their past human rights violations. The Iranian authorities 
could pressure Applicant’s relatives to get Applicant to disclose classified information to 
keep them safe from criminal penalties or harassment by the Iranian authorities. AG ¶ 
7(d) applies.  
 
Applicant’s possibility of inheritance from his father of property currently owned 
by his grandmother, aunt, and uncle are financial interests in Iran. Applicant wants to 
protect that inheritance possibility. Applicant could be subject to foreign influence or 
exploitation to protect his inheritance. AG ¶ 7(e) applies. 
 
After the Government raised a potential disqualification, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to establish any appropriate mitigating condition. AG ¶ 8 provides conditions 
that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
 
10 
 
 
 Iran’s bellicose statements and actions in recent years, and the lack of diplomatic 
relations with the U.S., are a security concern when Applicant traveled there in 2009. 
Applicant argues that his grandmother is 95 years old and his aunt and uncle are not 
involved with the Iranian government. Then Applicant asserts he has only made two 
trips in nine years to Iran to visit those family members. He speaks with his grandmother 
only every six months. He does not communicate with his aunt and uncle. These 
connections are encouraged by Applicant’s father, who arranged for a renewal of 
Applicant’s Iranian passport and who kept the passport in his safe deposit box. His 
father is driving this continued Iranian connection.  
 
 However, Applicant is an educated professional capable of making his own 
decisions. He exercised very poor judgment after becoming a U.S. citizen and obtaining 
a security clearance by then renewing his Iranian passport and traveling to Iran in 2009. 
While Applicant does not intend to renew the passport in 2014, and has no plans to visit 
Iran again, he took no action to destroy the passport after he received the SOR in 
August 2009. It is likely Applicant will be placed in a position to choose between the 
interests of the United States, Iran, and his family. AG ¶ 8 (a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant came to the United States at six years of age. He has lived here 
continuously, except for one year of education in Belgium. His family is here and his 
parents retired from jobs in the United States. His brother lives and works in the United 
States. They are all naturalized U.S. citizens. Applicant has a long-standing relationship 
with the United States. This country is the only one he really knows because he grew up 
here. His familial connections in Iran are severely periodic and likely to end when his 
aged grandmother dies. They are very minimal associations with those family members. 
AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply because Applicant shows a preference for Iran after becoming 
a U.S. citizen and getting a security clearance so he could work for a defense contractor 
and have access to classified information.  
 
 Applicant has infrequent contacts with his grandmother in Iran beyond two visits 
and semi-annual telephone calls. He has no contacts with his aunt and uncle in Iran. He 
only made two trips with his family to Iran in the past ten years. Those contacts are 
casual and infrequent. But Applicant has made two trips to Iran specifically to visit his 
grandmother. AG ¶ 8(c) applies partially. But it is so slight it cannot control this 
determination. 
 
 Applicant’s possibility of inheriting property in Iran is unknown. His father will 
inherit first when Applicant’s grandmother dies. The father could sell the property before 
he dies. The possibility of Applicant inheriting is slight but it might result in a conflict of 
interest for Applicant. AG ¶ 8 (f) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
 
11 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an 
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and 
the whole person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is a significant risk of terrorism 
and human rights abuses in Iran. More importantly for security purposes, terrorists are 
hostile to the United States and actively seek classified information. Terrorists could 
attempt to use Applicant’s grandmother, aunt and uncle to obtain such information. But 
Applicant’s relationship with these three people is so slight that the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress is virtually nonexistent. Applicant only made 
two trips within a decade to Iran for a total time of six weeks in country. His travels are 
infrequent and motivated by his father’s desires to have the family visit his mother in 
Iran. Applicant did not initiate these trips.  
 
Applicant has been in the United States for the past 26 years. He grew up here 
and obtained his education here. He became a U.S. citizen in 2000. His connection to 
the United States is deep and strong. Applicant has no relationship with Iran outside his 
father’s family members. Applicant declared he will not renew his Iranian passport and 
does not have plans to travel again to Iran. His inheritance possibility of some property 
in Iran is minimal. However, Applicant exercised very poor judgment by expressing a 
preference for Iran by obtaining a new Iranian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen, 
and more importantly, being granted a security clearance so he could work with 
classified information in the employ of a defense contractor. He also exercised poor 
judgment retaining his Iranian passport for nine months after the hearing while knowing 
it was a security concern to the government.    
 
Applicant did not mitigate the foreign preference and foreign influence security 
concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against 
Applicant because of his poor judgment regarding his connections to Iran.  
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.1:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.2:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.3:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.4:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
