                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09965 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
J, Criminal Conduct, Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On December 7, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 19, 2010, and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 20, 2010. The FORM was 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
mailed to Applicant and it was received on April 27, 2010. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the FORM and did not submit additional material. The case 
was assigned to me on July 20, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 2.a, 2.b, 2.c, 2.d, 3.a, and 3.b. He 
denied SOR ¶ 1.d. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
statements submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old and has worked for a federal contractor since April 
2008. He is married and has a three-year old stepdaughter and an infant son. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he used marijuana at least five times in 2005 and 
purchased it multiple times the same year.  
 
 Applicant was arrested in February 2005 and charged with (1) No Proof Liability 
Insurance, (2) Driving Under the Influence (DUI)-Liquor, and (3) Operating a Vehicle 
Under Combined Influence Alcohol/Controlled Substance. The police officer noted in his 
report that he could smell alcohol on Applicant. Applicant denied to the police officer 
that he had used alcohol. He was given a field sobriety test. Applicant explained he was 
on prescription drugs. In his interview on June 19, 2008, with an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator he stated that on the day he was arrested he had 
stopped at a bar after work and consumed one to two beers before driving home. He 
confirmed he was also taking prescription medications. In his answer to the SOR, he 
stated, “I had nothing in my possession, no drugs, nor prescription medications, no 
alcohol.” The DUI and Operating a Vehicle Under Combined Influence 
Alcohol/Controlled Substance were dismissed. He paid a fine for No Proof of Liability 
Insurance.1 
 
 In December 2005, Applicant was arrested and charged with Public Intoxication. 
After drinking alcohol at a bar, Applicant got into an altercation with another person. He 
pled guilty to Public Intoxication, and paid a fine and court costs. 
 
 In August 2007, Applicant was stopped by police for failing to wear his seat belt. 
The police officer smelled marijuana. Applicant consented to a search of his vehicle. 
The police officer noticed that Applicant had a pack of cigarettes in the door handle of 
the driver’s side of the vehicle. After conducting a pat-down search of Applicant, the 
police officer found in Applicant’s right shirt pocket rolling papers. In the vehicle, he also 
found a small brown box with a smoking pipe with residue and a small amount of a 
green leafy substance. A loaded 357 Smith & Wesson pistol was found under the seat.2 
In Applicant’s statement to the OPM investigator, he explained that he forgot about the 
1 Items 5, 7, 10. 
 
2 Item 8. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
pipe in the vehicle and believed he left it there some time in 2005. He was arrested for 
(1) Carrying a Pistol Without a Permit, (2) Possession of Drug Paraphernalia (3) Under 
the Influence of any Substance which impairs the Mental or Physical Faculties, and (4) 
Seatbelt Violation. He pled guilty to Count (2). He was fined $500, court costs, and 
sentenced to 30 days in the city jail, which was suspended for 24 months. Applicant 
previously had a permit to carry a concealed weapon, but that permit had recently 
expired. He subsequently renewed the permit and Count (1) was dismissed, along with 
Count (4). It appears that Applicant was ordered to complete a Level I Substance Abuse 
Program and upon completion Count (3) was dismissed.3 In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant stated that he had no alcohol in his system when he was arrested. In his 
statement to the OPM investigator, he said he was given a breathalyzer after his arrest 
and it recorded a .02 %. He stated that he had consumed a beer at lunch approximately 
two hours before the traffic stop.  
 
 Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on about May 13, 2008. In response to Question 23.c, which asked: In the last 7 
years have you had a firearms or explosive charge,” Applicant answered “no.” This 
response was false because Applicant had been arrested for carrying a pistol without a 
permit in August 2007. When interviewed on June 19, 2008, by an OPM investigator, 
Applicant failed to disclose material facts about his 2007 arrest. He stated that he was 
arrested for DUI and Possession of Drug Paraphernalia, but failed to disclose he was 
charged with Carrying a Pistol Without a Permit. At the interview, he was asked if there 
were any additional charges during that arrest or any additional details that were not 
covered. He explained to the investigator that he was forthcoming with all the 
information and he could not recall any other details about the arrest. On September 11, 
2008, Applicant was interviewed again by an OPM investigator and was confronted with 
the information about the arrest for Carrying a Pistol Without a Permit. In this interview, 
he acknowledged that he purposely omitted this charge during the initial interview 
because in his opinion it was not a viable charge and he decided not to mention it. He 
also added that he considered talking about this charge, but decided against it because 
it would make him look bad. He initially claimed ignorance over its existence because 
he decided that there was no need to bring it up.4  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant’s explanation for failing to disclose the 
required information was that he believed the charge was suppose to be removed from 
his record. He stated he was told by his lawyer it would not be on his record, and he 
believed he did not have to report it. Applicant’s two explanations for not disclosing the 
charges are inconsistent. Intentional failure to disclose the required information is a 
violation of Title 18 of the United States Code § 1001, a felony. I find Applicant 
intentionally and deliberately failed to disclose on his e-QIP and to the government 
investigator that he had been arrested for Carrying a Pistol Without a Permit.  
 
3 Item 8. 
 
4 Item 7.  
 
4 
 
 
 In his answer to the SOR Applicant stated he has been drug free for four years 
and does not drink. He admitted that he made mistakes in his past. He is a member of 
the Freemasons and works to help underprivileged citizens and handicapped children.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 
and especially considerer the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse, and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
Applicant used marijuana at least five times in 2005. He purchased marijuana on 
multiple occasions in 2005. He was arrested and convicted in 2007 for possession of 
drug paraphernalia. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 
26, and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, and  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 
6 
 
 
I was unable to question Applicant about his prior use of illegal drugs, what type 
of drugs he used, how often he used them, when was the last time he used them, and 
other pertinent questions, which would allow me to make an informed decision about 
the security concerns regarding his drug involvement. I was not able to inquire about the 
police officer’s report that indicated when he was searched during his 2007 arrest rolling 
papers were found in his shirt pocket. I was unable to make a credibility determination 
or judge his demeanor and candor. Therefore, I find Applicant has not met his burden of 
persuasion. I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant was convicted of Possession of Drug Paraphernalia in 2007, and 
Public Intoxication and No Proof of Insurance in 2005. He was also arrested for 
Carrying a Pistol Without a Permit, DUI, and Operating a Vehicle Under Combined 
Influence Alcohol/Controlled Substance. Those charges were dismissed. Applicant did 
not disclose the firearm arrest on his e-QIP or during his OPM interview. He was aware 
of the charge and intentionally withheld the information. His actions constitute a violation 
of federal law. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 23 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and  
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
 
7 
 
 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s last arrest was in 2007. The record does not contain evidence of any 
other involvement with law enforcement since then. However, Applicant deliberately 
failed to disclose his firearm arrest because he did not want to “look bad” and he 
decided there was no reason to bring it up. His omissions are a cause of concern. 
Government investigators rely on applicants’ honest answers so they can conduct an 
informative background check. Intentionally failing to provide the required information is 
a violation of federal law and a security concern. Because he waived his right to a 
hearing, I did not have an opportunity to question Applicant about his conduct, 
determine his credibility, or access his candor. Applicant failed to meet his burden of 
persuasion.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct.  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant intentionally failed to disclose his firearm arrest on his e-QIP and during 
his interview with an OPM investigator. I find the above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions and especially considered the following under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
 
8 
 
 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, an such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 Applicant decided that his arrest for a firearms offense was not a viable charge 
and he did not want to look bad by disclosing it. He failed to disclose it on his e-QIP, 
during his initial OPM interview, and when he was interviewed a second time. There is 
sufficient evidence that Applicant’s actions were intentional and deliberate. He did not 
make a good-faith effort to correct the omission. I find AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
Applicant also stated that he did not think he was required to disclose it because his 
lawyer told him it would be removed from his record. This contradicts his original reason 
for not disclosing it. In addition, no evidence was presented to show that Applicant’s 
lawyer was specifically advising him concerning the security clearance process. Without 
further inquiry, I cannot find AG ¶ 17(b) applies. I find the offense is not minor, and thus 
AG ¶ 17 (c) does not apply. There is insufficient evidence to support the application of 
any of the remaining mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 30 years old. He was last 
arrested in 2007 and he was previously arrested twice in 2005. He used illegal drugs in 
the past. I did not have the opportunity to question Applicant, determine his credibility, 
and appraise his candor. I was not provided any supporting evidence as to Applicant’s 
use of drugs after 2005 or his explanation for why he had drug paraphernalia in his 
possession in 2007. I was not able to question the purpose for carrying cigarette rolling 
papers in his pocket when he was arrested. In addition, Applicant made a conscious 
choice not to disclose the arrest for a firearms violation. He decided it was not a viable 
charge and did not want to “look bad.” His intentional omission is a violation of federal 
law and a felony. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion and mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guidelines for Criminal Conduct, Drug Involvement, 
and Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs   1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs  3.a-3.b:   Against Applicant 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
