                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
               )          ISCR Case No. 08-02299 
 SSN:           ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John B. Wells, Esquire 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
In 2001, Applicant, a commissioned officer, and two other officers were involved 
in sexual conduct with an enlisted female. Applicant was convicted at a general court-
martial of conspiracy, conduct unbecoming an officer, and false swearing. The Judge 
Advocate General subsequently set aside Applicant’s convictions and authorized a new 
trial. Although no new trial is anticipated, there is substantial evidence that Applicant 
committed these criminal offenses. He has not taken responsibility, shown remorse, or 
otherwise established his rehabilitation. Personal conduct concerns are mitigated; 
however, criminal conduct concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 10, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Item 5). On November 20, 2008, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to Applicant (Item 1), 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines J (criminal conduct) and E 
(personal conduct) (Item 1). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked (Item 1). 
 
On December 8, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and initially 
requested a hearing. (Item 4) On November 19, 2009, Applicant’s counsel waived 
Applicant’s right to a hearing and requested a decision on the record (Item 19 at 1). A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated January 6, 2010, was 
provided to Applicant’s counsel on February 22, 2010, and he was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and to submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation.1 On March 12, 2010, Applicant responded to the FORM. On April 29, 2010, 
Department Counsel filed a rebuttal to Applicant’s FORM response. The case was 
assigned to me on May 3, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s responses to the SOR and FORM, he admitted that he was 
convicted at a general court-martial (GCM) in 2001 of conspiracy, conduct unbecoming 
an officer, and false swearing in violation of Articles 81, 133, and 134, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. 
§§ 881, 933 and 934. The GCM sentenced him to forfeit $500 pay per month for two 
months, and a letter of reprimand. However, Applicant has continued to challenge 
whether there is sufficient evidence to meet the substantial evidence test used for 
security clearance determinations. See Policies section of this decision for burdens of 
proof. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of 
fact.   
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor.3 He was awarded a 
masters degree in public administration in 1994. He served on active duty from 1983 to 
2003. He was enlisted from 1983 to 1992, and he was an officer from 1992 to 2003. He 
 
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated January 8, 2010; and Applicant’s receipt is dated February 
22, 2010 (file). The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt to 
submit information (file).  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
3Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph are from Applicant’s July 10, 2007 SF 86 
(Item 5). 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
married in 1991 and divorced in 2005. He married his current spouse in 2006.  His two 
children were born in 1993 and 1996.  
 
Applicant’s statement, Prosecution Exhibit (PE) 124 
 
Applicant met H and W, who were the same grade as Applicant (O-3), in July 
1999. Applicant, H, and W were good friends, who often played golf and went to each 
other’s residences for social reasons.  
 
Applicant met V at a Super Bowl party in January 2001. “There were numerous 
people at the party and [he] briefly talked to [V]. [Applicant and V] did not have an in-
depth conversation, just one in which we introduced each other.  .  .  . [H] was at the 
party, but [W] was not.” 
 
Applicant, H, W, and V attended a second party on January 31, 2001, at a club. 
Applicant, H, and W consumed a considerable amount of alcohol at the party. H left the 
party without telling Applicant he was leaving. W and Applicant “became concerned as 
we knew [H] had a lot to drink. [Applicant and W] drove to [H’s] residence to make sure 
[H] was fine.” W drove to H’s residence even though Applicant and W had been drinking 
“pretty heavily as the night went on.” When Applicant went to H’s residence, they 
noticed that H’s vehicle was parked at H’s house. H’s front door was unlocked. 
Applicant and W went inside H’s residence, and W went to H’s bedroom door, which 
was closed. W shouted for H, asking if H was OK. H responded that he was fine. 
Applicant claimed that he did not hear any other voice emanating from H’s room, and he 
did not see W open H’s bedroom door. Applicant and W immediately left H’s residence. 
W arrived at Applicant’s home between 11 pm and midnight.5 
 
V’s testimony  
 
V met W in the summer of 2000. (Tr. 184) She knew he was an officer. (Tr. 184) 
They talked and danced the first evening that they met. (Tr. 184) She was then 19 years 
old and an active duty enlisted woman (E-3). (Tr. 183-184) She is 64 inches tall. (Tr. 
192) During the summer of 2000, W and V engaged in consensual oral sexual activity. 
(Tr. 185, 198) She continued to occasionally see W at the gym and around the base. 
(Tr. 184-186)  
 
V met Applicant and H at a Super Bowl party in January 2001. (Tr. 185, 200) V 
and Applicant danced together at the party, and V told Applicant she was enlisted. (Tr. 
186, 200) Applicant also gave V his business card. (Tr. 186) His card has Applicant’s 
rank on it. (Tr. 186, PE 4) Applicant told V he was a commissioned officer and they were 
 
4 Applicant made a sworn statement to military law enforcement on February 6, 2001, which was 
admitted in evidence at his court-martial. This statement is the source for the facts in this section. H, W, 
and Applicant did not testify at their joint court-martial. They have an absolute right not to testify at their 
court-martial, and no adverse inference whatsoever is drawn from their decision not to testify.    
 
 5 A law enforcement agent indicated it took about 10-15 minutes to drive from H’s residence to 
Applicant’s residence on base. (Tr. 150) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
in the same branch of service. (Tr. 186-187; PE 4) V also danced with H at the Super 
Bowl party. (Tr. 186) Applicant also told her about a party for him on January 31, 2001, 
at a club on base, which was because he was being reassigned. (Tr. 187) 
 
On January 31, 2001, V went to the party and danced with H. (Tr. 188) V 
observed H talking to Applicant and W. (Tr. 188) V did not consume any alcohol. (Tr. 
188) H invited V to a party at his residence. (Tr. 187-189) H said there were going to be 
a lot of people at the party at H’s house. (Tr. 187-188) H did not appear to be 
intoxicated. (Tr. 188) H and V departed the party about 10:30 pm and drove to H’s 
residence, which took about 25-30 minutes. (Tr. 188, 201)  
 
At first V and H sat on the couch, and V waited for others to arrive at the party. 
(Tr. 188-189) H started kissing and fondling V, with her consent, and then they moved 
from the couch to H’s bedroom. (Tr. 188-189) H continued to kiss and fondle V, and he 
kissed her vaginal area. (Tr. 188-189, 202) H’s bedroom door was open, and V heard 
the front door open. (Tr. 189) V asked H to close the bedroom door and he partially 
closed it. (Tr. 189) V observed Applicant and W watching through the partially open 
bedroom door. (Tr. 190) She asked to leave. (Tr. 190) Applicant and W entered the 
bedroom. Applicant was only wearing a tank top, and W was naked. (Tr. 190, 206, 207) 
W got into bed with H and V, and H and W fondled V. (Tr. 190) V said they were forcing 
themselves on her and she told them to stop. (Tr. 190) Applicant engaged in sexual 
intercourse with V for about two minutes while W and H held her legs and encouraged 
Applicant to continue. (Tr. 191, 197-198, 202) She was unsure whether Applicant was 
wearing a condom, or whether he ejaculated. (Tr. 191) After engaging in sexual 
intercourse with V, Applicant left the room and did not return. After Applicant left the 
room, W and H forced V to perform oral sodomy on H. (Tr. 191-192) Applicant was the 
only one who had sexual intercourse with V. (Tr. 192) 
 
V did not scratch, punch, kick, bite, or scream because she was scared. (Tr. 198, 
206) She did not incur any physical injuries, such as scratches or bruises. (Tr. 195) On 
the way back to the base, H took V to a carry out restaurant. (Tr. 193) She saw two 
petty officers at the restaurant; however, she did not talk to them. (Tr. 193) She also 
called a male friend and left a message that “some shit” had happened to her, but she 
did not provide details. (Tr. 193, 195) H dropped her off at her barracks, which was 
about a 25 minute drive from H’s residence. (Tr. 205) She did not take a shower 
because she did not want to wash away evidence. (Tr. 193, 195) She went to sleep, 
and the next morning contacted her supervisors and reported the incident. (Tr. 193-194) 
On February 1, 2001, she was examined at a rape crisis center, and on February 2, 
2001, she provided a statement to law enforcement. 
 
H’s statement to law enforcement and PE 7 
 
 H said on January 31, 2001, he drank two Long Island ice teas at the club from 
approximately 5:00 p.m. until the time that he left the club with V at about 10:30 pm. (Tr. 
139) He said he did not see V drink any alcohol, and he did not provide her with any at 
his house. Id. H denied that he was intoxicated. Id. H said that when he left the club with 
V, both Applicant and W saw H leave with V. Id.  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
H initially told a law enforcement agent that he did not know V. (Tr. 137) 
Eventually he admitted that he met a female at a club on January 31, 2001, and that he 
took her to his house, where they engaged in sexual activity. (Tr. 137) He did not “get” 
her name. (Tr. 137) He kissed around her vaginal area, but did not engage in oral 
sodomy with her. (Tr. 137) While she was in his bedroom, she advised H that she was 
enlisted. (Tr. 137) H immediately stopped his sexual activity, drove her to a restaurant, 
and then to her barracks. (Tr. 137)  
 
H said he had given keys to his residence to Applicant and W. While he was in 
the bedroom, Applicant and W entered his residence to check on H. They knocked on 
the bedroom door, which was closed. H said he was OK, and they left. (Tr. 137-138) At 
first H said he was sure the door had not opened; however, later he said his bedroom 
door may have come open, but he did not think that it did. H said the female did not 
want to be caught with an officer. (Tr. 137-139) H later said the female became upset 
when the other guys entered the room where H and V had been engaging in sexual 
activity. (Tr. 138) 
 
W’s statement to law enforcement, PE 9 
 
 W’s statement to law enforcement was consistent with the statements of other 
witnesses until he described the point at which W and Applicant arrived at H’s bedroom 
door way on January 31, 2001. W stated: 
 
I knocked on [H’s bedroom] door, and the door opened slightly. I saw two 
figures on the bed. I heard a female voice stating something like [“who’s 
that?” H] then stated, "What’s up gentlemen, I am alright." I felt 
uncomfortable, turned and walked past [Applicant] into the living room. 
[Applicant] was about five steps behind me. I then walked into the kitchen, 
and got a drink of water. [Applicant] and I waited in the living room, for 
maybe five (5) minutes. I recall the TV being on in the living room. I don't 
recall what show was on. [H] did not come out of his bedroom, so we left 
the house. [Applicant] and I then drove directly back to [base]. I drove 
[Applicant] to the [club] to pick-up his car. When we got to the [club], 
[Applicant] asked that I just drop him off at home. [Applicant] and I both 
live in base housing, just a few houses apart.  .  .  . I would guess the time 
was about 2345 hours, when I got home. 
 
W denied that he entered H’s bedroom on the evening of January 31, 2001. He denied 
that he had any physical or sexual contact with the female that was on H’s bed that 
evening. He denied knowing the woman who was in bed with H that evening.6   
 
 
6 During the summer of 2000, a female enlisted person, C, saw W and V dancing at the club on 
approximately three occasions. (Tr. 221) In the summer of 2000, another female enlisted person, D, 
listened in during a telephone conversation between W and V in which W and V discussed getting 
together. (Tr. 224)  Thus, W’s statement about not recognizing V is not credible.  
   
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Telephone records 
 
 Neither Applicant nor W called H on January 31, 2001 (evening of sexual activity 
between H and V) to check on him. On February 5, 2001, V called W four times, at the 
behest of law enforcement to attempt to obtain incriminating admissions from him. (Tr. 
126-128, 134-135; PE 5, 6) Their telephone conversations were tape recorded. W 
indicated he did not know who V was, and had no knowledge of the January 31, 2001, 
incident, asserting that the phone calls must be a joke. V threatened to call law 
enforcement to report the rape, and W discussed having a meeting with V or calling V 
back.  
 
On February 5 and 6, 2001, H and W, H and Applicant, and W and Applicant 
communicated with each other several times over the telephone. From 4:49 pm to 5:35 
pm, on February 5, 2001, H, W, and H called each other five times, and the three 
longest telephone conversations were 7 minutes, 25 minutes, and 27 minutes. Law 
enforcement interviewed H, W, and Applicant on February 6, 2001.  
 
Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) tests 
 
A law enforcement agent testified that, five days after the alleged sex offenses, 
three used condoms and a partially full box on unused condoms were found in the 
garbage outside H’s residence. (Tr. 141-142) The condoms were inside a sealed plastic 
garbage bag containing various items of trash including bones from chicken wings and 
tomato peelings. (Tr. 141-142) H was present when his garbage was searched and 
indicated he had chicken wings several days previously. (Tr. 142) The garbage inside 
H’s kitchen contained chicken wings and tomato peelings. (Tr. 142) 
 
The DNA examiner, M, testified that two of those condoms contained DNA on 
their outside showing some consistency with V's DNA. (Tr. 160-163) The inside of one 
condom showed some consistency with Applicant’s DNA; however, M refused to label 
the contents of the condom as a match to Applicant’s DNA. (Tr. 160-163). M concluded 
that Applicant could not be excluded as the donor of the DNA. In 2003-2005, M was 
implicated in nine discrepancies involving contamination of samples and providing false 
testing information. See United States v. Luke, 63 M.J. 60, 63 (C.A.A.F. 2006). The 
Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces ordered a hearing in Luke to assess for 
prejudice due to the possibility that the same DNA expert, M, contaminated the DNA 
samples in Luke’s case or falsified Luke’s test results.7     
 
Upon retest of the three condoms in October 2006 by a different DNA expert, all 
three condoms tested negative for semen, but epithelial or skin cells were found on 
each condom. V’s DNA was confirmed on all three condoms. (Item 19 at 24) For the 
 
7 In Luke, M examined the bed sheet and the bra for stains that contained saliva. Luke, 63 M.J. at 
62. M testified that each contained cells from which DNA could be obtained, so a portion of each was 
preserved for another examiner who would perform DNA tests. Id. M did not actually perform the DNA 
tests in Luke. Nevertheless, the Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces recognized that M could have 
contaminated the sheet and bra, causing the DNA test to falsely implicate Luke.  
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
inside of the first condom (7(1)), “the remaining partial DNA profile from the inside of the 
condom could not have originated from” Applicant, W, or H. (emphasis added) Id. For 
the inside of the second condom (7(2)), “the remaining partial DNA profile from the 
inside of the condom is consistent with originating from unknown Individual #1.” 
Applicant, W, and H “are excluded.” Id. For the third condom (9), “the remaining partial 
DNA profile is consistent with originating from unknown individual #1 and genetically 
typed as male,” and “the remaining partial DNA profile could not have originated from” 
Applicant, H, or W. (emphasis added) Id. The DNA profile for the third condom was 
inconclusive “due to degraded or insufficient amount of human DNA.” Id. 
 
Both H and V agreed that they engaged in sexual activity on January 31, 2001.   
V said the only one who had sexual intercourse with her was the Applicant. (Tr. 191, 
194) H denied that he used a condom, and V was unsure whether Applicant used a 
condom.  (Tr. 138, 191, 193, 202) V said she saw three or four condoms on H’s bed. 
(Tr. 193, 202) H claimed he used a different brand of condom than those found in his 
trash. (Tr. 138) V said she did not remember whether the condoms on the bed were 
unwrapped or not. (Tr. 193)  
   
Resolution of charges against Applicant 
 
 On January 31, 2002, a military judge sitting as a general court-martial found 
Applicant not guilty of conspiracy with H and W to commit an indecent act with V, 
violation of a lawful general regulation (fraternization), rape of V, forcible sodomy of V, 
and engaging in indecent, sexual acts with V in the presence of H and W, in violation of 
Articles 81, 92, 120, 125, and 134, UCMJ. The military judge found Applicant guilty of 
conspiracy with H and W to make a false official statement to law enforcement, conduct 
unbecoming an officer “by wrongfully and dishonorably engaging in sexual activities” 
with V in the presence of other officers, and making a false sworn statement, in violation 
of Articles 81, 133, and 134, UCMJ. The court-martial sentenced Applicant to forfeit 
$500 pay per month for two months and a reprimand.  
 
In December 2004, the Judge Advocate General set aside the false swearing 
charge after completing his required review under Article 69(a), UCMJ. In August 2005, 
the Government disclosed the compromise of the credibility of the DNA expert who 
tested condoms seized from the trash outside H’s residence and who testified at 
Applicant’s trial. The Judge Advocate General reviewed the 2006 re-test of the three 
condoms. On June 4, 2009, the Judge Advocate General stated:  
 
In light of the significant differences between the new DNA evidence and 
the DNA evidence presented at trial, the arguments and theories8 that 
                                            
8 The Judge Advocate General’s memorandum of June 4, 2009, provides:  
 
The DNA evidence, as properly tested, not only fails to implicate the three defendants, 
but it also presents possible theories of the case and interpretations of the evidence that 
are favorable to the defense. For instance, the fact that the alleged victim’s cells were on 
the inside and outside of each condom, combined with the fact that the condoms were 
found outside [H’s] house, could lead a trier-of-fact to wonder whether the alleged victim 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
would have been available to the defense with knowledge of the new 
evidence and all the other pertinent facts, I conclude that this evidence 
would probably produce a substantially more favorable outcome for the 
accused. 
 
(Item 18 at 5) In regard to the conspiracy to make a false official statement offense, “in 
order to effect the object of the conspiracy, the said [Applicant, H, and W] did each 
make a false statement to [law enforcement].” Id. The Judge Advocate General noted 
that the three accused made multiple statements to law enforcement, and it could not 
be established “which statement the military judge concluded was false.” Id. Thus, the 
conspiracy conviction was not reviewable and could not be affirmed.  The Judge 
Advocate General set aside the last two charges and authorized a new trial under 
Article 73, UCMJ. However, no new trial is anticipated. The sentence at the first trial 
would be the maximum sentence limitation for his retrial, and Applicant is now retired. 
See FORM at 10 n. 33.  
 
FORM response 
 
 Applicant’s counsel argues that V’s allegations against Applicant are not credible 
because of inconsistencies between her testimony at trial and her testimony at 
Applicant’s Article 32 testimony, or lack of memory of details, such as: (1) whether V 
told Applicant or H she was enlisted; (2) where she was located at the club when she 
first saw Applicant; (3) whether she spoke to Applicant at the club on January 31, 2001; 
(4) the particular room where the dance in the club was located; and (5) whether others 
were expected at H’s residence on January 31, 2001.  
 
V was not able to describe whether Applicant used a condom, whether Applicant 
was circumcised, or the fraternity brand on Applicant’s upper arm. Applicant’s pubic hair 
and bodily fluids were not found on V’s person or at H’s residence.9 Several witnesses 
at trial opined that V was not credible and had a poor reputation for honesty. Other 
witnesses opined that Applicant was a credible person, and had a good reputation for 
honesty. 
 
Applicant’s counsel contends the lack of corroboration concerning whether V 
danced with Applicant at the Super Bowl party in 2001, absence of physical injuries to 
V, and V’s lack of agitation at the restaurant after the sexual incident and when she 
 
may have planted the condoms herself. Moreover, the presence of one, if not two 
unidentified males on all three of the condoms also raises significant questions.  
 
Item 19 at 20. See also FORM response at 17. The DNA expert who testified in Applicant’s trial was male, 
and handled all three condoms. He was disciplined for sloppy lab work relating to several cases. There is 
no evidence that the laboratory excluded the DNA expert’s own DNA as the source of the male skin cells 
found on the condoms. There is no evidence that V knew if or when law enforcement would search 
Applicant’s trash for condoms.  
 
9 When law enforcement searched H’s bedroom the bedding had been removed from the bed. 
Other beds in his residence did not have the bedding removed. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
described the incident at the Sexual Assault Resource Center are inconsistent with 
being sexually assaulted earlier and cast further doubt on V’s credibility.   
 
Character evidence10 
 
 Applicant has a 4.6 average of all officer fitness reports. He has received: four 
awards of the service Commendation Medal, five awards of the service Achievement 
Medal, four awards of the Meritorious Unit Commendation, two awards of the service 
Battle Efficiency Ribbon, two awards of the Good Conduct Medal, two awards of the 
National Defense Service Medal, the Military Outstanding Volunteer Service Medal, four 
awards of the service Deployment Ribbon, three awards of the Overseas Service 
Ribbon, two awards of the service Recruiting Service Ribbon, and the service Expert 
Rifle and Pistol Ribbons.   
 
 Applicant’s file has numerous letters lauding his duty performance and dedication 
to the service. His file was replete with recommendations for promotion to O-4 and for 
assignment to sensitive, high profile duties. The testimony at trial of a three-star flag 
officer, a two-star flag officer, and an O-6 level officer during Applicant’s trial lauded 
Applicant’s good character, solid integrity, or tireless efforts on behalf of his commands 
during his 20-year military career.   
    
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
10The Staff Judge Advocate’s post trial recommendation, dated November 1, 2002, and the 
numerous letters and awards from Applicant’s personnel records are the basis for the information in this 
paragraph.   
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the initial 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531. “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance,” and 
“is such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a 
conclusion.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct 
under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR 
Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has repeatedly stated: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
“The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole 
person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them 
apply to the particular facts of a case. Rather, their application requires the 
exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  
 
ISCR Case No. 09-01015 at 3 (App. Bd. July 16, 2010); ISCR Case No. 07-16427 at 2 
(App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 07-16841 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2008).  
 
The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. 
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; 
see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines J (criminal conduct) and E (personal conduct).  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying, ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and ¶ 31(c), 
“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether [Applicant] was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”  
 
V’s statement describing Applicant’s conduct on January 31, 2001, is credible. 
There is no record evidence supporting any reason for her to falsely accuse Applicant of 
such serious crimes.11 Applicant and V agree that they barely knew each other before 
the sexual incident of January 31, 2001. Applicant and W claim that they went to H’s 
residence to check on H’s welfare, even though Applicant, W, and H had all had been 
consuming alcohol, and it was risky for W to drive after consuming alcohol. Applicant 
and W could have called H’s cell phone number to check on his welfare. When they 
arrived at H’s residence, they saw H’s vehicle and knew he arrived home safely. 
Nevertheless, they entered H’s residence without knocking on the front door or ringing 
his doorbell. H had left the front door unlocked, which is a clear indication he expected 
their arrival, wanted them to enter his residence, and anticipated that he did not want to 
prematurely alert V concerning their arrival. Applicant and W’s statements about driving 
to H’s residence to check on H are not credible.  
 
H and V agree that they were engaging in consensual sexual activity when 
Applicant and W arrived at H’s bedroom door supposedly to check on H’s welfare. It is 
more reasonable to infer that Applicant and W drove 20-30 minutes to H’s residence 
because they wanted to engage in sexual activity with V. Applicant and W stripped off 
 
11 Applicant’s counsel suggests that V had four different reasons to falsely accuse Applicant of 
sexual crimes. First, V was upset because she thought W, who was “fine” or very handsome, saw V at H’s 
residence and V may have been upset about losing a chance for a relationship with W. Second, “a 
reasonable inference may be that [V] thought she had a chance at a trifecta in bringing three [officers] 
down for the price of one.” Form Response at 9. Third, V may have thought that V’s acquaintance would 
report her for fraternization so she decided that “[s]triking first with a phony rape report must have 
seemed like a logical course of action.” Form Response at 14. Fourth, V may have wanted to strike back 
at W because “she felt spurned.” Form Response at 15. Ultimately Applicant’s counsel concludes, 
Applicant “was an innocent bystander caught in the wrong place at the wrong time in the sights of a liar 
who for whatever reason, decided to take down three [officers].” Form Response at 16.    
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
their clothes, except for Applicant’s tank top, entered H’s bedroom, and proceeded to 
engage in sexual acts upon V, even though Applicant and W did not have V’s consent 
to engage in this sexual activity. Moreover, even if she had consented, Applicant would 
have committed conduct unbecoming an officer and indecent acts by engaging in 
sexual intercourse with V while H and W were watching this sexual activity.  
 
On February 5, 2001, after V called W and threatened to disclose the rape to law 
enforcement, H, W, and Applicant coordinated their false statements to law enforcement 
to ensure consistency. Their plan and agreement was to assert that W and Applicant did 
not enter H’s bedroom. Applicant subsequently made a false statement to law 
enforcement that he did not enter H’s bedroom. This behavior established conspiracy to 
make false statements, and making false statements, in violation of Articles 81, and 
107, UCMJ, as well as 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Additionally, Applicant engaged in sexual 
intercourse with V, a 19-year-old enlisted woman, in the presence of H and W. This 
behavior constitutes conduct unbecoming an officer, and indecent acts, in violation of 
Articles 133 and 134, UCMJ. There is more than substantial evidence to prove these 
military crimes. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply with respect to Applicant’s indecent acts, 
conduct unbecoming an officer, conspiracy and making false statements, even though 
he does not have a conviction for any of these offenses.      
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶ 30(a) partially applies. None of the other mitigating conditions fully apply. A 
substantial period of time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, and it 
happened under unusual circumstances. The offenses occurred on January 31, 2001, 
more than nine years ago. Applicant has left active service. He has remarried. There is 
no evidence of any other disciplinary action, misconduct, or arrests.   
 
The case of ISCR 07-14127 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug 12, 2010) is instructive. In that 
case the Applicant was a heavy drug user from 1975 to 1990, while holding a security 
clearance. Additionally, he provided false information about his history of illegal drug 
abuse on his security clearance applications from 1975 to 2001. In 2005, he provided 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
accurate information about his history of drug abuse “following a pre-polygraph 
examination.” Id. at 4. The administrative judge determined his offenses were not recent 
and mitigated his misconduct under Guidelines E and J. The Appeal Board reversed the 
favorable security clearance decision, concluding the Applicant’s conduct continued to 
“cast doubt upon his reliability and good judgment.”  Id.   
 
The Applicant in the instant case did not have a long history of history of drug 
abuse and falsifications of multiple security clearance applications, and yet the 
Applicant in ISCR Case No. 07-14127 admitted his long history of drug abuse and other 
misconduct in 2005. On the other hand, the Applicant in the instant case had a brief 
episode of illegal behavior (January 31, 2001 to February 6, 2001); however, he has not 
shown any remorse, apologized to the victim, or taken responsibility for his misconduct.  
 
Applicant’s criminal conduct is not fully mitigated. He was not pressured into 
committing the misconduct. He was a mature, 36-year-old man with 19 years of military 
service. V was only 19 years old. I have carefully considered all of the evidence and I 
conclude there is substantial evidence that he committed the offenses. His lawyer’s 
attacks on the 19-year-old enlisted victim of these three officers do not convince me that 
she framed three innocent officers for the reasons stated in n. 11, infra. Under all the 
circumstances, Applicant’s offenses continue to “cast doubt on the [Applicant’s] 
reliability, trustworthiness, [and] good judgment.” There is insufficient assurance that 
other criminal offenses are “unlikely to recur.” There is insufficient evidence to establish 
his rehabilitation.  
  
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating, “Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” 
 
Two potentially pertinent disqualifying conditions are AG ¶ 16(d)(3) which states: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  .  .  . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations, 
 
and AG ¶ 16(e)(1), which states, “personal conduct, or concealment of information 
about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, 
such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing.”  
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
With respect to the personal conduct concerns involving Applicant’s conspiracy 
to make false statements, making false statements, and engaging in sexual intercourse 
with a 19-year-old enlisted woman, in the presence of H and W, this behavior violates 
multiple statutes or rules. As discussed in the criminal conduct section, this conduct 
violates Articles 81, 107, 133, and 134, UCMJ. Moreover, making a false statement to 
federal law enforcement concerning involvement in sexual offenses committed upon an 
enlisted woman violates 18 U.S.C. § 1001.  However, AG ¶ 16(d)(3) does not apply 
because this conduct is covered under the criminal conduct guideline, as all rules 
involved, when violated, are criminal offenses. 
  
Certainly, such crimes violate important civil and criminal rules in our society, and 
these offenses are conduct a person might wish to conceal, as it adversely affects a 
person’s professional and community standing.  Thus, AG ¶ 16(e)(1) applies and further 
inquiry concerning the applicability of mitigating conditions is required.  
 
The mitigating condition outlined in AG ¶ 17(e), “the individual has taken positive 
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress” 
applies to Applicant’s offenses. Applicant’s former commanding officer, supervisor, and 
security officials are well aware of Applicant’s offenses. His conduct is well-documented 
in court-martial, law enforcement, and appellate records. The federal government’s 
knowledge of these allegations eliminates any vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation 
or duress. I do not believe Applicant would compromise national security to avoid public 
disclosure of these offenses. Any personal conduct security concerns (pertaining to 
disclosure of his criminal conduct) are mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
15 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 There are several factors tending to support reinstatement of Applicant’s access 
to classified information. He presented a very strong mitigation case at his court-martial, 
and his military records contain an outstanding record of dedicated, honorable service 
to his command, service, and the Department of Defense. He has left the service, 
remarried, volunteers in his community, and wishes to contribute to the Department of 
Defense as a contractor. I attribute his offenses in part to alcohol consumption, and the 
encouragement of two fellow officers and friends. Applicant deserves substantial credit 
for serving his country in war and peace for 20 years. There is every indication that he is 
loyal to the United States. There were no allegations of security violations. He does not 
have any felony arrests or any drug or alcohol-related arrests or convictions, aside from 
the UCMJ offenses which occurred from January 31, 2001, to February 6, 2001. He is 
motivated to have a successful career, and to retain his security clearance.    
 
There are more substantial whole-person factors weighing against reinstatement 
of Applicant’s access to classified information at this time. Applicant’s UCMJ violations 
were not prudent or responsible. His conduct violated Articles 81, 107, 133, and 134, 
UCMJ. The offenses did not result from a brief, irresponsible impulse. His misconduct 
involved planning to go to H’s residence to have sex with V, riding with W to H’s 
residence, undressing outside H’s bedroom door, entering H’s bedroom, engaging in 
sexual intercourse with V, planning the false statements to law enforcement with H and 
W, and making his false sworn written statement to law enforcement. The offenses 
occurred over a period of about seven days. He had ample opportunity to reconsider 
before taking each step in his criminal activity. He committed the offenses while on 
active duty, as a commissioned officer, with 19 years of service. He was fully inculcated 
with service values of integrity and honesty. He knew he was not supposed to engage in 
sexual activity with a 19-year-old enlisted woman. He held a secret-level security 
clearance when he committed the misconduct. Sexual abuse of V, and the subsequent 
cover-up, shows extraordinarily poor judgment.  
 
Applicant has not apologized to V or indicated he regrets his misconduct. During 
the sentencing phase of his court-martial, he said he accepted the judgment of the 
court. (Tr. 297-298) However, this statement does not constitute an admission of guilt 
but is merely a statement of recognition of the court’s finding. See FORM Response at 
11. The service has not held him fully accountable for his misconduct because the 
courts-martial findings and sentence were set aside. Acceptance of responsibility, and a 
sincere statement of regret and remorse must occur or substantially more time must 
elapse without further misconduct before confidence in his judgment, character, integrity 
and trustworthiness can be restored.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 12968, the Directive, the AGs, and other cited references to 
the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. For the reasons stated, 
Applicant has not mitigated or overcome the Government’s case, and he is not eligible 
for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
