 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ADP Case No. 08-03720 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul L. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and J (Criminal Conduct). Eligibility for assignment to a public trust 
position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her application for a public trust position (SF 85P) on April 5, 
2007, and recertified it on July 6, 2007. On November 19, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
basis for its preliminary decision to deny her application, citing trustworthiness concerns 
under Guidelines F and J. DOHA acted under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR in an undated document that was received by 
DOHA on May 5, 2009, but her answer was returned to her on June 4, 2009, because it 
was incomplete. She responded in an undated document that was received by DOHA 
on July 6, 2009, and she requested a determination on the record without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the government’s written case on July 30, 2009. On the 
same day, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to 
Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the government’s evidence. Applicant did not receive the FORM 
until May 20, 2010, but the record does not reflect the reason for the delay. She did not 
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on July 20, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the Guideline F allegations in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.m, denied ¶¶ 1.n-1.q, admitted ¶ 1.r, denied ¶ 1.s, and admitted ¶¶ 1.t 
and 1.u. She admitted the Guideline J allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. Her 
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old claims specialist employed by a defense contractor 
since September 2005. She worked as a customer service representative in the private 
sector from January to October 2000, was unemployed from October 2000 to 
September 2001, and then worked as a bill collector from September 2001 until she 
began her current job. She has never held a security clearance or a public trust position. 
 
Applicant is unmarried and has no children. The record does not reflect that she 
financially supports anyone other than herself.  
 
 Applicant’s credit bureau reports reflect the 21 delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR, including the debts that she denied in her response to the SOR. (GX 9; GX 10.) 
The delinquent debts total more than $16,700, and she has admitted debts totaling 
more than $12,800. In response to DOHA interrogatories, she did not offer specific 
explanations for any of the debts. Instead, she stated that she has not been able to 
resolve any of her debts because she does not earn enough money. She stated that 
she was considering consumer credit counseling, but there is no evidence that she 
sought or obtained any counseling. (GX 8 at 2, 10.) 
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in October 2000. It was dismissed in 
February 2001. (GX 10 at 3.) The reason for dismissal is not reflected in the record. Her 
petition for bankruptcy was not alleged in the statement of reasons. 
 
 Applicant disclosed on her SF 85P that she was convicted of driving with a 
suspended license in December 2003 and sentenced to one day in jail. She also 
disclosed that she was convicted of prostitution in January 2005 and placed on 
probation for two years. (GX 7 at 7.) 
 
 3
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor 
personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction an evaluation of the whole 
person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security. The Government 
must present substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by 
substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 
375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant 
or him or her eligibility for assignment to a sensitive position.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concern under this guideline is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 4
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 Applicant’s financial history raises the disqualifying conditions in AG & 19(a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG & 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). Thus, she has the burden to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating condition is not 
established, because Applicant’s debts are numerous, not yet resolved, and there is no 
evidence that they occurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Trustworthiness concerns also may be mitigated if Athe conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ AG & 
20(b). Applicant was unemployed from October 2000 to September 2001, but she has 
been employed continuously since September 2001. She is financially responsible only 
for herself. The record reflects that she filed a petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy when 
she became unemployed, but it was dismissed in February 2001, before completion. 
She submitted no evidence of efforts to resolve, compromise, or settle her debts. This 
mitigating condition is not established. 
 
Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not sought or received 
financial counseling and her financial problems are not under control. 
 
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing 
that “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case 
No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). This mitigating condition 
is not established because Applicant submitted no evidence of efforts to repay or 
resolve her debts. 
 
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing 
“the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt 
which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the 
 5
basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). 
This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not disputed any of 
the debts. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The trustworthiness concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 30 as follows: 
“Criminal conduct creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  
 
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include 
“a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). Applicant’s disclosure of criminal 
conduct on her SF 85P and her admissions in her response to the SOR establish these 
two disqualifying conditions.   
 
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that 
“so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). The first prong of 
this mitigating condition (“so much time has elapsed”) focuses on whether the criminal 
conduct was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is 
Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the 
evidence. See ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence 
shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
 Applicant has provided no information regarding the circumstances of her two 
criminal convictions. Her conviction for prostitution occurred while she was gainfully 
employed and only eight months before she began her current position. It reinforces the 
Guideline F concern that she might engage in illegal conduct to generate additional 
income. She was on probation until early 2007. She submitted her SF 85P in April 2007 
and has been trying since then to obtain a favorable trustworthiness determination. She 
has not demonstrated that she can be trusted to refrain from illegal conduct once the 
pressure of qualifying for a position of trust is lifted. I conclude that AG ¶ 32(a) is not 
established. 
 
Finally, trustworthiness concerns may be mitigated if “there is evidence of 
successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without 
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, 
good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 32(d). 
Applicant provided no evidence from supervisors, neighbors, friends, or coworkers 
 6
about the quality of her performance or constructive community involvement. For this 
reason, as well as the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶ 32(a), I conclude 
that she has not provided sufficient evidence of successful rehabilitation. No other 
enumerated mitigating conditions under this guideline have been established. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for an 
assignment to a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have 
incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and J in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant did not request a hearing, limiting my ability to assess her sincerity, 
credibility, candor, and remorse. She provided little information about the circumstances 
of her financial difficulties and criminal conduct.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
J, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns based on financial 
considerations and criminal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant her eligibility for assignment to a public trust position.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.u:    Against Applicant 
 
 7
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    Against Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for assignment to a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
