  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10425 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
In March 2008, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). In response to section 11, relating to his employment 
activities, he failed to list he had been employed for more than 30 years with the Drug 
Enforcement Agency (DEA), or that he left his job after being given the choice to resign 
or be terminated. Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the security concerns under 
personal conduct. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
1 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on January 8, 2010, detailing security concerns under 
personal conduct. 
  
 On February 26, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the 
matter decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government's 
case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated March 31, 2010. The FORM 
contained 11 attachments. On April 29, 2010, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, 
along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
On May 5, 2010, Applicant responded to the FORM. Department Counsel did not 
object to the material and Applicant's response was admitted into the record. On June 4, 
2010, I was assigned the case.  
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding an 
additional paragraph to ¶ 1, alleging Applicant falsified his response to Section 22 for 
failing to indicate on his March 2008 SF-86 that he had left a part-time job after his 
employer was notified by the IRS of a garnishment action. In Applicant’s response to the 
FORM, he stated he did not understand what Department Counsel had proposed. The 
Motion to Amend the SOR is granted, but for the reasons later described in this 
decision, I find for Applicant on this allegation. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations of the SOR. 
He admitted he was told by the DEA that “they were going to fire me unless I resigned.” 
(Item 2) After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old security officer who works for a defense contractor and 
is seeking to obtain a security clearance. Applicant is a Marine Corps veteran of the Viet 
Nam conflict. (Answer to FORM, Item 4)  
 
 Applicant was employed with the DEA from 1968 through November 2005 as a 
property manager. (Items 7, 11) In May 1999, Applicant was suspended for five days 
due to conduct unbecoming a DEA employee. Applicant sent an email to the individual 
in charge of payroll stating if he was not paid for the hours he had worked that Applicant 
had friends in New York who would visit the individual. (Item 2) Applicant asserted this 
was a joke, but it was taken as a threat. Applicant was immediately escorted out of the 
building and told not to return until told to do so. In March 2000, he was called back to 
work, given a five day suspension for poor judgment, and received a letter of reprimand. 
(Item 6)  
 
 
2 
 Upon his return, Applicant’s work performance was closely monitored. In 2005, 
he was told his work performance was unsatisfactory and he would be terminated 
unless he resigned. Applicant chose to retire. Applicant asserted, but failed to 
document, that he chose to retire because of “harassment retaliation by [his] unit chief 
after he was unsuccessful in getting [Applicant] out of the agency after doing all those 
negative things against me.” (Item 2) In November 2005, Applicant stated he filed an 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) complaint. (Item 11) The findings 
of the EEOC complaint are not part of the record of the FORM. Applicant asserted, had 
he chosen to contest his termination, he would have ultimately prevailed. (Answer to 
FORM)  
 
 In November 2005, Applicant completed an SF-86 and listed his employment 
with the DEA. (Item 1) He indicated he had been employed with the DEA since July 
1972. He was working at DEA when this SF-86 was completed.  
 
 In March 2008, Applicant completed an SF-86. (Item 4) In section 11, Applicant 
listed various part-time security jobs Applicant held from September 1972 through 
March 2008. Some of the part-time jobs he listed were for less than two years. 
However, he did not list his DEA employment. The instructions for answering section 11 
indicate Applicant was to show “all Federal civilian service, whether it occurred within 
the last 7 years or not.” (Item 5) 
 
 Applicant answered “no” to question 22, employment record, which asked him if, 
during the previous seven years, he had been fired, quit, or left a job under unfavorable 
circumstances. (Item 4) The instructions for answering section 11 (Item 5) state: 
 
Has any of the following happened to you in the last 7 years? 
 
1. Fired from a job. 
2. Quit a job after being told you’d be fired. 
3. Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct. 
4. Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of 
unsatisfactory performance. 
5. Left a job for other reasons under unfavorable circumstances. 
 
If you answered “Yes,” provide a detailed entry for each occurrence to 
report.  
 
In January 2009, in response to written interrogatories, Applicant asserted: 
 
I was under the impression that if I choose (sic.) to retire then I did not 
have to state I left under unfavorable circumstances . . . However now I 
understand and see that I should have answered yes to the question that I 
left under unfavorable circumstances. (Item 6) 
 
 
3 
 In June 2008, Applicant had a personal subject interview with an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) investigator. Applicant was asked about his employment 
with DEA, his finances, and any discrepancies on his March 2008 SF-86. He informed 
the investigator of the email he sent, the disciplinary action he received, and that he was 
told his work was unsatisfactory in 2005, and would be terminated if he did not resign. 
(Item 7)  
 
 In September 2007, Applicant resigned from his part-time job after the IRS 
presented his employer with a Notice of Levy on Wages, Salary, and Other Income. As 
a secured security facility, his employer was required to forward this information to the 
Defense Security Service. (Item 8) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
 
4 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 15 articulates the security concerns relating to 
personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 16 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
 (a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
Applicant deliberately failed to report his DEA employment and his termination in 
response to question in Section 11 on his March 2008 security clearance application. 
Applicant was told he would be fired for poor duty performance if he did chose not to 
resign. The question in Section 22 clearly asks Applicant to lists if he left a job by mutual 
agreement following allegations of unsatisfactory performance. He should have reported 
the circumstances surrounding his leaving the DEA after thirty plus years. In fact, 
Applicant now acknowledges he should have answered the form differently.  
 
 
5 
Applicant=s false answer on his SF 86 and his response during his OPM interview 
concerning his thirty plus years with the DEA and the circumstances surrounding his 
leaving that Federal employment tends to show questionable judgment, unreliability, 
and a lack of trustworthiness. & 16 (a) applies. 
 
 Applicant’s explanation rings hollow. His explanation was not credible to explain 
his failure to disclose his more than thirty years of employment. Applicant disclosed 
part-time jobs starting in 1972 and disclosed some part-time jobs which lasted only two 
years. A person does not list part-time jobs of two years and unintentionally forget a 
federal service job of more than thirty years. His assertion that he was not being 
deceptive is unpersuasive.  
 
With thirty plus years in Federal service, Applicant would have completed 
numerous security questionnaires. He provided a copy of one page of his November 15, 
2005 SF-86 where he listed his DEA employment. I note that when he completed this 
SF-86 he was still working for the DEA and had not yet been terminated. I find Applicant 
deliberately falsified his answer to questions in Section 11 and 22 of his March 2008 
security clearance application.  
 
None of the mitigating conditions related to personal conduct apply. Applicant did 
not make a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts (AG ¶ 17(a)). There was no refusal or 
failure to cooperate. AG ¶ 17(b) “the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or 
concealment was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual cooperated fully and 
truthfully,” does not apply.  
 
The offense is not minor; Applicant left his job with the DEA after more than thirty 
years after being told he would be terminated if the did not resign. AG ¶ 17(c) “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” does not apply. 
Applicant acknowledged his employment when questioned by the OPM investigator. 
There is no indication his answers to the SF-86 were caused by stress or factors 
beyond his control. AG ¶ 17(d) “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and 
obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur” does not apply.  
 
AG ¶ 17(e) “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress” has limited application. He did 
inform the OPM investigator of his employment and the factors surrounding his leaving 
the DEA, thereby reducing his vulnerability. AG ¶ 17(f) “the information was 
 
6 
unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability” does not apply because the 
information was substantiated.  
 
Applicant’s failure to disclose his employment history and adverse termination 
demonstrates a lack of candor required of public trust personnel. The government has 
an interest in examining all relevant and material adverse information about an 
Applicant before making a public trust decision. The government relies on applicants to 
truthfully disclose that adverse information in a timely fashion, not when it is perceived 
to be prudent or convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse 
information about himself provides some indication of his willingness to report 
inadvertent violations or other concerns in the future, something the government relies 
on to perform damage assessments and limit the compromise of sensitive information. 
Applicant’s conduct suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate 
government interests. I resolve Guideline E against Applicant.  
 
In September 2007, Applicant quit a part-time job. His employer had received a 
Notice of Levy on Wages, Salary, and Other Income from the IRS. His decision to stop 
working meets none of the criteria listed in Section 22 of his SF-86 that would require 
him to report this termination on an SF 86. He was not fired from the job, told he would 
be fired, left following misconduct, left following allegations of unsatisfactory 
performance, or left under unfavorable circumstances. It is true his employer had a duty 
to report the garnishment to the DSS, but his employer’s obligation to report the 
garnishment does not mean Applicant’s choice to leave was due to unfavorable 
circumstances. I find for Applicant as to this allegation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
7 
 
8 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was sufficiently mature 
when he completed his March 2008 SF-86 and chose not to reveal his employment with 
the DEA or the factors surrounding his leaving. His explanation for doing so was 
unpersuasive.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his personal 
conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1d:  Against Applicant 
  Additional added subparagraph: For Applicant     
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
