1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-10404
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Robert J. Judd, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s sexual abuse of his stepdaughter raises security concerns that he
failed to mitigate. Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case
On March 1, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines
D, Sexual Behavior, J, Criminal Conduct, and E, Personal Conduct. DOHA took the
action under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines.
Applicant answered the SOR on March 22, 2010. He denied all of the allegations
and requested a hearing. The case was originally assigned to another administrative
judge on April 5, 2010 and scheduled for April 29, 2010. On April 21, 2010, Applicant’s
2
attorney filed a notice of appearance, and moved to continue the hearing until after
August 2010, the month that the state court scheduled the criminal trial involving the
same allegations. Department Counsel objected. The administrative judge partially
granted the motion, agreeing to continue the case from April 2010, but denying the
request to reschedule it after August 2010. Instead, he scheduled it for May 24, 2010.
On May 7, 2010, the case was transferred to me. 
The hearing was conducted as scheduled. The Government moved to admit nine
exhibits, marked as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9. Applicant’s counsel
objected to the admission of GE 3 through 9, and did not object to GE 1 and GE 2. I
admitted all of the Government’s exhibits except GE 9. Also, I admitted one Applicant
exhibit, marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, and received the testimony of Applicant and
two supporting witnesses. At the close of the hearing, I ordered Department Counsel to
submit copies of the relevant state law governing Applicant’s allegedly criminal conduct.
He submitted it within the time allotted and I marked it as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. DOHA
received the transcript on June 4, 2010.
Evidentiary Ruling
At the close of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by
adding the following allegation, as follows:
3.b. On or about January 2008, you sent your step-daughter, who was 13
years old at the time, a text message, which stated that she had a
“banging ass,” using a company cell phone.
I granted the motion. (Tr. 157)
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 42-year-old married man with one child, age five. He has been
married since 2005. A previous marriage ended in 2002. He has one stepchild, a 15-
year-old girl, who is his wife’s child from a previous relationship.
Applicant graduated from college in 1992 with a bachelor of science degree in
mechanical engineering. Since then, he has worked for a defense contractor managing
computer database systems. (Tr. 128) Currently, he is a senior-level employee who
supervises 15 people. (Tr. 151) He has held a security clearance since 1993. According
to the company’s facility security officer, Applicant is a conscientious employee who has
won several awards for his exceptional handling of security-related matters. (Tr. 146)
Applicant’s supervisor characterizes him as a reliable team leader. (Tr. 153)
Applicant’s stepdaughter alleges that he molested her on the evening of March
16, 2008. Specifically, she alleged they were lying on his bed watching television. Her
head was at his feet and vice versa. (GE 5 at 2) Applicant was massaging her feet and
calves. She briefly fell asleep, then awoke when she felt him rubbing her buttocks under
Applicant’s daughter was also on the bed with Applicant and his stepdaughter on the night when the alleged1
incident occurred.
3
her underwear. She then walked out of the room, went to the bathroom, and went to
bed. (Tr. 77) 
Applicant’s stepdaughter went to school the next morning. When she returned
home, she told her mother what Applicant allegedly did. (Tr. 77) Her mother then asked
Applicant if he touched her daughter “on the butt.” (Tr. 78) Applicant responded that he
did “not recall anything like that.” (Tr. 78) She then ordered him to leave their home.
They have been separated since then.
On March 18, 2008, Applicant’s wife went to court and sought a protective order.
(Tr. 80) The judge issued the order. It restricts Applicant from any contact with either his
stepdaughter or wife and requires visitation with his daughter to be supervised. (GE 2 at
4) The order is still in effect. (GE 3)
Applicant’s wife then reported the incident to the local department of social
services. A child protective services social worker took a statement from Applicant’s
stepdaughter. (GE 5 at 3) This statement formed the basis of a criminal complaint filed
on March 19, 2008 charging Applicant with sexual abuse of a minor child, unlawful
sexual contact with a child under the age of 14 (third degree sexual assault), and
unlawfully engaging in sexual contact without the victim’s consent (fourth degree sexual
assault). (GE 5 at 1) The trial was originally scheduled for February 2009, but was
continued multiple times. It is currently scheduled for August 2010.
Applicant denies the allegations. He admits to rubbing his stepdaughter’s feet
and calves, but not her buttocks. (Tr. 74, 116) It was not unusual for Applicant to rub his
stepdaughter’s feet. (Tr. 85, 134; GE 5 at 2) He had rubbed them about 20 times before
the alleged incident. (Tr. 85) Her mother was aware of the foot rubs. (Tr. 87) After
Applicant’s stepdaughter reached puberty, his wife asked him to stop rubbing her feet.
(Tr. 87-88) His stepdaughter, however, continued to ask him for foot rubs. (Tr. 87, 121) 
On the evening of the alleged incident, Applicant relented “because [he] wanted
her to be quiet” so that his daughter, who was then a toddler, could get to sleep.  (Tr.1
91) Applicant contends that after his daughter eventually fell asleep, he took her to her
bedroom. (Tr. 91) When he returned to his bedroom, his stepdaughter “was still sitting
on [his] bed.” (Tr. 92) She then asked him to resume rubbing her feet. (Tr. 92) Applicant
obliged, and rubbed them “until she popped up and said ‘oh, I fell asleep’.” (Tr. 93) She
then left the room “for no apparent reason . . . without say[ing] anything to [Applicant].”
(Tr. 93)
According to Applicant, his stepdaughter is a rebellious, emotionally troubled
child who was prone to hallucinations and on medications to control anxiety. (Tr. 39-40)
She had been receiving treatment from a psychiatrist for five months preceding the
Applicant never reported the alleged hallucinations to his stepdaughter’s psychiatrist. (Tr. 49-50)2
Applicant did not use his personal cell phone to text his stepdaughter. Instead, he used his work-issued cell3
phone that she did not recognize. (Tr. 57) Applicant knew that his work-issued cell phone was only supposed
to be used for work-related purposes. (Tr. 58)
4
alleged incident.  (Tr. 51) Also, according to Applicant, she frequently lied about her2
whereabouts and the friends with whom she associated. (Tr. 46, 49, 53) In sum,
Applicant characterized his stepdaughter’s allegations as part of a broader continuum of
oppositional behavior stemming from unhappiness with her mother for getting
remarried. (Tr. 51, 52)
One day in January 2008, while sitting at home next to his wife, Applicant
decided to send a text message to his stepdaughter. (Tr. 64) Neither Applicant nor his
wife were upset with his stepdaughter or concerned about her safety. Rather, they were
bored and wondering what she was doing. (Tr. 66) When Applicant’s stepdaughter
received his text message, she did not know that he had sent it. Instead, she thought it
was a friend who shared the same first name as Applicant.  Applicant then told his wife3
that he was “just going to kid around with [his stepdaughter] and see what’s going on.”
(Tr. 62) His wife played along with the joke and told him to “go ahead and ask her a
couple of things.” (Tr. 63) Applicant then sent his stepdaughter a text message that she
had a “banging ass.” (Tr. 54)
Applicant and his stepdaughter ended their phone-texting conversation. Later,
Applicant’s wife told his stepdaughter that he was the one who sent the text message.
His stepdaughter then got uncomfortable. (Tr. 63)
Applicant contends that he had no prurient interest in his stepdaughter’s
buttocks. (Tr. 63) Instead, he was merely seeking to build her self-esteem because “she
had been complaining . . . about how nobody comments on her . . . posterior.” (Tr. 63)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG lists potentially disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied together with the factors
listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
5
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
The absence of a conviction does not preclude the Government from proving an
applicant engaged in criminal conduct. (ISCR Case No. 99-0119 (App. Bd. Sept. 13,
1999) However, the fact that an applicant has been arrested or otherwise charged with
a criminal offense, standing, alone, does not constitute proof the applicant engaged in
criminal conduct. (See ISCR Case No. 98-0424 (App. Bd. July 16, 1999) at p. 4)
The SOR is based primarily on GE 3, Applicant’s stepdaughter’s statement to a
social worker that the state used to draft its statement of charges. During Applicant’s
testimony, he reiterated his denial of the allegations and asserted that his stepdaughter
was either lying or delusional. After considering both the Government’s evidence and
Applicant’s testimony, I find that Applicant sexually abused his stepdaughter, as alleged.
Applicant’s testimony was not credible. Although he vehemently denied the
allegations throughout the security clearance investigative process, when his wife asked
him the day after the incident if the molestation occurred, he told her he did not recall.
Also, he testified that he had stopped massaging his stepdaughter’s feet after she
reached puberty, but resumed on the evening of March 16, 2008, in response to her
repeated requests so that she would be quiet and her younger half-sister, a toddler,
could get to sleep. However, after the toddler fell asleep, Applicant admitted that he
resumed massaging his stepdaughter’s feet. As for Applicant’s contention that his
daughter was delusional, he testified that she had experienced hallucinations in the
three months preceding the episode; however, he never reported this to her psychiatrist.
Most important, Applicant had manifested a perverse interest in his stepdaughter two
months before the incident when he sent her a text message complimenting her
buttocks. 
I conclude Applicant’s conduct raises security concerns under the adjudicative
guidelines governing sexual behavior, criminal conduct, and personal conduct.
Sexual Behavior 
Under this guideline, “sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a
personality or emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may
6
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.” (AG ¶ 12) Applicant’s conduct triggers the application of AG ¶¶ 13(a),
“sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has been
prosecuted,” and 13(c), “sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to
coercion, exploitation, or duress.”
Applicant presented no evidence establishing that he has undergone counseling
to remedy whatever compelled him to molest his stepdaughter. Consequently, I cannot
conclude that his conduct “no longer serves as a basis of coercion, exploitation, or
duress.” (AG ¶ 14(c)) None of the other mitigating conditions under this guideline are
relevant.
Criminal Conduct
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.” (AG ¶ 30) Also, “by its very nature, it calls into question
a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” (Id.)
Applicant’s conduct triggers the application of AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime
or multiple lesser offenses.” The potentially applicable mitigating conditions set forth in
AG ¶ 32 are:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment; 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense, and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
Applicant’s evidence that he did not commit the offense was limited to his
testimony, which was not credible. AG ¶ 32(c) does not apply.
Although the offense occurred nearly two and a half years ago, Applicant is still
awaiting trial, and a protective order prohibiting contact with his stepdaughter is still in
place. AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply. As discussed above, Applicant has neither attended
any counseling nor sought treatment to address what compelled him to molest his
stepdaughter. AG ¶ 32(d) does not apply. 
7
Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.” (AG ¶ 15) Applicant’s conduct triggers the application of AG 16(e),
“personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . engaging in activities
which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.”
The relevant, potentially mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are:
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, and
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable
reliability.
These mitigating conditions are inapplicable for the same reasons as discussed under
Guidelines D and E.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
8
The criminal allegations against Applicant remain pending as of the hearing date.
This fact, combined with the nature and seriousness of the allegations make Applicant
an unacceptable security risk.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline D: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
