 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08012 
 SSN:  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 29, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 3, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 12, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on July 28, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
August 17, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
 
2 
 
received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through I, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on August 25, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since 2001. He seeks to retain the security clearance 
that he has held since about 2004. He has a bachelor’s degree and attended post-
graduate courses, but he has not earned a master’s degree. He was married and 
divorced before he married his current wife in 2006. He has two adult children, a 
teenage stepchild, and his wife gave birth to triplets last year.1 
 
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts with balances totaling about $133,151, and 
that Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in March 2010. Applicant admitted all the 
allegations.  
 
 Applicant had a clean financial record for many years, as documented in a credit 
report from 2004 that showed no delinquent accounts. The balances on his revolving 
accounts were a little high but were always paid on time. In 2008, a series of events led 
to serious financial difficulties. In mid-2008, it was discovered that a water leak in 
Applicant’s house caused mold to grow inside the walls. The mold had been making his 
wife ill. Applicant and his family rented a condominium for a year while the house was 
repaired and renovated. Applicant’s credit card balances rose because of the house 
renovations and the expense of paying rent in addition to his mortgage payments, but 
he was able to make all the payments on time.2  
 
 Applicant had health insurance for his family through his employer. His wife’s 
employer offered health insurance through the same carrier for less money. They 
changed to his wife’s health insurance in January 2009. Applicant and his wife 
discovered that she was pregnant with triplets in February 2009. She was in her late 
thirties. Her doctor diagnosed it as a difficult pregnancy and placed her on bed rest. She 
immediately went on disability from her full-time job that she had held for about 20 
years. Her disability payments were a fraction of her former salary.3   
 
 In March 2009, Applicant and his wife were notified by her health insurance 
carrier that their policy was cancelled because she had not been enrolled in the plan for 
60 days before she went on disability. She was eligible for Consolidated Omnibus 
Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) insurance coverage and accepted it, but it cost 
$1,500 per month. The triplets were born prematurely in mid-2009. They were in 
intensive care for several weeks. The medical expenses related to the birth and care of 
the triplets were well over $200,000. The insurance carrier initially denied most of their 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 30, 32, 36, 56-57; GE 1; AE B. 
 
2 Tr. at 20-21, 33-38; GE 2, 7. 
 
3 Tr. at 20; GE 2. 
 
3 
 
claims, requiring many phone calls. After many months of quarreling over the coverage, 
the carrier recently paid all the bills. Applicant estimated that he paid about $6,700 in 
medical bills for deductibles and co-payments.4   
 
 Applicant and his wife spent their savings. He paid his first and second mortgage 
payments, rent, and the loans for his cars, but he was unable to maintain the payments 
on his credit cards. He called the credit card companies and attempted to work out a 
plan for smaller payments for a period. The credit card companies were unwilling to 
modify their agreements.5   
 
 In July 2009, Applicant submitted a financial difficulties form to his company’s 
security officer notifying the Department of Defense that he had debts that were 90 days 
delinquent.6   
 
 Applicant’s lease for the condominium expired at the end of August 2009. The 
repairs on his house were completed, and they were preparing to move home. In early 
August 2009, a fire started in one of the condominium units and spread to other units, 
including Applicant’s. Most of his family’s personal property was destroyed. Insurance 
eventually covered most of their losses.7 
 
 Applicant consulted a credit counseling company. He was advised that, because 
of the extent of his debts and the pending medical bills of over $200,000, his best 
recourse was to file bankruptcy. He consulted an attorney who gave him the same 
advice. He was advised to wait until after he received the insurance check from the fire 
to file bankruptcy.8 
 
 Applicant and his wife filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in October 2009. They 
received financial counseling as required for the bankruptcy. They received on-line 
counseling, and they also attended a live session because Applicant thought it would be 
beneficial as they progress in the bankruptcy. A plan was approved by the court. The 
plan called for four monthly payments to the trustee of $370 from April through July 
2010, followed by 56 monthly payments of $489 from August 2010 through March 2015. 
Applicant made the first four monthly payments as required. He is also required to pay 
his mortgages and car loans outside the plan.9 
 
 Applicant stated that he is able to make the monthly payments to the trustee and 
have some left over each month for savings and contingencies. His wife has returned to 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 20-26, 53-55; GE 2; AE B-D. 
 
5 Tr. at 24-25; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 25-28; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 21; GE 2; AE E. 
 
8 Tr. at 25-27, 38-39; GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. at 28-29, 56-57; GE 2, 3; AE E, F. 
 
4 
 
work. The triplets are now healthy. There are no child care expenses because he and 
his wife work different shifts, and his father-in-law watches the children during the period 
that they are both gone. One of his vehicle loans is almost paid, which will free up an 
additional $289 each month. His other vehicle loan still has a few years left, but the 
monthly payments are a manageable $251 per month. He is also able to make the 
monthly mortgage payments of $1,288 for his first mortgage and $233 for his second 
mortgage. Applicant and his wife have simplified their lifestyle and are not accruing new 
debt. He credibly testified that he is committed to completing the bankruptcy plan and 
resolving his financial problems.10   
 
 Applicant submitted performance appraisals from his company that reflected 
solid job performance.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 29-30, 40-52, 57; GE 2; AE H. 
 
11 AE I. 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence raises the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
  
  Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. His plan was confirmed by the court, and 
he made the first four monthly payments. However, he is still early in the plan. His 
financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not yet applicable.  
 
 Mold was discovered in Applicant’s house in 2008, requiring extensive 
renovations. Applicant’s family was forced to move into a condominium for a year while 
the house was renovated. Applicant and his wife changed medical insurance to the 
insurance offered by her wife’s company because the premiums were lower. She 
became pregnant with triplets causing her to go on disability. Their policy was cancelled 
because she had not been enrolled in the plan for 60 days before she went on disability. 
They utilized their COBRA insurance coverage, but it cost $1,500 per month. The 
insurance company initially denied most of their claims. They lost most of their personal 
belongings in a fire at the condominium. These qualify as conditions that were outside 
his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant notified his company that he was having 
financial problems. He paid his first and second mortgage payments, rent, and the loans 
for his cars, but he was unable to maintain the payments on his credit cards. He 
contacted the credit card companies, but they were unwilling to work with him or modify 
their agreements. He finally filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy to pay his debts in accordance 
with a court-approved plan. I find that he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is applicable.  
 
 Applicant has received the financial counseling required for his bankruptcy. He 
made the first four monthly payments to the bankruptcy plan. There are clear indications 
that the problem is being resolved and is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable.  
 
 A Chapter 13 bankruptcy involves a structured payment plan approved by the 
court and monitored by a trustee. A Chapter 7 bankruptcy would not qualify as a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.12 However, payments 
                                                          
12 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
 
7 
 
through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy may constitute a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts, depending upon the circumstances. The four 
payments to the trustee are not yet sufficient to qualify as a good-faith effort to pay or 
resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is not attempting to absolve himself of excessive debt caused by 
frivolous or irresponsible spending. He is taking the legal remedy of bankruptcy to rectify 
a situation that was beyond his ability to control. I am convinced that he will follow 
through with his Chapter 13 bankruptcy and that he is on the right track financially.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
