                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07478 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government, D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 22, 2010, and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on May 11, 2010. The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant and it was received on May 13, 2010. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object to the FORM and submitted additional material dated June 5, 
2010. Department Counsel had no objection and the material was considered. The case 
was assigned to me on July 19, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements submitted, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 62 years old. He is married and has three grown sons. He has been 
employed by a federal contractor since November 2008.  
 
 Applicant admitted that he owes the 19 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, 
totaling approximately $331,116. He filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 on March 10, 
2010, after issuance of the SOR. The delinquent debts include a court judgment, bank 
loans, and credit card debts. The debts are unpaid and the bankruptcy proceeding is 
pending.  
 
 Applicant claims all of the debts were the result of a failed business and his use 
of credit cards as a means to finance the venture. He indicated in his answer to the 
SOR that his delinquent debts will be resolved through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  
 
 Applicant purchased a business in 1991 and had one retail store. The business 
did well during its first two years, so he opened another store. In 2005, Applicant 
indicated the sales in his stores dropped because of legislation restricting smoking. Part 
of Applicant’s inventory involved the sale of smoking products. Applicant also claimed 
the business suffered a decline due to the economy. He used credit cards to purchase 
inventory and pay bills, which caused him to be financially overextended. He took out a 
bank loan for $40,000 in 2005 to pay the high interest credit cards, but subsequently 
had difficulty making the loan payments. Applicant stopped paying the creditors in late 
2007 or early 2008. He closed his stores in January 2008.  
 
 Applicant liquidated some retirement accounts and assumed a second mortgage 
on his home. He was unable to sell the inventory he held. Along with his full-time job he 
worked a part-time job. Applicant indicated that he restructured his mortgage to 
decrease his monthly payments. He owns a time-share property that he stated is up for 
sale.1 No documentation was offered to substantiate those statements. Applicant also 
indicated that he had overdue tax debts for both personal income taxes and business 
taxes. He did not file the tax returns because he did not have money to pay someone to 
prepare the tax returns. He believed that he would not owe a tax debt for his personal 
income tax returns for 2007 and 2008 tax years, but did owe for 2006. He filed his 2006, 
2007, and 2008 federal income tax returns in August 2009. It appears he filed his 2006, 
1 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
2007, and 2008, state income tax returns in December 2009.2 He indicated in his 
answer: 
 
 I believe I have again demonstrated financial responsibility by paying all of 
my other bills on time and paying off thousands of dollars in delinquent 
[f]ederal and [s]tate business and personal taxes. Unfortunately, my 
current income is simply too low to allow me to pay the accumulated 
business debt and I am forced to file for bankruptcy.3  
 
 No documentation or other evidence was provided to corroborate Applicant’s 
statement that he was making reasonable and responsible business decisions 
regarding the businesses he owned. He did not elaborate on why he failed to pay his 
business taxes. He was advised by his attorney that he was required to satisfy all of his 
tax debts before he could file for bankruptcy. It appears that he has satisfied his tax 
debts.4 
 
 No information was provided to indicate that Applicant has received any financial 
counseling or sought debt management services. 
 
Policies 
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
2 Item 5. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Items 1. I have not considered for disqualifying purposes Applicant’s previous delinquent tax debts, but I 
will consider them when analyzing Applicant’s business practices and responsible financial planning, and 
when analyzing the “whole-person.” 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
5 
 
 
Appellant owes approximately $331,116 in delinquent debts. He is unable to pay 
the delinquent debts and they remain unpaid and unresolved. Applicant has filed for 
bankruptcy under Chapter 7. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The $331,116 in delinquent debt is unpaid. Applicant’s bankruptcy proceeding is 
pending and the debts have not been discharged. Therefore, Applicant remains 
responsible for his delinquent debts. I find AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant 
attributes his financial problems to a failed business venture. I have not had an 
opportunity to question Applicant regarding his business practices. He did not provide 
documentation to substantiate that his business failures were beyond his control. He 
stated it was the downturn in the economy and a new no-smoking law that caused the 
demise of his business. However, he did not file his federal business tax returns, his 
federal personal tax returns, or his state tax returns, which causes concern about his 
business practices. He commented that he acted responsibly by paying his delinquent 
taxes, but does not explain how failing to file tax returns is a responsible act. In addition, 
he did not take steps to resolve his tax issues until he was advised by his bankruptcy 
attorney that he could not proceed to file for bankruptcy until his tax issues were 
resolved. I have not been provided sufficient evidence to conclude that the conditions 
that resulted in Applicant’s financial problems were beyond his control and he acted 
responsible under the circumstances. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has taken some steps to reduce his personal expenses and live within 
his means by working two jobs. He stated that all of his delinquent debts are business 
related. It appears Applicant’s rationale is that because his debts were due to a failed 
 
6 
 
 
business he should somehow not be held accountable or responsible for repaying his 
loans and credit cards. He did not provide a reasonable explanation for why he failed to 
file his tax returns. I have not been able to make a credibility determination. Although 
bankruptcy is a legal means to resolve debt and creates a new financial start, it does 
not necessarily constitute a good-faith effort to pay overdue creditors. Applicant has not 
sought financial counseling and the bankruptcy is not completed. There are too many 
issues that without further corroboration and explanation remain unresolved. I find AG 
¶¶ 20 (c) and 20(d) do not apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant accumulated $331,116 in 
delinquent debts, which he attributed to a failed business venture. He only recently filed 
for bankruptcy under Chapter 7, and that action is pending. Although his debts may be 
eventually discharged in bankruptcy, Applicant’s decision to resolve them through that 
process does not reflect a good-faith effort and responsible conduct toward paying his 
creditors based on the circumstances in this case. I did not have an opportunity to 
question Applicant about his finances and make a credibility determination, or elicit 
other evidence that could address issues regarding his reliability and judgment. There 
was insufficient evidence to substantiate his assertions regarding his business and 
personal finances.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline 
for Financial Considerations.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.s:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
