                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                           )
                                                                    )
 )       ISCR Case No. 09-04849
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
W ESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
On November 3, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
DOHA recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs). 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 17, 2009, and requested a
hearing.  The case was initially assigned to another judge, and was reassigned to me on
March 4, 2010.  A hearing was scheduled for March 31, 2010, and was convened on the
scheduled date. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of six exhibits (GE).
2
All but one of the Government’s exhibits (GE 6) were admitted pursuant to stipulation by
the parties. Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and five exhibits (AE). The transcript
(Tr.) was received on April 21, 2010. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to supplement the
record with an updated personal financial statement and letters to her creditors. For good
cause shown, Applicant was granted 11 days to supplement the record.  Department
Counsel was afforded two days to respond.  Within the time permitted, Applicant
furnished copies of her updated personal financial statement and letters to her creditors.
Her submissions were admitted as AEs F and G.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly incurred six delinquent debts exceeding
$22,000. In her November 17, 2009 response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of
the allegations. She provided explanations for the listed debts and the steps she has
taken to try and resolve them.  
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 47-year-old security guard for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant married her first spouse in August 1978 and has two children from this
marriage.  GE 1. She divorced her first husband in June 1989. See GE 1. In September
1994, she married her current husband GE 1. She has two stepchildren from this
marriage. Since the fall of 2006, she has attended a local college and is pursuing an
Associate of Art degree in general studies.  She was awarded an Associate of Applied
Science degree in criminal justice this year. Tr. 116. She expects to complete her
general studies class work in the fall of 2010. Tr. 115.
Applicant’s finances
In June 2004, Applicant injured her shoulder while pulling print cylinders on her
job Tr. 44-45. The accident was work-related, and she prepared a contemporaneous
accident report describing the circumstances of her accident. Tr. 45. She wrote a
contemporaneous accident report complaining of pain in her right shoulder, right upper
arm, and neck.  
The day after her accident, she consulted with a company physician who
indicated her injury was likely soft tissue-related, and not very serious. Tr. 46-47.  When
the pain did not dissipate, she continued her physical therapy and consulted another
doctor, who prescribed surgical repair of her shoulder. Applicant underwent her surgical
intervention to correct her shoulder injury in December 2004. Tr. 48-49. 
3
Applicant returned to work in January 2005. Tr. 50. When her safety manager
asked her about her condition, she replied that she was having considerable pain in her
neck.  Told that she had not indicated any pain in her neck in the post-accident complaint
she filed, or awarded any relief for neck pain in her workman’s compensation hearing,
she double-checked her accident report, which confirmed her complaints of shoulder and
neck pain in the report she filed with her employer following the accident.  Tr. 51-52.  
In April 2005, Applicant was “pulled off the press” and told by her supervisor that
she was not fit to operate a press with her neck injury. Tr. 51. Her supervisor then told
her that the company was docking her wages for the time she could not work on the
forklift she was trained to operate. Tr. 52. 
When her employer determined in June 2005 that Applicant was then fit to
operate a forklift, her supervisor ordered her to take a forklift driver’s test. Tr. 52-53.
When she could not pass the forklift test in her current condition, her employer’s safety
manager and human resources manager informed her that she could not  return to work
until she could do her job and advised her to apply for short-term disability. Tr. 54-55.
Applicant applied for and was awarded short term disability benefits in August
2005.  Her benefits provided for bi-weekly payments of $500 (a $500 reduction from her
employment benefits). By September 2005, Applicant and her husband realized they
could not meet their monthly expenses with the reduced benefits and explored
refinancing of their home. When she learned she could not obtain refinancing, she turned
to a debt consolidation company to try and obtained lower interest rates. Tr. 81-90.
Applicant and her husband signed a debt repayment agreement with the financial
services company (FS) in October 2005, and agreed to pay the service firm $3,237 if
they would reduce their overall debts from approximately $21,586 (inclusive of cost of
service) to a much lower debt load of $11,872 (inclusive of service costs).  See GE 2; Tr.
57-58. Applicant and FS entered into an agreement that memorialized their mutual
understanding of how FS would consolidate and pay off Applicant’s identified delinquent
debts.  For the ensuing 13 months, FS debited their checking account with bi-weekly
deductions from Applicant’s joint checking account.  Once FS’s fees were paid, however,
Applicant and her husband stopped receiving payment invoices from FS. See GE 2; Tr.
62-63.  Altogether, Applicant paid FS $3,400 in fees. Tr. 64.  With the funds, FS paid off
two of her accounts (creditors 1.a and 1.e), but failed to address the three remaining
ones. 
By November 2005, Applicant no longer received disability checks. Shortly
thereafter (in December 2005), her husband was laid off from his job due to plant
closure. GE 2; Tr. 59. Thereafter, he began receiving unemployment checks.
In February 2006, Applicant learned that she had won her disability hearing
concerning her employer’s refusal to accept responsibility for her neck injury. GE 2; Tr.
56-57. She then had to press her appeal for actual back pay, which her employer
challenged. Tr. 57.  In June 2007, Applicant was granted a 29 per cent disability on her
workman’s compensation claim.  Based on this disability calculation, she was awarded
4
25 per cent of her claimed lost wages in one lump sum amount and 4 per cent (which
translates to about $890 a year) of her lost wages monthly for the duration of her life, or
until she reaches the age of 70. Tr. 65-69.  Her employer’s insurance company was held
responsible for the payments covered by her award.  Tr. 68.  After her attorney deducted
her 33 and 1/3 per cent share of her award to cover her attorneys fees, Applicant was
left with $36,000, scarcely enough to pay her bills.  Tr. 59-61, 65-69. 
Applicant ‘s husband returned to work with another employer in March 2006. Tr.
59-61. Three months later (in July 2006), Applicant underwent neck surgery for the
fusion of two discs. GE 2. The fusion procedure secured a 29 per cent disability rating for
her in April 2007.  With the additional income from her husband, she was able to settle
two of her delinquent debts.
With the $36,000 lump sum disability proceeds awarded her In June 2007,
Applicant was able to pay off her truck, in addition to other bills, her overdraft protection,
and her brother who had advanced her funds to cover her mortgage. GE 2; Tr. 70.  In
the same month, she also asked FS to move forward with negotiations to settle her
remaining delinquent accounts with the remaining money she retained in her checking
account. She advised FS that she had escrowed $8,000 to $10,000 to cover her
creditors holding outstanding balances. Tr. 71-72.
By July 2008, Applicant had heard nothing back from FS about paying off her
creditors. After signing another power of attorney July 2008 to extend her power of
attorney to FS, she received an e-mail that a new company (H Company) would be
assuming responsibility for addressing her debts under the guidance of the same
personal negotiator. GE 2; Tr. 72. After receiving e-mails and confirming calls from this
negotiator, Applicant received nothing of substance from this personal negotiator for over
a year.  She continued to remit monthly payments to him, but received no confirmations
that any of her identified delinquent debts had been paid or addressed.  Tr. 72-73.
After joining her current employer in January 2009, her husband was placed on
temporary layoff status due to cut backs imposed by his employer, and began receiving
unemployment benefits pending his recall to full time work status. When she made
renewed inquiries to her personal negotiator in April 2009, she was reassured in May
2009 that he would soon be returning to working on her accounts. GE 2. Upon learning
from a local better business bureau that FS had an F rating, (GE 2), she filed an on-line
complaint with the bureau. Tr. 72-73. This prompted a phone call from her personal
negotiator in July 2009, and a follow-up e-mail that his H group was still representing her
and working on the six identified accounts she provided.  See GE 2; Tr. 74-75.
To date, Applicant has received no substantive information from her personal
negotiator concerning his progress in addressing her accounts. Tr. 77-79. Through her
own contacts with creditors 1.a and 1.e (opened in 2004), she was able to document that
these two accounts were paid by the H group. See AE C; Tr. 80-83. However, she has
had no success with the other creditors she has contacted to explore payment
arrangements on their charged off accounts. See AE D. Tr. 85-89. 
5
Applicant has continued to enlist her remaining creditors to work with her in
developing repayment plans, but to no avail. None of her remaining creditors have
returned her repeated calls to arrange repayment plans. She documents recent letters to
each of her remaining creditors outlining her repayment efforts dating to September
2005.  See AEs G through H. In the meantime, she continues to work two jobs to pay her
bills.  Her husband has received unemployment benefits since March 2010, and has filed
for his Social Security benefits. Tr. 77, 98-99.
Based on her most current personal financial statement, Applicant and her
husband earn about $3,526 in net monthly income. GE F. She and her husband estimate
about $1,530 in net monthly expenses, and $1,375 in debts (inclusive of their mortgage).
This leaves them with a net monthly remainder of approximately $621.  Compare GE 3
with AE F and Tr. 100-01.  
Endorsements
Applicant is well-regarded by her supervisors and colleagues. She documents
numerous credits for her contributions to her team’s missions.  See AEs A, D and F.
Colleagues who have had considerable experience working with her describe her as
very conscientious and trustworthy. They credit her with demonstrated courage,
leadership, and outstanding performance in the execution of her assigned
responsibilities as a team leader.  See AEs A and E.  
Applicant draws important support from her family as well. Her son has served in
the U.S. Navy for the past 14 years and describes Applicant as a strong supporter of
sailors and marines who over the years has sent gifts to deployed military personnel.  AE
A.  For over four years, Applicant and her husband have been foster parents for young
boys with behavioral issues. Tr. 96. They are compensated by her state’s division of
child and family services. See AE A; Tr. 107-08.  
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. 
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying
and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the
guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶
2(c) 
6
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy concerns are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
Under the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an applicant's request for
security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly
consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires administrative
judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record,
the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in
large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all adversarial
proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and
logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR; and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
7
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or his security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.  Because Executive Order 10865 requires that all
security clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, “security-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
Analysis  
Applicant is a respected employee of a defense contractor who accumulated a
number of delinquent debts during periods of her own unemployment resulting from a
work-related accident and associated shoulder injury, and her husband’s layoffs during
the same contemporaneous time frame. With proceeds she received from her workman’s
compensation award, she engaged a debt consolidation firm to work with her creditors
and pay them off.  Unbeknownst to her, the debt consolidation firm and its successor firm
failed to resolve most of her debts, while assuring her they were actively engaged in
working with her creditors. As matters now stand, only two of the listed creditors in the
SOR (creditors 1.a and 1.e have been paid. 
Applicant’s accumulated debt delinquencies warrant the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the financial consideration guideline: DC ¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s duties
and access to classified information necessarily impose important duties of trust and
candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those typically imposed
on government employees and contractors involved in other lines of government
business. See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). Failure of the
applicant to make concerted efforts to pay or resolve her debts when able to do so raises
security-significant concerns about the sufficiency of the applicant’s demonstrated trust
and judgment necessary to safeguard classified information.
All of Applicant’s listed debts were accumulated during periods when she was out
of work and collecting disability benefits for a shoulder injury she suffered in a work-
related accident.  Based on her evidentiary showing, Applicant’s proofs are sufficient to
establish significant extenuating circumstances associated with her debt accumulations.
As a result, MC ¶ 20(b) of the financial considerations guideline, “the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
8
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce,
or separation, and the individual acted responsibly),” applies to Applicant’s
circumstances. 
After succeeding in her workman’s compensation appeal, she used most of the
proceeds to address the delinquent debts she incurred in 2004 and 2005 when both she
and her husband were out of work for considerable periods. She made good faith
attempts to pay her creditors by engaging a debt consolidation firm to work with her
creditors.  She paid the debt consolidation firm their required monthly fees in the belief
the firm was actively working in her behalf. As it turns out, the firm and its related
successor accepted Applicant’s money for many months, but for reasons still
unexplained, the firm paid off only two of Applicant’s creditors (creditors 1.a and 1.e).
Applicant cannot be faulted for working earnestly through a debt consolidation firm, as
well as the debtors individually, to resolve her debts, all of which were opened in 2004
and 2005.  
By all credible accounts in the record, Applicant’s remaining debts are barred by
her state’s four-year statute of limitations for collections of debts on account. See §
11.190 of State A’s revised civil statutes.  Applicant’s debts are associated with credit
card accounts for the most part and qualify as debts on account. 
Statutes of limitation, while considered important policy tools for discouraging
plaintiffs from pursuing stale claims and promoting finality in litigation, have never been
equated with good-faith efforts to repay overdue creditors.  See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No.
02-30304, at 3 (App. Bd. April 2004)(quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020, at 5-6 (App. Bd.
June 2001). Still, they provide effective collection barriers and, like bankruptcy, serve to
insulate the debtor from pressures to raise cash to  satisfy his or her creditors.
To be sure, Applicant does not assert relevant statutes of limitation in her
defense. With her limited income and good-faith efforts in working with her debt
consolidation firm, she fully expected to repay all of her listed debts with the workman’s
compensation proceeds she was awarded in 2007. To her surprise, and disappointment,
the debt consolidation firm she engaged did not fulfill its contractual responsibilities. 
At this time, it is not clear what steps Applicant might consider in the foreseeable
future, if any, to resolve her remaining time barred debts. If these covered creditors are
not willing, or in a position, to detail the bases of the debts, the consolidation firm is
unlikely to have any future interest in pursuing them, their assurances notwithstanding.
While she has not sought any new financial counseling or initiated constructive steps
(such as petitioning for bankruptcy) to discharge or otherwise resolve her debts, she is
currently legally insulated from any collection action by the applicable state statute of
limitation, and for all practicable purposes, is no longer at risk to having to raise large
sums of money to resolve her debts. 
Applicant has a positive remainder every month, and she has shown considerable
progress in the payment of her debts since she returned to full time employment in 2009.
She is current with all of her debts not listed in the SOR, and is pursuing advanced
degrees to improve her skills and opportunities.   
9
Evaluating all of her repayment efforts contextually, and given the difficult family
and unemployment issues she has had to manage the past few years, Applicant may be
credited with serious, good-faith efforts to resolve her debts and regain control of her
finances. She has made considerable progress to date in regaining control of her
finances and shows good promise for fulfilling her remaining debt obligations.
Applicant’s repayment efforts entitle her to mitigation credit under both MC ¶
20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts,” and MC ¶ 20(e), “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue.” These mitigating conditions have application to Applicant’s
situation, considering her repayment efforts and credible reasons for disputing her
remaining debts. 
On balance, Applicant has shown good faith in addressing her debts since she
returned to full-time employment with her current employer in 2009. With her improved
financial situation (which includes a net monthly remainder), she demonstrates that she
is now firmly in control of her finances and can be expected to stay current with her
debts.
Based on a whole-person assessment, Applicant surmounts the judgment
questions raised by her accumulation of six delinquent debts during extended periods of
disability and her husband’s layoffs. Her positive endorsements from her supervisors and
colleagues merit considerable praise and commendation. On balance, she has shown
sufficient tangible effort in addressing her major debts to mitigate her listed delinquent
debts and demonstrate restored control over her finances. 
Taking into account all of the extenuating facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, the limited resources she has had to work with following
her work-related accident and ensuing layoffs of her husband, safe predictive judgments
can be made about her ability and intentions to maintain control of her finances for the
foreseeable future. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f.   
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in ¶ 2(a) of the AGs.
Formal Findings 
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):       FOR APPLICANT
Subparas 1.a through 1.f :           For Applicant
10
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is granted.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
                                          
                                        
11
