 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-00957 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 15, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 27, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) for Applicant. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within 
the Department of Defense for SORs after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 3, 2009, and DOHA received his 
answer on November 9, 2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 
 
2 
 
 
15, 2010. The case was assigned to me on May 5, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on May 6, 2010, scheduling the hearing for May 19, 2010. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until May 28, 2010, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted 
AE C and D, which were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on May 26, 2010. The record closed on May 28, 2010. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.a. to correct Applicant’s 
Chapter 7 discharge date from “2206” to “2006.” Without objection from the Applicant, 
I granted Department Counsel’s request. (Tr. 33-34.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old tool room machinist, who has worked for a defense 
contractor employer since November 1982. His employer has changed hands several 
times since 1982; however, Applicant has remained in the same location. He is a first-
time applicant for a security clearance. (GE 1, Tr. 16-19, 27-28.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1971. He attended a community 
college from September 1996 to May 2000, and estimates that he has earned 15 
credit hours. Applicant has also attended various job-related courses throughout his 
working career. He did not serve in the armed forces. (GE 1, Tr. 22-24.) 
 
Applicant married in June 1984, and has been separated from his wife since 
July 2008. They have three children, a 26-year-old daughter, a 23-year-old son, and 
an 18-year-old son. At the time of hearing, Applicant’s daughter was living with her 
mother, and his two sons were living with family members. Applicant does not pay 
spousal or child support. His wife is employed as a nurse. (GE 1, Tr. 21-22, 28-30.)  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his September 2008 e-QIP; his April 2009 responses to DOHA 
Interrogatories; his October 2005 Chapter 7 Bankruptcy petition; his February 2006 
Chapter 7 Bankruptcy discharge; as well as his September 2008, February 2009, and 
December 2009 credit reports. Applicant’s SOR alleges a 2006 Chapter 7 Bankruptcy 
and three separate collection accounts totaling $11,534. (GE 1 – 7; SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 
1.d.) 
 
Applicant and his wife filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in October 2005 and were 
awarded a discharge in February 2006. The total amount of debts discharged on their 
Schedule F (Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims) was $58,503. Applicant 
stated the reason he and his wife were forced to file bankruptcy was due to his wife’s 
“casino gambling habit.” Her gambling habit had been ongoing for approximately 12 
years and led to the deterioration of their marriage. (GE 6, GE 7, Tr. 30-33, 47-48, 51; 
SOR ¶ 1.a.) 
 
The remaining three debts are collection accounts for credit cards. Applicant 
testified that two of the accounts are joint accounts and the third account was opened 
without his knowledge by his estranged wife before they separated. Applicant 
attributes these collection accounts to his wife’s indiscriminate spending, but 
recognizes his obligation to make good on them. He estimates that he fell behind on 
these debts at the time he and his wife separated in 2008. (AE A, Tr. 35-36, 46, 50-
52.) 
 
In May 2010, Applicant retained the services of a debt consolidation firm (DCF). 
Applicant enrolled his three SOR debts with the DCF. Applicant has been making 
monthly payments to the DCF since May 2010 in the amount of $287 per month by 
direct debit. His three SOR debts are being monitored and paid by the DCF. (AE B, 
AE D, Tr. 36-40.) 
 
In conclusion, Applicant has made good-faith efforts to repay or resolve the 
three debts alleged. Applicant remains current on the rest of his monthly bills. His 
budget reflects a monthly remainder and demonstrates that he maintains a modest 
lifestyle and is living within his means. (GE 4, Tr. 40-47.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted a reference letter from a senior company manager. The 
manager stated that Applicant worked on and off for him for over 20 years in various 
positions. He stated that Applicant has shown an outstanding work ethic and a positive 
attitude in everything he does. Applicant is conscientious and has always been willing 
to work late and come in early. He concluded, “For all the years [Applicant] has 
worked for me I have never heard him say a negative thing about anyone. If all my 
employees were like [Applicant], my life would be a whole lot easier.” (AE C.) 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude that a relevant security concern exists under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial 
problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and the 
evidence presented. As indicated in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. to 1.d., he filed for bankruptcy in 
2005 and more recently accumulated three debts totaling $11,534 that were in various 
states of delinquency for several years. The Government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 
(e) are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. 
Three debts remain unpaid. Therefore, his debt is “a continuing course of conduct.” 
See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 
01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). He receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) 
because the debt “occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.”  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant receives credit because his indebtedness stems 
from his estranged wife’s gambling problems, which are largely beyond his control. 
Applicant took the drastic step of filing Chapter 7 bankruptcy hoping his indebtedness 
was behind him. Applicant’s wife continued to gamble and engage in indiscriminate 
spending. Her behavior led to the deterioration of their marriage. They are currently 
separated with a divorce pending.1  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable because Applicant did not produce evidence of 
financial counseling. However, he has produced evidence that establishes that he is 
living within his means and has regained has financial responsibility. Furthermore, 
there is sufficient information to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).2 Applicant 
is making a good-faith effort to pay or otherwise resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is not 
applicable because Applicant did not dispute the legitimacy of any of his debts. His 
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
his debts current. 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
 
2005 Chapter 7 Bankruptcy filing lacks security significance both because of the 
passage of time, and because it followed the financial fallout incurred as a result of his 
wife’s gambling habits. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. The SOR lists a 2005 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy and three debts totalling $11,534 that were at one time or 
another in various states of delinquency. He failed to keep his accounts current, 
showing financial irresponsibility and lack of judgment. This fact alone raises sufficient 
security concerns to merit further inquiry.   
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s record of good employment weighs in his favor. He has accumulated 28 
years of faithful and loyal service in the defense industry. Applicant is a law-abiding 
citizen. He has made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve his SOR debts. He 
recognized he had a problem with his debts, retained the services of a DCF in May 
2010, and is making monthly payments to his DCF by direct debit. His monthly 
expenses are current. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-
person analysis in financial cases, stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
 
8 
 
 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
Applicant is making a significant contribution to the national defense. His company 
fully supports him and recommends him for a security clearance. He made mistakes, 
and debts became delinquent. There is, however, simply no reason not to trust him. 
He is paying down his debts. Furthermore, he has established a “meaningful track 
record” of debt payments. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and 
mitigation. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts 
and circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. to 1.d.:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
