 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04745 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 19, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 6, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on April 22, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 13, 2010, scheduling the 
hearing for June 24, 2010. Applicant was working in Afghanistan. He requested the 
 
2 
 
hearing be continued until he was home on vacation between July 29, 2010 and August 
15, 2010. Documents relating to the request for a continuance were marked Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. The case was reassigned to me on June 4, 2010. DOHA issued another 
notice of hearing on July 13, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
August 10, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through G, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on August 18, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since April 2009. He is applying for a security clearance. He 
attended college for a period but did not obtain a degree. He is married with two 
children, ages 26 and 21.1 
 
 Applicant worked as a manager for food establishments from the 1990s to 2003. 
He was the manager of a gas station from 2003 until he accepted his current job in 
2009. His annual income from the gas station was about $42,000. Applicant lives in an 
area of the country that has high real estate values. The housing market in his area 
increased greatly during the real estate boom of the early-to-mid 2000s. He bought a 
house for his personal residence in 2002. He paid about $350,000 for the home. He put 
about $50,000 down and financed the remainder.2  
 
 Applicant purchased a second house as an investment property in 2006. He paid 
about $475,000 for the property. He refinanced his original home and took out about 
$120,000 in equity from the property. He used that money as a down payment on the 
second property and financed the remainder. Applicant testified that the property was to 
be a rental property. He had a tenant but the rent did not cover the mortgage. The rent 
on the property was about $1,900 per month, and the mortgage was about $3,500 each 
month. There was also a period when the tenant was not paying the rent. Applicant 
refinanced the property at one point and used some of the equity he received to pay the 
monthly mortgage.3 
 
 Applicant purchased two more investment properties in 2007. He paid about 
$500,000 each for the two properties. Both of the houses were 100% financed. The 
mortgage payments for the properties were about $4,000 each property. Applicant 
hoped to sell the properties at a profit. The housing market slowed and then collapsed, 
and Applicant was unable to sell any of the properties for what he owed on the 
mortgages. He used credit cards in an attempt to maintain the properties. He was 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 61-63; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-27, 64; GE 3, 7. 
 
3 Tr. at 24-32, 65-66, 70-74; GE 3, 7. 
 
3 
 
unable to pay the mortgages or the credit cards. All four properties, including his home, 
were lost to foreclosure and a number of credit card debts became delinquent.4  
 
 The SOR alleges four credit card debts with balances totaling about $45,552, a 
$142 debt for a returned check, and two debts of $70,902 and $112,000 for foreclosed 
mortgages. Applicant admitted all the allegations. Individual debts are discussed below.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a delinquent debt of $4,664 owed to a bank for a credit card. 
Applicant entered into a settlement agreement with the collection company handling the 
debt in March 2009. He agreed to settle the debt, which had grown to $5,130, for 
$3,900. Applicant was to pay seven consecutive monthly payments of $25 starting April 
1, 2009, followed by a payment of $3,725 due no later than November 1, 2009. 
Applicant made nine monthly payments of $25 between April 2009 and December 2009. 
He made $50 payments in January and February 2010. The total amount of the 11 
payments is $325. Applicant testified that he stopped paying because he was in 
Afghanistan and did not have access to all his records.5 
 
 Applicant retained an attorney on May 26, 2010, to assist in settling his debts and 
to dispute “inaccurate, erroneous, or obsolete information contained in [his] credit 
reports.” The attorney submitted a letter dated August 9, 2010. She indicated that the 
creditor for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a agreed to accept $50 monthly payments on 
the debt.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a delinquent $5,789 credit card debt. In June 2009, Applicant 
agreed to pay $50 per month toward this debt, which had a balance at that time of 
$5,989. Between May and October 2009, he paid the collection company handling the 
debt six monthly payments of $50, for a total of $300. His attorney indicated that the 
creditor agreed to accept $50 monthly payments on the debt.7 
 
 On March 12, 2009, Applicant received a settlement agreement from the 
collection company handling the credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. The collection 
company agreed to settle the debt, which was $18,646 at the time, for $6,600. The 
agreement called for six consecutive monthly payments of $100 starting March 2009, 
followed by four monthly payments of $1,500. Applicant made $50 payments in May, 
June, and July 2009, for a total of $150. He stated that he stopped paying because the 
debt was sold to another collection company. The debt continued to accrue interest. 
Applicant admitted owing the amount alleged in the SOR, which is $20,214. Applicant’s 
attorney indicated that the creditor agreed to accept $100 monthly payments starting on 
September 1, 2010.8 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 22, 30, 32-36; GE 3, 7. 
 
5 Tr. at 45-52; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 8; AE B, D, F, G. 
 
6 AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 52; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 8; AE B, F, G. 
 
8 Tr. at 52-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 8; AE B, F. 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a delinquent $14,485 credit card debt. On March 26, 2009, the 
collection company handling the debt agreed to accept partial payments of $20 each 
month. On April 1, 2009, the collection company agreed to accept $3,678 in settlement 
of the debt, due in a lump-sum payment no later than April 25, 2009. Applicant made 11 
monthly payments of $40 between May 2009 and March 2010, for a total of $440. 
Applicant’s attorney indicated that the creditor agreed to accept $100 monthly payments 
starting on September 1, 2010.9 
 
 Applicant has not paid the $142 debt for a check returned for nonsufficient funds, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. Applicant’s attorney wrote a letter stating that she contacted 
the creditor, but she was told they no longer had the debt in their system. She stated 
she will continue to attempt to locate the owner of the debt and it will be paid once it is 
located.10  
 
 Applicant admitted owing the foreclosed mortgage loans of $70,902 and 
$112,000, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.g.11 Applicant’s attorney wrote the same 
thing about both debts: 
 
The validity of this debt is being disputed as it was not a equity line and 
was in fact a second mortgage on a house that the lender foreclosed on 
and should not show a balance at all.12 
 
 Applicant’s mortgagor on one of his properties issued an Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) form 1099-C (Cancellation of Debt) in 2008. It listed the amount of debt 
cancelled as $188,628. This does not appear to relate to either of the two foreclosed 
mortgages alleged in the SOR.13 
 
 Applicant submitted some evidence of questionable practices by the real estate 
company handling his investment properties. I note that one of the individuals from the 
real estate company that Applicant stated forged Applicant’s name on a lease is listed 
on the signature line of the letter from Applicant’s attorney as the “Sr. Negotiator” for the 
attorney.14  
 
 Applicant has worked as a linguist in Afghanistan since June 2009. He estimated 
that his annual salary while in Afghanistan, including bonuses, is about $185,000. He 
stated that he paid about $25,000 to $30,000 toward his child’s wedding expenses 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
9 Tr. at 53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 8; AE B, F, G. 
 
10 Tr. at 53-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE B. 
 
11 Tr. at 36-38; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
12 AE B. 
 
13 Tr. at 67-70; GE 7. 
 
14 Tr. at 72-81; GE 7; AE B. 
 
5 
 
during the past year and also paid the loan on one of his cars. His wife earns about 
$1,600 per month, but she was not working when he purchased the four houses. He 
has about $20,000 in the bank. He stated he will use that money and the salary he 
earns in Afghanistan to pay his creditors through the arrangements made by his 
attorney. He has not received formal financial counseling.15 
 
 Applicant submitted a number a certificates of appreciation and numerous letters 
from the military members he serves with in Afghanistan. They praise his value to the 
mission, as well as his outstanding abilities and performance as a linguist under 
rigorous and dangerous conditions.16 A Marine company commander wrote: 
 
[Applicant] displayed uncommon valor while being exposed to the daily 
dangers of small arms fire, improvised explosive devices and numerous 
indirect fire attacks. His loyalty, dedication and patriotism are a shining 
example for all to emulate and was displayed daily during his various 
duties.17 
 
Another Marine officer wrote: 
 
[Applicant] lived in austere conditions, going months without showers or 
electricity. He shared living spaces with the Marines in a dusty war-torn, 
and crumbling facility infested with rodents and insects. He received little 
to no mail and ate a sub-standard repetitive menu of MREs with the 
Marines. In every way, he suffered the “Spartan” conditions to which 
Marines have grown accustomed over the years. More importantly, he, 
along with the Marines at [location], received nearly 30 days of indirect fire 
and faced an ever-present IED threat. He served alongside the Marines in 
some of the horrid scenes of battle, and partnered with them during trying 
times. Despite these [un]inhabitable, grisly, and life-threatening living 
conditions, [Applicant] remained stalwart in heart where others would have 
collapsed under the weight of the circumstances. He was a true team 
member who, throughout his meritorious service with the Marines, 
remained the consummate professional focusing on his duties. In sum, I 
consider him a hero to both the United States and Afghanistan.18 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
15 Tr. at 51, 54-61, 65, 81-90. 
 
16 AE C. 
 
17 Id. 
 
18 Id. 
 
 
6 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
7 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence raises the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not resolved most of the debts alleged in the SOR. His financial 
issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant bought three houses as investment properties. He refinanced his 
home to fund the investments. He did not have the income to pay the mortgages. He 
 
8 
 
attempted to pay the mortgages with credit cards. He could not maintain the mortgage 
payments or the credit card payments. The housing market collapsed, and he could not 
sell the houses. He eventually lost all four houses to foreclosure. The real estate 
collapse was outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that 
the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Any investment carries an 
element of risk. Applicant engaged in questionable investments without the financial 
resources to handle a downturn. He has worked in Afghanistan for the past year and 
earned about $185,000. He has paid a total of about $1,215 toward his $45,000 credit 
card debt. I am unable to make a determination that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant may have received some financial counseling from the law firm that is 
assisting with his credit issues, but his financial problems are not resolved and are not 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant’s state has an anti-deficiency statute which may preclude a mortgagor 
from enforcing the deficiency owed on a mortgage after a home is foreclosed. He has 
made minimal payments toward his credit card debts. His efforts are insufficient to 
qualify as a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.19 AG 
¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant’s attorney disputed that his two foreclosed mortgage loans should 
reflect a balance on his credit report. Applicant does not dispute that his properties were 
foreclosed. I do not find AG ¶ 20(e) to be applicable.  
 
 In sum, I conclude that financial concerns are still present despite the presence 
of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
                                                          
19 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or an anti-deficiency statute]) in order to claim the benefit of [good-faith 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
9 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s service to the mission in Afghanistan. Applicant is a loyal 
U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous conditions in support of the 
national defense. The Appeal Board has held in Foreign Preference cases that “an 
applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the United States is very important and 
can lead to a favorable result for an applicant.”20 I give Applicant special consideration 
because of his service in Afghanistan. However, his finances are in complete disarray. 
He overextended himself and bought four properties in a short period and lost them all 
to foreclosure. I believe he was subjected to questionable practices by the real estate 
company handling his investment properties. However, he is ultimately responsible for 
his poor choices. Furthermore, he earned about $185,000 during the year he was 
overseas, but he paid less than $1,300 toward his delinquent debts. Applicant may be a 
brave, honorable, and patriotic man, but the current state of his finances precludes the 
granting of a security clearance.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
                                                          
20 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
10 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
