1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-05158
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns generated by his possession of
a foreign passport. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On April 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines C, Foreign
Preference. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG).
Applicant answered the SOR on April 22, 2010. He admitted all the SOR
allegations and requested a hearing. I was assigned the case on May 28, 2010. On
June 3, 2010, DOHA issued a notice of hearing for June 30, 2010. I held the hearing as
2
scheduled. At the hearing, I received three government exhibits and Applicant’s
testimony. The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 9, 2010.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 39-year-old married man with one child, age four. He is an
architect. Since 2009, he has worked for a company that, among other things, designs
and builds embassies. (Tr. 14) He earned a bachelor of architecture degree in 1994.
(Tr. 13)
Applicant was born and raised in the United States (U.S.). While in college,
Applicant spent a semester in 1994 studying in Italy. While there, he met and married
his wife, an Italian citizen. (Tr. 21) Applicant then applied for and received an Italian
work visa, and he relocated to Italy where he lived with his wife for the next five years.
(Tr. 19) During this time, Applicant worked for an Italian architecture firm. (Tr. 33)
Applicant returned to the U.S. with his wife in 1999. Subsequently, she became a
naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant and his wife have been living in the U.S. since
relocating in 1999. 
In early 2005, Applicant’s daughter was born. (GE 1 at 34) Shortly before she
was born, Applicant and his wife went to the Italian consulate to “ask what [they] needed
to do to register the child’s birth with the Italian government to make sure that she
acquired her Italian citizenship” upon her birth. (Tr. 37-38) An official at the consulate
advised them that their daughter would automatically have Italian citizenship through
her mother, who had retained her Italian citizenship when she became a naturalized
U.S. citizen. Also, the official told them that Applicant could experience difficulties
leaving Italy if he ever travelled there with his child, but without his wife. (Tr. 37)
Specifically, his use of a U.S. passport to exit Italy with a child who is an Italian citizen
could raise “all kinds of questions that have to do with international child trafficking.” (Tr.
37)
To avoid this potential problem, Applicant applied for Italian citizenship along with
an Italian passport. (GE 2 at 1) His application was approved in 2006. Since obtaining
an Italian passport, Applicant has used it to travel to Italy three to four times. (Tr. 24) He
does not want to surrender his passport because it would “place limitations on [his]
ability to freely travel with [his] child in/out of Italy . . . and would hamper eventual efforts
to obtain employment in Italy and throughout the European Union.” (GE 3 at 2) He has
no current plans of moving to Italy. (Tr. 32)
Applicant has voted in Italian elections “once [or] possibly twice.” (Tr. 29) He did
so because he believes “it’s [his] obligation to protect [his] family’s future. . . ” (Tr. 32)
Applicant has never accepted any unemployment or welfare benefits from Italy.
Once while studying in Italy, he received free medical care under Italy’s national health
care system after breaking his arm. (Tr. 31)
3
While working in Italy during the 1990s, Applicant paid taxes into a national
pension fund. (Tr. 32) When he returned to the U.S., he requested and received a
refund of his income that had accrued in the fund. (Tr. 33) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior,
these guidelines are applied together with the factors listed in the adjudicative process.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
“When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign
country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or
make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States” (AG ¶ 9).
Applicant applied for and was granted Italian citizenship. He then applied for and
received an Italian passport, and has voted in Italian elections. The following
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 10 apply:
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member [including] but . . . not limited to:
4
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or
other such benefits from a foreign country;
(7) voting in a foreign election; and
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an
American citizen.
There is no record evidence of any enmity between the Italian and U.S.
governments, nor any record evidence that the Italian government engages in
espionage against the U.S. Applicant maintains the Italian passport primarily to facilitate
travel there with his child. This possession of a foreign passport, alone, is significant
enough, however, to generate a security concern, because it raises the possibility that
its holder may engage in foreign travel that the U.S. would not be able to verify.
Moreover, the negative security significance of possessing a foreign passport “is not
negated or diminished because an applicant engages in these acts for personal reasons
or for personal convenience” (ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. (February 8, 2001)).
Applicant’s acquisition of Italian citizenship to obtain an Italian passport compounds the
negative security implications of his current possession of the passport.
I have considered the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. Applicant
has not mitigated the foreign preference security concern.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered the whole-person factors in the Foreign Preference section of the
Decision, above. Upon considering the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions
together with the whole-person factors, I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. Clearance is
denied.
5
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
