 In response to Applicant’s offer of evidence refuting SOR allegation ¶ 1.a, regarding the nationality of      1
Applicant’s spouse, the denied allegation was withdrawn. See FORM at 2.
1
 
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-04086
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On March 15, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under Guideline
B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In a response dated April 5, 2010, Applicant admitted four of the five allegations
raised under Guideline B and requested an administrative determination. Department
Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated May 13, 2010.  Applicant1
received the FORM on May 19, 2010, but did not submit either a response or any
 Administrative Notice (May 12, 2010), attachments I – IX.      2
 Administrative Notice (May 12, 2010) at 3.      3
 Id. at 3-4.      4
 Id.      5
 Id. at 5.      6
 Id., attachment I (U.S. Dep’t of State, Background Note, Hong Kong, Dec. 2009).       7
2
additional information for consideration. The case was assigned to me on July 20,
2010. Based on a review of the case file, submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant
failed to meet his burden regarding the security concerns raised. Security clearance
denied.
Administrative Notice
In its FORM, the Government requested administrative notice of pertinent facts
regarding the People’s Republic of China (PRC) and the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region (Hong Kong). Those facts are derived from eight U.S.
Government publications and “Web postings of Hong Kong Immigration Department.”2
Those materials were fully reviewed and accepted into the record. The following facts
are reflected in the Government’s argument and materials.
The PRC is a communist party-led state. It has a population of approximately 1.3
billion people and an economy growing at about 9.8% per year. The PRC has an
authoritative government dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. Its human rights
record has been and remains poor. Its military is large and sophisticated. The United
States is a primary intelligence target of China because the United States is a global
superpower, has a substantial presence in the Pacific Rim and Asia, develops
advanced technology that the PRC requires for economic growth, and has a large
population of citizens of Chinese heritage. Such United States citizens are considered
prime intelligence targets by the PRC.  The PRC’s Military Intelligence Department,3
First Bureau, is responsible for collecting military information about the United States.4
The United States is its second most targeted intelligence source.  The PRC is also5
involved in gathering industrial intelligence. There is evidence that enterprise-directed
espionage may be growing in importance and taking on a targeted form.  6
Hong Kong has been a special administrative region of the PRC since 1997. It
has a population of 7 million, 95% of whom are Chinese. It is highly autonomous,
except in areas of foreign and defense affairs, which are the responsibility of the PRC.
Hong Kong generally respects human rights. Claims of press self-censorship persist
and violence against women remains a concern. Hong Kong has a thriving economy.
The United States has strong financial ties with Hong Kong. Hong Kong is active in
counter-terrorism efforts.7
 In using this phrase and limiting his facts regarding his family members, Applicant was not specific as to      8
its intended meaning. For example, there is no indication whether these individuals receive governmental aid,
worked for a foreign government, etc.
 Id.      9
 Id.      10
3
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 34-year-old information technology professional who has worked
for the same defense contractor since May 2006. He was born in Hong Kong, later
moving to the United States. He attended a large American university from 1994 until
1999. He then entered into the information technology field. With the exception of a two
month break in employment before starting his current position, Applicant has been
continuously employed since college graduation. In choosing an administrative
determination, Applicant chose to rely on the scant facts he previously submitted and
those provided in his response to the SOR.
Applicant was granted U.S. citizenship in March 2007. Later that year, he
married his wife, a U.S. citizen born in Hong Kong. Applicant has several family
members living abroad. Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of Hong Kong and
his stepmother is a citizen of China residing in Hong Kong. Both have been retired for
several years. Neither has been a “member of any group, organization, or
government.”  They have no debt. Applicant speaks with them one or two times a8
month. Applicant also has a step-sister who is a citizen of China and permanent
resident of Canada. She plans to become a Canadian citizen. A housewife, she has
never been a “member of a group, organization, or government.”  She has no debt.9
Applicant has only met her in person about five times. There is no evidence as to
whether they maintain alternative modes of contact.
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen of Hong Kong. She plans to become a
United States citizen once her requirements are met. She was granted permanent
resident status by the United States, but is currently residing in Hong Kong in order to
care for her own mother-in-law. Applicant’s mother-in-law has been retired for over six
years. She has never been a “member of a group, organization, or government.”10
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions
and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead,
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied in conjunction with
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      11
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      12
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      13
 See also EO 12968, §  3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      14
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      15
 Id.      16
4
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The United States Government (Government) must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is11
something less than a preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion12
is on the applicant.  13
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security14
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any15
reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive
information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.  A security16
5
clearance denial does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
The concern under Guideline B is that foreign contacts and interests may be a
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any
foreign interest. The adjudication can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target U.S.
citizens to obtain protected information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Conditions pertaining to this adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate security concerns, are
set forth and discussed in the conclusions below.
The countries at issue are the PRC, a communist party-led state, and Hong
Kong, a special administrative region of the PRC. The PRC has an authoritative
government dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. Its human rights record is
poor. Its military is large and sophisticated. The United States is a primary intelligence
target of China. It targets the United States for many reasons, including the fact that the
United States has a large population of citizens of Chinese heritage who are considered
prime intelligence targets by the PRC. The PRC’s Military Intelligence Department, First
Bureau, is responsible for collecting military information about the United States. There
is evidence that enterprise-directed espionage may be growing in importance and
taking on a targeted form. While Hong Kong is highly autonomous, it remains under the
administration of the PRC. Its population is mostly comprised of citizens of the PRC.
Given these considerations, examination under this guideline must be conducted with
high scrutiny. 
Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of Hong Kong, and his stepmother is a
citizen of China residing in Hong Kong. He speaks with them about twice a month.
Applicant’s step-sister is a citizen of China and permanent resident of Canada. While
Applicant depicts their relationship as slight, he failed to describe his step-sister’s
relationship with his father and stepmother. Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen of
Hong Kong currently residing in Hong Kong. There is no information regarding her
relationship with Applicant or his wife. Inasmuch as the burden in the proceedings is on
the Applicant, it must be concluded that they at least maintain normal familial relations
and communications. In light of these considerations, Foreign Influence Disqualifying
Conditions AG ¶ 7(a) (contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if
that contact creates a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion) and AG ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group,
6
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information)  apply.
While Applicant may have a casual relationship with his step-sister, his bi-
monthly contact with his father and step-mother reflects a typically close or warm
relationship. In failing to address his wife’s relationship with her mother or his own
relationship with his mother-in-law, Applicant failed to address security concerns
regarding his wife’s mother. Therefore, security concerns remain with regard to
Applicant’s parents and mother-in-law. Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions AG ¶
8(a) (the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and
the interests of the U.S.) and AG ¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens
is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for
foreign influence or exploitation) do not apply. 
In failing to provide a fuller description of himself, his work, his leisure time
activities, investments, or any other facts which could paint a clearer picture of his life or
better depict his activities between the time he came to the United States and became
a U.S. citizen, Applicant provided insufficient facts upon which AG ¶ 8(b) (there is no
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest) can be
examined for applicability. In view of the limited facts presented, none of the available
mitigating conditions apply. Foreign influence security concerns remain unmitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate burden of persuasion is on the
applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is a mature and educated man who has built a career in the
information technology field. He is married. He arrived in the United States in or before
1994 and became a U.S. citizen about 13 years later. He provided some facts
7
concerning his step-sister to demonstrate a casual relationship. The same cannot be
said with regard to his relationships with his father, stepmother, or mother-in-law. Those
individuals, their relationships with Applicant, and Applicant, himself, remain undefined.
Without more, an assessment of the risks they could present cannot be made. This is
particularly true given the fact that the country at issue is the PRC, known for its interest
in acquiring United States technology and information, and its administrative region,
Hong Kong. In failing to meet his burden in providing sufficient facts or materials that
could mitigate security concerns, foreign influence security concerns remain
unmitigated. Clearance denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Withdrawn
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified
information. Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
