1
                                                            
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-06540
SSN: ------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On April 1, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).
In an April 30, 2010, answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted seven of the nine
allegations set forth under Guideline F and denied the two allegations raised under
Guideline E. She also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA
assigned the case to me on July 2, 2010. The parties proposed a hearing date of
August 5, 2010. A notice setting that date for the hearing was issued on July 15, 2010. I
convened the hearing as scheduled. Applicant gave testimony and presented no
documents. Department Counsel offered six documents, admitted as exhibits (Exs.) 1-6
without objection. The parties were given until August 18, 2010, to submit any additional
materials. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on August 10, 2010. On
August 18, 2010, Department Counsel forwarded three documents received from
 Tr. 14, 28.      1
 Id., 25-27. At purchase, the house was valued at approximately $300,000. Comparable homes in the      2
neighborhood are currently selling for about $150,000. Applicant is currently negotiating a home loan
modification.
 Tr. 18.      3
 Tr. 19.      4
 The SOR, at allegations ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b, references a January 26, 2009, Standard Form 85P. This is an      5
error. The January 26, 2009, application was an e-QIP. See Tr. 84-85.
2
Applicant on August 17, 2010. They were accepted into the record as Exs. A-C without
objection. The record was then closed. Based on a review of the testimony,
submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet her burden mitigating security
concerns related to Guideline F. Clearance denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 42-year-old financial budget analyst working for a defense
contractor. She has worked for the same employer for approximately three years.
Applicant earned a high school diploma and completed 32 credit hours of collegiate
study. She is married and has no children.
In 2001, the same year she married, Applicant’s parents’ health began to
decline. In order to help them, she began giving them “large sums of cash” to help them
meet numerous medical expenses.  In 2005, Applicant bought a house. Soon1
thereafter, the economy and local real estate market began to sour. Applicant’s home
value started to decrease. Meanwhile, the monthly payments on her home loan jumped
from about $1,900 to about $3,500.  The increase significantly impacted Applicant’s2
available income, forcing her to chose which bills she could pay each month. In order to
meet her mounting obligations, she withdrew about $10,000 from her 401k retirement
account to satisfy some of her debts. She advised her mortgage lender of her efforts to
meet her obligations.  In 2007, she also left her job as an account payable administrator3
in favor of a better paying job. The following year, it was determined that the occupant
of Applicant’s position needed to maintain a security clearance. At some point in 2008,
she completed a security clearance application, but was later told she had used the
wrong form or format.  In January 2009, she rushed to complete an electronic4
questionnaire for investigations processing (e-QIP).  5
At the time, she was familiar with the security clearance application format and
process, having previously applied for a security clearance in about 1997. She was
unfamiliar, however, with the electronic format. Although she knew she had credit
issues and knew that her credit would be checked, she “just kind of flipped through” the
application and did not enumerate what her delinquent accounts were, assuming her
 Tr. 19-20.      6
 Tr. 20, 87-88.      7
 See Answer to the SOR, dated Apr. 30, 2010.      8
 Tr. 32.      9
 Tr. 32-38.      10
 Tr. 40-42.      11
 Tr. 43.      12
 Ex. A (Statement, dated Aug. 13, 2010).      13
 Tr. 53-54.      14
 Ex. C (Letter, dated Nov. 10, 2009)      15
3
credit would be discussed in detail during the investigatory process.  Applicant’s6
omission was “an accident.”    7
At issue in the SOR are nine allegedly delinquent accounts. Applicant admits
responsibility for seven of those debts, but denies she is liable for the debts noted in
SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.c and 1.f.   The status of those accounts is as follows:8
1.a – Judgment ($5,058) – Unpaid. This debt represents a loan taken by Applicant to
help pay for her 2001 wedding. She stopped making payments on the loan in about
2003 or 2004, when she no longer had sufficient funds to make the payments.9
Applicant believes the debt was ultimately satisfied, but she provided no evidence of
payment.  10
1.b – Judgment ($910) – Unpaid. Applicant offered no documentary evidence showing
that she has addressed this balance.11
1.c – Mortgage ($238,000), Past due ($1,638) – Current. Applicant was past due on her
primary home loan mortgage for the home she purchased in 2005.   This mortgage is12
for 60% of the total loan taken for the home purchase. Applicant provided evidence
showing that her account is current, with her next payment due on September 2,
2010.13
1.d – Charged-off Mortgage ($58,500) – Unpaid. This debt represents 40% of the home
loan mortgage assumed for the 2005 house purchase. While the account remains
unpaid, Applicant testified the mortgagor has been flexible in working with her.  She14
submitted a copy of a written offer from the mortgagor to settle the balance on payment
of $8,782.57 if such payment was made by November 27, 2009.  Applicant provided a15
copy of correspondence to the mortgagor confirming her request for a temporary
 Ex. B (Letter, undated).      16
 Tr. 58.       17
 Tr. 59-60.      18
 Tr. 62-63.      19
 Tr. 69-70.      20
 Tr. 70.      21
 Tr. 71, 75-76.      22
 Tr. 77-78.      23
 Tr. 79.      24
4
cessation or reduction in mortgage payments, but presented no evidence of payment or
payments.16
1.e – Charged-off Credit Card balance ($3,652) – Unpaid. Applicant stopped making
payments on this card in 2006.  She believes the original balance was for about17
$1,000 to $1,500. Applicant last contacted the company in 2009.   She was told that18
the entire balance was due, and that a settlement could not be arranged. 
1.f – Collection account ($899) – No evidence of payment. Applicant stopped paying on
this account in the mid-2000s. She testified that she paid this account off previously, but
she provided no evidence of payment or that the balance is currently either reduced or
at zero.19
1.g – Collection account ($3,890) – No evidence of payment. Applicant stopped paying
on this account in the mid-2000s. Applicant testified that she had made telephonic
contact with this creditor, informing it of her financial situation.  Applicant provided no20
evidence of a payment or a proposed repayment plan in response to an offer to accept
three payments of $1,000 to settle the debt.  21
1.h – Student loan ($1,500) – Unpaid. This loan was taken in 1999. Although she has
not been enrolled as a full-time student since that time, Applicant testified this loan
remains in deferral.  She provided no evidence, however, of a deferral status. 22
1.i – Charged-off Account ($5,316) – Unpaid. For her honeymoon, Applicant tried to
defray expenses by accepting a free trip to a resort property with a time-share
component. During the honeymoon, she bought a time-share. She stopped making
payments on the time-share in 2006 and thought the share was to be resold. She has
no evidence that the debt has been reduced or forgiven.23
Applicant and her husband have not been on a vacation in several years. They
live frugally, but do not have a written budget.  Applicant received financial counseling.24
 Id. Applicant does not want to pursue bankruptcy because she wishes to eventually honor her debts.      25
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      26
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      27
5
She was advised to declare bankruptcy.  The record shows that Applicant fully detailed25
her finances during the investigatory process that followed her e-QIP submission.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a26
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  27
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified
information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
 Id.      28
 Id.      29
 AG ¶ 18.      30
6
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access28
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.29
Based upon consideration of the evidence, Guideline F (Financial
Considerations  and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) are the most pertinent to this
case. Conditions pertaining to these AGs that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate such concerns, are set forth and
discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
Under Guideline F, “failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.”  The guideline sets out several potentially disqualifying conditions. Here,30
Applicant acquired eight delinquent debts and was past due on a mortgage. This
financial situation raises security concerns. Financial Considerations Disqualifying
Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC
AG ¶ 9(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With these conditions
raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to overcome the case against her and mitigate
security concerns. 
Almost all of the debts acquired by Applicant became delinquent in the mid-
2000s. While there is evidence that her main home loan is now in regular payment
status, there is no documentary evidence showing she has attempted to address the
majority of the accounts remaining. Such evidence is insufficient to raise FC MC AG ¶
20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). 
The majority of Applicant’s delinquent debts arose in the mid-2000s, when
Applicant became financially burdened while helping her ailing parents, and she
acquired both a home and a time-share property in excess of her available income. Her
home value was impacted by the downturn in the real estate market in the mid-200s. To
help meet her obligations, she eventually sought and secured a better paying job. To
the extent her financial problems stemmed from her contributions to her parents’
 AG ¶ 15.      31
 Id.      32
7
illnesses and the decline in her home value, FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies in
part. 
Applicant received formal financial counseling and provided both testimony and
evidence of trying to work with some of her creditors. As a result, her past due
mortgage appears to be addressed. There is no evidence, however, indicating the
current status of the debts noted at SOR allegations ¶¶ 2.g, 2.h, or 2.i, regarding which
Applicant asserts she has made progress in working with her creditors. The rest remain
unaddressed or unpaid. To date, none of the delinquent debts have been repaid, put
into repayment, or formally disputed. She has yet to structure a workable, written
budget. Such facts obviate application of FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control), but raise, in part, FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts).
Applicant may now be in regular repayment on her largest home loan payments,
but the documentary evidence regarding the other debts is sorely lacking. There is no
evidence that either of the two judgments have been satisfied or otherwise addressed.
There is no evidence that her second mortgage holder has reacted to her letter
regarding her present financial circumstances. There is no documentary evidence
showing that her student loans, after over a decade, are still in deferral, or that her time-
share interest has been sold. Finally, there is no documentary evidence indicating that
any of the remaining debts have been adequately addressed or satisfied. Although
Applicant has received financial counseling, she simply appears to still be financially
incapable of making even minor payments on the remaining debts at issue. Given such
circumstances, financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated.
Guideline E – Personal Conduct
Security concerns arise from matters of personal conduct because “conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.“  In addition, “any failure to31
provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process” is of special interest.  Here,32
personal conduct concerns were potentially raised when Applicant failed to identify her
delinquent debts and judgment on her e-QIP. If such a failure was deliberate, such
omissions would be sufficient to raise Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶
16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
8
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities). Consequently, the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate the resultant
security concerns.
Applicant credibly testified that she did not intentionally mislead or falsify when
she failed to note any debts or judgments on her security clearance application. Her
explanation and the facts show that she had sufficient past experience with the
investigatory process to know that her finances would be checked. In her rush to
complete the appropriate form, she neglected to detail her finances. Her neglect in
elaborating on her finances was an accident. Absent evidence that her omissions were
intentional or fraudulent, the disqualifying condition cited must fail. However, if a
disqualifying condition did apply, Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 17(e) (the
individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation,
manipulation, or duress) would apply. Absent evidence of intentional falsity or omission,
personal conduct security concerns are mitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is a credible, mature, and professional woman who chose not to file
bankruptcy so that she could honor her debts. Her home valuation was adversely
impacted by the recent downturn in real estate. She voluntarily aided her parents when
their health began to decline. 
While Applicant should be commended for her wish to honor her financial
obligations and for showing of generosity, such overtures cannot dismiss some of her
unfortunate financial choices. Her acquisition of a home that appears to have been
outside of her financial reach, as well as a time-share purchased while on a honeymoon
she thought would be virtually cost-free, demonstrate a clear lack of financial planning.
Her voluntary abandonment of other debts once she became financially strapped in the
mid-2000s is only accentuated by the fact that most of those debts remain largely
unaddressed. Her current financial distress is even more striking given the fact she is a
professional working in the field of finance. Most of the debts at issue are unaddressed
or unresolved; the status of some of the debts remains unclear and unresearched.
Moreover, there is no indication when Applicant might be able to start satisfying some
or all of her delinquent debts. She presented no financial plan or strategy for addressing
all of her debts in the near future, and she has not drafted a personal budget. Given
such considerations, financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated. 
9
 It is clear that Applicant is familiar with the security clearance application
investigatory process, and that she knew her credit report would be examined. While a
budget analyst might be expected to pay more attention to detail, Applicant credibly
testified that her failure to enumerate her delinquent debts and judgments on her
security clearance application was an oversight. Lacking evidence of fraud or falsity,
personal conduct security concerns are mitigated. 
The burden in these cases is placed squarely on the Applicant. As note above,
the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials. In light of the unmitigated security concerns
related to Applicant’s finances, however, clearance is denied.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a  For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b  For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
