KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board’s authority to review a case is limited.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 09-02496.a1
DATE: 08/11/2010
DATE: August 11, 2010
In Re:
------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-02496
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
In his brief, Applicant states, “I have sent my new credit reports and some documentation showing that they1
were paid.”  However, the only document submitted with the brief was a written character reference.  Applicant submitted
a credit report in response to the File of Relevant Material.  The Judge considered the report and cited it several times
in her decision.  
2
clearance.  On November 30, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),
Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case be
decided on the written record.  On May 17, 2010, after reviewing the record, Administrative Judge
Mary E. Henry denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed
pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief makes no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge.
Applicant does make reference to additional written materials which he asserts support a granting
of his security clearance.   However, the Board may not consider new evidence on appeal.  See1
Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases in which the
appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.  The Board
does not review cases de novo.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security
clearance is AFFIRMED. 
  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan     
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
