 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04520 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 10, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 4, 2010. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on July 13, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
August 11, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
 
2 
 
received without objection. Applicant testified but he did not submit any documentary 
evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 19, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 1999. He served in the United States Navy from 1989 until 
he was honorably discharged in 1994. He is applying for a security clearance. He held a 
security clearance in the past, but it has lapsed. Applicant is a high school graduate. He 
is single, and he has an 11-year-old child.1 
 
 In about June 2004, Applicant had a friend [A] whose grandmother had a stroke, 
and her house was going into foreclosure. None of his friend’s family members qualified 
for a mortgage. Applicant agreed to purchase the house from his friend’s grandmother, 
with the verbal agreement that the friend’s family would make the mortgage payments 
until the house and mortgage could be transferred to a family member. He bought the 
house for about $320,000, which was completely financed through a first and second 
mortgage. The family paid Applicant the amount of the mortgage, and he paid the 
mortgagor. The family paid the mortgages for a period and then stopped the payments. 
Applicant was unable to pay the mortgages on his own.2 
 
 Applicant was a number of months behind on the mortgages, and the house was 
going into foreclosure. Applicant’s friend had another friend [B] who was willing to lend 
$20,000 to keep the house out of foreclosure. They hoped to bring the mortgages 
current and sell the house. Applicant did not know friend B at the time. Friend B agreed 
to lend the money, but insisted that Applicant be named on the loan. Friend A verbally 
agreed to pay the loan back to friend B. Applicant agreed to sign the loan because he 
hoped to keep the house from being foreclosed, which would negatively impact his 
credit rating. Applicant received a check for $20,000, which he cashed and used to pay 
the delinquent amounts that were due on the mortgages.3  
 
 Friend A’s family was unable to maintain the mortgage payments and did not pay 
the loan back to friend B. Because of the collapse of the real estate market, they were 
unable to sell the house, and the house was foreclosed. Applicant stated that the 
mortgage company sold the house for more than was owed on the two mortgages. He 
stated that the mortgage company has never requested payment for any deficiency 
owed on the mortgages.4  
 
 Friend B sued Applicant for the unpaid loan. Applicant stated friend A was also 
named in the lawsuit. Applicant was present at the trial. In about 2008, friend B obtained 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26-29; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 15-18, 30; GE 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 17-19, 32-33; GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 19-21, 30-31; GE 2, 3. 
 
3 
 
a judgment of $20,000 plus interest against Applicant and friend A. Applicant has made 
no attempt to pay or settle the judgment, because he believes it is friend A’s 
responsibility. He testified that friend B told him that he knew that Applicant did not owe 
him the money, but he sued him because Applicant’s name was on the paperwork. 
Applicant stated that he cannot afford to pay the judgment, but he would pay it if he 
were to come into some money.5  
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. With the exception of the 
foreclosed house and the unpaid mortgage, his financial situation generates no security 
concerns.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 21-25; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
6 Tr. at 25, 34-35; GE 4-7. 
 
 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The house that Applicant purchased for a friend was foreclosed after the 
mortgage payments were not made. A judgment was obtained against Applicant 
because a loan went unpaid. Applicant has made no efforts to pay the judgment. The 
evidence raises the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The judgment against Applicant is still pending resolution. His financial issues 
are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant bought a house for a friend because the friend’s family could not 
qualify for a mortgage. He agreed to be responsible for a personal loan to attempt to 
keep the house out of foreclosure when the friend did not pay him the money for the 
mortgages on the house. They hoped to sell the house. The housing market collapsed, 
and he could not sell the house. The friend was unable to pay the mortgages or the 
loan. The house was lost to foreclosure, and a judgment was obtained against 
Applicant. The collapse of the real estate market and his friend’s failure to pay the 
mortgages and the loan were outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant should 
have known that there was a good reason why his friend’s grandmother’s house was 
going into foreclosure and her family members could not qualify for a mortgage. If a 
bank or mortgage company was unwilling to give them a mortgage, he should have 
realized they represented a risk of being unable to pay the mortgages on the property. 
He exacerbated the situation by agreeing to become personally responsible for a 
$20,000 loan. He has made no effort to pay the judgment that was based upon the loan. 
I am unable to make a determination that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. His financial problems are not 
resolved and are not under control. He has not made a good-faith effort to pay or 
resolve his delinquent debt. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not applicable. 
 
Applicant indicated that the foreclosed house sold for enough to pay the two 
mortgages. The $20,000 that was borrowed went to the mortgages. There has been no 
effort to collect any deficiency owed on the mortgages. I conclude SOR ¶ 1.b for 
Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service, his stable employment 
record, and that his finances, other than those related to the foreclosed house, are 
stable. Applicant was attempting to help a friend when he got himself into his 
predicament. However, this was not a matter of lending a friend several hundred dollars. 
He made himself liable for hundreds of thousands of dollars. He may have had good 
intentions, but he exhibited poor judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
