                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02566 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
  
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, 
but failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On October 1, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
G and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 14, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 1, 
2010. Applicant was working out of the country and the case could not be scheduled 
until he returned in July 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 22, 2010. I 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
convened the hearing as scheduled on July 15, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5. Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified 
and offered Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 21, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶1.a through 1.g; 2.a through 2.d, 
and 2.f though 2.i. He denied SOR ¶¶ 2.e and 2.j. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He was married to his first wife from 1988 to 1998. He 
has a daughter from that marriage who is 17 years old. He remarried in 2003 and was 
divorced in 2005. He has no children from this marriage. He has a second daughter 
from a previous relationship, who is five years old. He and his girlfriend lived together 
from 2005 to 2007. He provides child support for both daughters. He has worked for his 
current employer, a federal contractor, since September 2009. Applicant served in the 
Navy for 20 years, retired, and was honorably discharged as an E-5. He held Secret 
and Top Secret security clearances in the past. He deployed as a contractor in January 
2010 and returned in May 2010.1  
 
 Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the point of intoxication, 
from approximately 1988 to December 2008. In July 1999, he was charged with assault 
with a deadly weapon, a felony. He had been drinking alcohol at a farewell party held for 
him. There was an altercation. The next day the police went to his house, but he was 
not home. He contacted the police and told them the assault was in self-defense. He 
was told by the police not to worry about the charge. Unbeknownst to him, the charges 
were not dismissed and he learned of them when he was stopped by police five years 
later and there was an outstanding warrant. His commanding officer contacted the 
district attorney and vouched for Applicant’s good character and the charges were 
dismissed.2  
 
 Applicant increased his consumption of alcohol in about March 1998. In 
November 2000, he was arrested for malicious mischief, a felony, and harassment. He 
and friends had rented a hotel room and damaged it. He was drinking alcohol. He paid 
restitution to the hotel and the charges were dismissed.3  
 
 In August 2001, Applicant was charged with disorderly conduct. He and his 
neighbor had a verbal altercation. The neighbor called the police. Applicant could not 
1 Tr. 30, 38-43. 
 
2 Tr. 45-53. 
 
3 Tr. 54-55. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
recall if he had been drinking alcohol. He was charged with disorderly conduct for using 
vulgar language.4  
 
 In March 2006, Applicant was charged with assault, second degree, and reckless 
endangerment. He and his girlfriend had an argument at a bar where they were drinking 
alcohol. They returned to their home and the argument continued. He explained “there 
was some pushing and shoving on both parts.”5 There was an altercation and his 
girlfriend called the police. She left the house. He was arrested a couple of days later 
and released on his own recognizance. He went to court and was advised if he 
remained out of trouble the charges would be dismissed. The charges were nolle 
prosequi.6 
 
 Applicant and his girlfriend were issued verbal Military Protection Orders (MPO) 
in approximately October 2006.7 He could not recall the specific reason why at that time 
he received the MPO, but believed they had been arguing and there was maybe some 
pushing. He explained it was nothing harmful and no bruising, but his girlfriend went to 
the command to report him. The MPO required him to stay away from his girlfriend. In 
November and December 2006, he violated the MPO three times.8  
 
 In November 2006, Applicant voluntarily talked to substance abuse rehabilitation 
personnel and was screened for alcohol dependence. It was recommended he attend 
an inpatient treatment program. He volunteered to go because he thought it would help 
his relationship with his girlfriend.9  
 
 A civilian petition for protection was filed against Applicant on about December 4, 
2006, in state court, and a temporary protective order from abuse was granted. The 
petition was dismissed about December 11, 2006. 
 
 Applicant attended inpatient treatment from December 2006 to January 2007. He 
was diagnosed by a medical doctor as alcohol dependent and with a substance-induced 
mood disorder. He was encouraged to maintain total abstinence from alcohol 
consumption, go to Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) for 90 meetings in 90 days, obtain a 
sponsor, and associate closely with a 12-step recovery group.10 He had been attending 
anger management counseling and was advised by his counselor to abstain from 
4 Tr. 55-57. 
 
5 Tr. 59. 
 
6 Tr. 57-65. 
 
7 Applicant’s girlfriend was also on active duty. 
 
8 Tr. 84-95. 
 
9 Tr. 121-123. 
 
10 GE 3. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
alcohol use. The discharge summary noted Applicant was at risk of relapse. He refused 
aftercare through the military. He obtained a temporary sponsor, but stated the sponsor 
was not good. He never obtained a permanent sponsor. He also found an AA home 
group. Applicant attended AA from the date of his discharge on January 8, 2007, until 
February 20, 2007. Applicant abstained from alcohol consumption until February 20, 
2007.11 
 
 In February 2007, Applicant was charged with assault, second degree, reckless 
endangerment, and alcohol beverage/intoxication. He and his girlfriend had a fight. She 
grabbed his genitals and caused pain. He admitted he had been drinking alcohol at the 
time. She left the house. He went to the police station to file charges against her. She 
retaliated by filing charges against him. The charges were nolle prosequi.12  
 
 A petition for protection was filed against Applicant in state court in February 
2007. The order was granted and remained in effect until November 2007. Applicant 
was not to have contact with his girlfriend.13  
 
 Based on Applicant’s actions, his command referred charges to be adjudicated at 
nonjudicial punishment (NJP). Applicant refused to accept NJP, and the charges for 
violating his commanding officer’s MPO and disrespect to a chief petty officer, were 
referred to a Special Court-Martial in April 2007. He was placed in pretrial confinement 
because the MPO did not work. He pled guilty to the charges and was sentenced to 
serve 60 days in confinement, and he was reduced in rank from E-6 to E-5. He did not 
resume attending AA after he was released from confinement.14  
 
 In October 2007, Applicant had an altercation with a person in his garage. 
Applicant had been drinking alcohol and grabbed and pushed the person. They were 
discussing Applicant’s girlfriend. He was later summoned by the police. He did not 
believe he was arrested, but he had been charged. Two weeks after the incident the 
person asked to borrow $2,000 from Applicant. He was aware the person had filed 
charges against him. Applicant lent his accuser the money and was never paid back. 
Applicant stated it was a loan. He stated that this person did not follow through on 
pursuing the charges against him and he failed to show for the court proceedings. He 
stated he did not give the person the money so he would drop the charges.15 
 
 In April 2008, Applicant was charged with public intoxication. He had been 
drinking alcohol at two bars and was stopped by the police. He paid a fine and court 
11 Tr. 33, 121-135. 
 
12 Tr.33, 66-84, 95-100. 
 
13 Tr. 108. 
 
14 Tr. 32-33, 100-108. 
 
15 Tr. 109-116. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
costs. He admitted he had about four to five drinks at one bar and about one to two at 
another.16  
 
 Applicant continued to consume alcohol on a weekly basis, from April 2007 to 
December 2008. He retired from the military in April 2008. He stated that he reduced 
the amount he drank. He stated he has not consumed alcohol since November 2009, 
when he learned he was going to deploy overseas. Alcohol was not available where he 
was located overseas and it was against his employer’s rules to drink alcohol while 
deployed. He stated he has not had any alcohol since he returned from his assignment 
in May 2010.17 
 
 Applicant is attempting to change his life and does not plan on consuming 
alcohol in the future. He admitted he made some bad decisions in his life and they have 
all been alcohol-related. He plans on taking care of his daughters. He is not proud of his 
past. He did not believe he was alcohol dependent until he went overseas with his job. 
He is not attending AA.18  
 
 Applicant and his girlfriend are no longer together. She is now married to another 
person. He asked her to write a statement for him in support of his security clearance 
application. She described him as a loving and caring father. She admitted to her 
involvement in the February 2007 incident and she was required to perform community 
service. She noted that Applicant is a good man who made some bad decisions and he 
deserves a second chance. Applicant admitted she is concerned about him losing his 
job and being able to continue to pay child support.19  
 
 In January 2010, as part of Applicant’s pre-deployment screening, he saw a 
psychiatrist one time for around “30 minutes or more.”20 He was also required to 
complete paperwork on his medical background. Applicant was asked a few questions. 
He stated “I think there was stuff about the alcohol treatment.”21 He believed the only 
information the doctor had about his alcohol issues was that which was contained in his 
military records. He believed the doctor was aware that he went to treatment, but the 
records were not available to him. He was not asked about his drinking habits.22 The 
psychiatrist stated: 
 
16 Tr. 116-119. 
 
17 Tr.135-147. 
 
18 Tr. 147-149, 158-161. 
 
19 Tr. 150-152; AE A. 
 
20 Tr. 155. 
 
21 Id. 
 
22 Tr. 152-157. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
It is in my professional opinion that this patient does not suffer from any 
psychiatric illness and does not suffer from any emotional illness. This 
patient does not need to be on any medications at all. After a full 
evaluation, it is also my professional opinion that this patient is clear for 
deployment.23 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
23 AE G. 
 
7 
 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:  
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 including:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependent and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
Applicant had numerous alcohol-related incidents that led to arrests and police 
involvement. He attended inpatient alcohol rehabilitation treatment and was diagnosed 
by a medical doctor as alcohol dependent. He was advised to abstain from alcohol 
consumption and did not. He was arrested twice after his treatment. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and 
especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt o the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
 
8 
 
 
 (b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
 (d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of alcohol dependence. He completed an inpatient 
alcohol treatment program on January 8, 2007, and resumed drinking alcohol on 
February 20, 2007. He continued to have alcohol-related incidents. He did not abstain 
as recommended. He stated that he has not had any alcohol since November 2009, 
when he became aware that he would be deploying overseas. He did not follow through 
on treatment advice received after his inpatient treatment. He was regarded as a high 
risk for relapse and he did. Applicant did not have alcohol available to him while he was 
deployed. His long history of alcohol dependence outweighs his short history of nine 
months from abstaining from alcohol use. I cannot find that his actions occurred under 
unique circumstances or that they are unlikely to recur. Applicant’s lack of commitment 
to the advice and recommendations he received after his inpatient treatment leads me 
to believe he continues to be a high risk to resume drinking alcohol. He only recently 
has accepted that he is alcohol dependent. It is unclear if his recent commitment to 
abstinence is truly long term or a consequence of his deployment. It is too early to make 
a definitive conclusion. He has not established a sufficient period of abstinence. 
Applicant successfully completed an inpatient alcohol treatment program, but did not 
demonstrate an established pattern of abstinence or follow the aftercare program. He 
has not received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional. 
Therefore, I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and especially considered: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
9 
 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant was arrested eight times from July 1999 to October 2007. Many of the 
charges were dismissed, nolle prosequi, or he paid a fine. He also went to a Special 
Court-Martial and pled guilty to violating a MPO on three occasions and Disrespect to a 
Chief Petty Officer. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has a nine-year history of criminal conduct, the most recent offense 
occurring in October 2007. All of his criminal problems were alcohol-related. In addition, 
it appears he had a tumultuous relationship with the mother of his youngest daughter, 
which was also the source of many of his criminal problems. She is now married to 
another person and it seems their parental relationship is stable. Applicant appears to 
have stabilized his life somewhat. He has not had any criminal involvement for over two 
years. He wants to change his life and appears to be on the road to doing so. He 
recently returned from a deployment and there is no evidence of problems with his job. I 
find enough time has elapsed since his last criminal involvement to convince me his 
criminal conduct is a thing of the past. Applicant is remorseful for his past conduct. 
Therefore, I find AG ¶ 32 (a) and ¶32 (d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
10 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines G and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is 42 years old. He retired from the Navy after 20 years of service and 
received an honorable discharge, but went to a Court-Martial before he was discharged. 
He has a long history of criminal conduct that was alcohol-related. He went to inpatient 
alcohol rehabilitation treatment; was diagnosed as alcohol dependent; failed to follow 
through on the after care recommendations; and he continued to drink alcohol and get 
in trouble. Applicant continued to drink alcohol until November 2009. He stated he has 
abstained from alcohol consumption since then and intends to abstain in the future. He 
does not attend AA or any other support group. It is too early to conclude that alcohol is 
no longer an issue in Applicant’s life. His abstention has been less than a year, and 
during some of that time he was deployed. Applicant’s criminal conduct seems to be a 
thing of the past, if he continues to abstain from alcohol use. It is too early to conclude 
that Applicant is committed to abstaining from alcohol. After a sufficient period of 
abstinence, he may be a viable candidate for a security clearance. However, at this 
time, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for Criminal 
Conduct, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under the guideline for Alcohol 
Consumption.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.g:   Against Applicant  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.j:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interests to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
