                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
1
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-05085 
SSN: ----------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 23, 2006, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On January 26, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing. Applicant requested his case be decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On April 14, 2010, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant 
on April 22, 2010, when he received the file. He was given the opportunity to file 
 
 
 
 
 
2
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed that would have expired on 
May 22, 2010. I received the case assignment on July 7, 2010. Based upon a review of 
the complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations. He also provided additional information to 
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.  (Item 4)  
 
 Applicant is 41 years old and married to his second wife. He was hired by a 
defense contractor in February 2006. (Items 4-6) 
 
 The SOR lists 18 delinquent debts. The debts total $44,664. The debts and their 
current status are as follows: (Items 6-10) 
 
1. A judgment for $4,620 owed to a financial institution 
since 2004. This debt is unpaid. (Subparagraph 1.a) 
2. A judgment for $1,021 that remains unpaid since 2008. 
(Subparagraph 1.b) 
3. A medical debt for $1,330 unpaid since October 2009. 
(Subparagraph 1.c) 
4. Another medical debt in the amount of $539 unpaid since 
2009. (Subparagraph 1.d) 
5. A third medical account for $250 delinquent and unpaid 
since 2009. (Subparagraph 1.e) 
6. A debt owed to a collector for $915 since 2007. 
(Subparagraph 1.f) 
7. A debt owed to a collector for $1,957 that is unpaid since 
2009. (Subparagraph 1.g) 
8. A debt owed to a collector on credit card purchases in the 
amount of $1,743 since 2009. (Subparagraph 1.h) 
9. A debt owed to a collector on a credit card account in the 
amount of $785 since 2004. (Subparagraph 1.i) 
10.  A debt owed to a bank in the amount of $1,808 owed 
since 2004 and remaining unpaid. (Subparagraph 1.j) 
11.  A debt owed on a cable television bill in the amount of 
$92. It remains unpaid. (Subparagraph 1.k) 
12.  A debt owed to a bank in the amount of $409 remains 
unpaid. It originated in 2004. (Subparagraph 1.l) 
13.  A $3,515 debt owed to a bank on an auto loan 
delinquent since 2005. The car was repossessed. 
(Subparagraph 1.m) 
 
 
 
 
 
3
14.  A debt owed on a credit card in the amount of $1,677 
since 2009. (Subparagraph 1.n) 
15.  A debt owed to a bank in the amount of $557 since 
2009. This debt remains unpaid. (Subparagraph 1.o) 
16.  A debt for a telephone account owed to a collector in the 
amount of $74. This debt remains unpaid. (Subparagraph 
1.p) 
17.  A debt owed on a credit card in the amount $586 since 
2009. (Subparagraph 1.q) 
18.  Applicant’s wages were garnished in the amount of 
$22,783 to repay education loans owed to the U.S. 
Department of Education from October 2008 to the 
present. The loans started in 2002 and continued to 
2006. The garnishment order remains in effect, taking 
$560 monthly from Applicant’s income. (Subparagraph 
1.r)  
 
 Applicant claims in his Answer that he has not incurred any new delinquent debt 
since 2006 when he completed the e-QIP. He also asserts the car loan was “resolved,” 
but did not submit any documentary evidence showing the date or amount of resolution. 
Finally, he states the garnishment has reduced his student loan balance to about 
$11,000. He did not submit any evidence to support any of these statements. (Items 4, 
6) 
 
 Applicant has no savings amount. He has less than $1,000 in a retirement 
account. His income is $4,625 monthly as of October 2009, when he completed the 
DOHA interrogatories. His net monthly income after the garnishment was $2,600. His 
monthly expenses are about $2,435. His house and car are fully paid. His wife obtained 
$140,000 several years ago in settlement of a lawsuit. Applicant and his wife spent the 
money on repaying family loans and paying off his mortgage and other debts. Applicant 
has not sought or obtained financial counseling. (Item 6) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
 
 
 
 
 
4
known as the Awhole person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. 
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
5
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the 
facts found in this case: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and,   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated $44,664 in delinquent debt from 2002 to the present time 
that remains unpaid.  Applicant has 18 delinquent debts, including education loans and 
an unpaid debt on a repossessed car.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties.  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Of these six conditions, none are applicable. Applicant did not present any 
evidence of a good-faith effort to repay or resolve in some manner his delinquent debts. 
Applicant has not repaid any of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR voluntarily. His 
delinquent debt problem has continued for several years. He has not obtained any 
counseling. Applicant has not asserted any basis to dispute the debts. Nor has he 
 
 
 
 
 
6
presented any evidence that a divorce or unemployment, or other outside factors, 
caused him to fall into debt and kept him from repaying it.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts 
during the past four years of his current employment, at least. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.r:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
