 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00968 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 27, 2010 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 11, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 3, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 21, 2010. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on June 3, 2010, scheduling the hearing for June 28, 2010. 
Applicant requested a continuance. Based upon good cause, the continuance was 
 
2 
 
granted, and the hearing was rescheduled on June 30, 2010, for July 26, 2010. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
11, which were admitted without objection. The Applicant no offered Exhibits and called 
no witnesses, but did testify on his own behalf. The record was held open for Applicant 
to submit additional information until close of business August 8, 2010. Applicant failed 
to submit any post-hearing exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
August 5, 2010.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
At the hearing on July 26, 2010, Department Counsel made a motion to amend 
the SOR, in order to conform to the evidence, by adding ¶¶1.n. through 1.q., pursuant to 
Directive ¶ E3.1.17. Applicant had no objections to the amendment. The motion to 
amend was granted. (Tr. 49-52.)The allegations are as follows: 
 
 1.n. You willfully failed to file your Federal income tax return for the tax year 
2008. As of the date of this hearing, you had not filed. 
 
1.o. You willfully failed to file your [state] income tax return for the tax year 2008. 
As of the date of this hearing, you had not filed. 
 
1.p. You willfully failed to file your Federal income tax return for the tax year 
2009. As of the date of this hearing, you had not filed. 
 
1.q. You willfully failed to file your [state] income tax return for the tax year 2009. 
As of the date of this hearing, you had not filed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the 
Army from 1972 to 1974 as a Sergeant. He received a Meritorious Service Medal and 
two Amy Commendation Medals during his service. He had a secret clearance while in 
the Army. He possesses an associate’s degree in chemical engineering. He is divorced 
and has one daughter, age 25, who is in graduate school. Applicant provided no letters 
of support, performance evaluations, or other evidence of his character. (GE 1; Tr. 24-
30.) 
 
 Applicant has experienced significant financial problems since at least 1994. In 
1994, he purchased a home and “over the next few years, [he] was overextended and 
was having trouble meeting [his] bills.” His financial problems continued in 2001, when 
he withdrew $40,000 from his 401K to purchase a car and take care of some other 
debts. As a result of withdrawing money from his 401K, he incurred both state and 
Federal tax debts, which were eventually garnished from his wages. The garnishments 
caused him to fall behind on his mortgage in September of 2002. His home was 
foreclosed upon in 2003. As a result of the foreclosure, Applicant received $42,000 
profit from the sale. He used the profit from the house for his daughter’s education and 
to support an academic team she participated in. Applicant attributes his current 
 
3 
 
financial problems to his financial support of that academic team from 1995 through 
2005. For approximately one year during that time frame, he was giving his daughter’s 
team $500 to $1,200 per month in financial support. (GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 30-35, 55, 63.) 
 
 The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts as listed on credit reports obtained in 
2007 through 2010. (GE 7; GE 8; GE 9; GE 10; GE 11.) They are as follows: 
 
 Allegation 1.a. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a collections account for the 
approximate amount of $107. Applicant admitted this debt in his Answer to the SOR. 
Applicant claims that this debt has been paid, although he presented no documentation 
to support his claim. Applicant’s credit report dated July 25, 2010, reflects this debt as 
“unpaid.” (GE 11; Tr. 35-36.) 
 
Allegation 1.b. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a collections account for the 
approximate amount of $156. Applicant admitted this debt in his Answer to the SOR. 
Applicant claims that this debt has been paid, although he presented no documentation 
to support his claim. Applicant’s credit report dated July 25, 2010, reflects this debt as 
“unpaid.” (GE 11; Tr. 36-37.) 
 
Allegation 1.c. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a past due account for the 
approximate amount of $765. Applicant denied this debt in his Answer to the SOR, 
because he claims he paid it off. Applicant’s credit report dated July 25, 2010, reflects 
this debt as a “paid charge off” and supports Applicant’s claim. (GE 11; Tr. 37-38.) 
 
Allegation 1.d. alleges that Applicant is indebted on credit card account for the 
approximate amount of $2,501. Applicant denied this debt in his Answer to the SOR, 
because he was making $200 payments on this account for over a year. He claimed 
that he has repaid all but $381. Applicant’s credit report dated July 25, 2010, reflects the 
current balance on this debt is $381, which supports Applicant’s claim that he has been 
making payments on this account. (GE 11; Tr. 38-40.) 
 
Allegation 1.e. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a collections account for the 
approximate amount of $1,392. Applicant admitted this debt in his Answer to the SOR. 
Applicant claims that this debt has been paid, although he presented no documentation 
to support his claim. Applicant’s credit report dated July 25, 2010, reflects this debt as 
an unpaid collections account. (GE 11; Tr. 41-42.) 
 
Allegation 1.f. alleges that Applicant is indebted to a telephone company for the 
approximate amount of $184. Applicant denied this debt in his Answer to the SOR, 
because he had made arrangements to pay this debt. Applicant claims that this debt 
has been paid, although he presented no documentation to support his claim. 
Applicant’s credit report dated February 27, 2009, reflects this debt with an unpaid 
balance. (GE 8; Tr. 36-37.) 
 
Allegation 1.g. alleges that Applicant is indebted on Federal tax debt for the 
approximate amount of $13,435. Applicant admitted this debt in his Answer to the SOR. 
Applicant testified that he hired an agent to negotiate a settlement with the IRS. He 
 
4 
 
failed to provide documentation showing he hired an agent in January 2009, to assist 
him with this debt or that he has successfully negotiated payment on this debt with the 
IRS. (GE 4; Tr. 42-44, 47, 53.) 
 
Allegations 1.h. through 1.q. allege that Applicant failed to file both his Federal 
Income Tax return and his state tax return for the tax years 2005-2009. Applicant 
denied these allegations in his Answer to the SOR. At hearing, he claimed that he filed 
both state and Federal income tax returns for 2005-2007, electronically through a 
popular tax preparation computer program. He claims the agent he hired in January 
2010, was assisting him with his 2005-2007 taxes, as well. When asked if he filed his 
2008 and 2009 state and Federal income tax returns, he indicated he had not, but 
planned to complete them. (GE 3; Tr. 44-49.) 
 
 Applicant is current on his two car payments. He purchased a BMW for himself 
and a Mercedes for his daughter. He pays the insurance of both vehicles. (Tr. 57-58.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
5 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and has been unable or unwilling to pay 
his obligations. His delinquencies have been on-going for several years, and he has 
failed to establish resolution of the majority of his delinquent accounts. He has a history, 
dating back to approximately 1994, of financial irresponsibility. Further, the Government 
established that Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax 
years 2005-2009. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant has satisfied one of his debts (SOR allegation 1.c.) and is successfully 
making payments on one debt (SOR allegation 1.d.), but he has failed to establish he 
has taken action on his other delinquent accounts. His debt is current and on-going. 
Further, financial difficulties have plagued Applicant for a number of years and are likely 
to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties were partly caused by his poor financial decisions. 
These decisions do not qualify as conditions that were outside his control. Further, AG ¶ 
20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant has not made a significant attempt to responsibly address his remaining 
debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant presented no evidence of financial counseling. AG ¶ 20(c) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant has satisfied one of his debts (SOR allegation 1.c.) and is making 
payments on another (SOR allegation 1.d.). However, he has not made payment 
arrangements with any of his other creditors. There is no showing he has initiated a 
good-faith effort to repay his remaining overdue creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. 
In addition, he failed to show he has acted in good faith with respect to resolving his 
unfiled state and Federal income tax returns. AG ¶ 20(d) is not mitigating. 
 
 Finally, Applicant has not contested his outstanding debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is not 
mitigating. 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F, in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant failed to demonstrate good judgment when it comes to satisfying his 
financial delinquencies. His choices, with respect to his debts, do not demonstrate the 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness needed to hold a security clearance. There are 
significant unresolved concerns about Applicant’s finances and judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
