1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-02951
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
August 3, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP), on December 10, 2008 (Government Exhibit 1). On July 13, 2009, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing
security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on September 11,
2009. I received the case assignment on September 16, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of
hearing on September 28, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on October
30, 2009. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were
Allegation 1.b. in the SOR was amended to state, “You possess a current United Kingdom Passport that will1
expire in June 2013.” (Transcript at 25-27.)
2
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted
Applicant Exhibit A, which was also admitted without objection. DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing, and the record closed, on November 12, 2009. Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 28 and single. He is employed by a defense contractor, and seeks a
security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense industry. Applicant
admitted the allegations in the SOR.  Those admissions are hereby deemed findings of1
fact. He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a
security clearance.  
Guideline C - Foreign Preference  
The Government alleges in this paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has acted in a way that shows a preference for another country
over the United States. 
Applicant was born in Hong Kong. In 1999, he moved to the United States with
his family. After high school, he attended a junior college and eventually a university,
from which he received a bachelor’s degree in 2009. (Transcript at 5.) Applicant
became an American citizen in September 2005. (Government Exhibit 1 at Section 8;
Transcript at 23.) He obtained a United States passport in October 2005 and has used it
for all of his foreign travel. (Government Exhibit 4.)
Applicant is a British subject by birth, but feels no loyalty for Great Britain, Hong
Kong, or China. (Government Exhibit 2 at 4.) Applicant states that his sole loyalty is to
the United States. He evinced a credible intent to revoke his British citizenship.
(Transcript at 43-45.) His parents and a brother and sister are all American citizens.
Two other sisters are native born Canadian citizens. (Government Exhibit 1 at Section
14/15.)
Applicant was issued a British passport in 2003. He has not used this passport
since becoming an American citizen in 2005. This passport was destroyed by the
Applicant, as witnessed by the DOHA Western Office security officer. I personally saw
the destroyed passport. (Applicant Exhibit A; Transcript at 39-42.)
3
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for
each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on his own
common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature and the ways of the
world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of
compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
4
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access
to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
The Government must present substantial evidence to support the finding of a
nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant's conduct and the continued
holding of a security clearance. If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation, or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government's case. The applicant bears
the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant a security clearance.
Guideline C - Foreign Preference 
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial
evidence that Applicant is a dual citizen of the United Kingdom and the United States,
and that he had a valid British passport.
The concern is stated thus under this Guideline, When an individual acts in such
a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he
or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the
interests of the United States.
Applicant continued to hold a valid British passport after becoming an American
citizen. Accordingly, Disqualifying Condition 10 applies to the facts of this case:
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include: (a)
exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S.
citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not
limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
The Applicant has expressed a credible intent to renounce his British citizenship,
and compellingly stated that his loyalty is only to the United States.  Mitigating Condition
11(b) applies to this case: the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual
citizenship.  
The Applicant’s British passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated as required by Mitigating Condition
11(e).  Applicant has mitigated the Government’s concerns about his dual citizenship
with the United Kingdom, and his possession of a British passport after becoming an
American citizen. Guideline C is found for the Applicant.
5
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. My Guideline C analysis is
applicable to the whole-person analysis as well. The evidence shows that the Applicant
is a patriotic American citizen. He was born in Hong Kong, but the majority of his family
lives in the United States as American citizens, and he received his higher education
here. The Applicant is proud to be an American citizen and a member of the defense
industry. I find that there is little or no “potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress” as set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)(8). Using the whole-person standard, the Applicant has
mitigated the security significance of his alleged foreign preference and is eligible for a
security clearance. 
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance. Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR THE APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b.: For the Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
