 1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-03899 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves unsatisfied tax liens and a delinquent debt that raise security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on February 19, 2009. On 
January 25, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 2 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on February 4, 2010; answered it on February 18, 
2010; and requested a determination on the record without a hearing. DOHA received 
his answer and request on February 22, 2010. Department Counsel submitted the 
government’s written case on April 2, 2010, and on the same day a complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on April 22, 2010, but he did not 
respond. The case was assigned to me on July 19, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the all the allegations in the SOR. 
His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old truck driver. He has worked for a federal contractor 
since January 2009. He was unemployed from November 2008 until he obtained his 
current position. His security clearance application reflects previous periods of 
unemployment from December 2006 to September 2007 and from September 2004 to 
March 2005. 
 
 Applicant graduated from college in 1969. He married in June 1970, divorced in 
October 1975, remarried in June 1976, divorced in October 1977, remarried in June 
1983, and divorced in October 1989. Since August 2006, he has cohabited with a 
woman he intends to marry. He and his fiancée work as a truck-driving team. (GX 5 at 
5.) 
 
 A federal tax lien for unpaid income taxes was entered against Applicant in 
August 1993 for about $13,217. A state tax lien for unpaid income taxes was entered 
against him in May 1994 for about $3,165. The tax debts were incurred because 
Applicant worked as an independent contractor, with no taxes withheld from his income, 
and he was unable to pay the taxes due when he filed his tax returns. (GX 5 at 4.) The 
liens are unsatisfied. 
 
Applicant’s credit bureau report also reflects an unpaid debt for $552 that was 
placed for collection in November 2006. Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to 
dissolution of his marriage, loss of his family, and “an abrupt career change,” leaving 
him with insufficient income to pay them. He has provided no details about the “abrupt 
career change.”  
 
Applicant has resolved several delinquent debts not alleged in the SOR. (GX 5 at 
5; GX 6 at 3-4.) In his answer to the SOR, he promised to pay the $552 debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c, but he has submitted no evidence that it is paid. 
 
 In a personal financial statement (PFS) submitted by Applicant in August 2009, 
he listed his Social Security payments $1,490 as his only monthly income. His PFS 
reflects that he has a monthly remainder of about $158 after paying his share of the 
 3 
 
living expenses for himself and his fiancée. Their apartment, automobile, utilities, cell 
phone, and insurance are all listed in his fiancée’s name. Their truck-driving team earns 
about $1,500 per month, which is collected by his fiancée. Applicant’s PFS does not list 
his share of their jointly earned income. (GX 5 at 5; GX 6 at 5.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 4 
 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges a state tax lien for $3,165 (SOR ¶ 1.a); a federal tax lien for 
$13,217 (SOR ¶ 1.b); and an unpaid collection account of $552 (SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant’s 
admissions, corroborated by his credit bureau report and responses to DOHA 
interrogatories, establish all three delinquent debts.  
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The evidence establishes two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 
19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not 
meeting financial obligations”), shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant has 
accumulated several delinquent debts that were incurred “long ago” but have not yet 
been resolved. They did not arise under unusual circumstances. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) 
is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
 5 
 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant has encountered 
multiple marital breakups and periods of unemployment, but his last divorce was in 
1989. The two tax liens predate the periods of unemployment reflected on his security 
clearance application. He was employed from March 2005 to December 2006 and from 
September 2007 to November 2008, and he has been employed since January 2009. 
He has paid some delinquent debts not alleged in the SOR, but he has done nothing to 
resolve, compromise, or settle the two tax debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. In his 
response to the SOR, he promised to settle the collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, 
but he has produced no evidence of settlement. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant produced no evidence that he 
has sought or received counseling. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant produced no evidence that he 
has contacted the creditors alleged in the SOR or attempted to resolve the debts.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has admitted all the debts 
alleged in the SOR.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 6 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I conclude he has not 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
