 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07073 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 16, 2010 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
security concerns. Of his nine debts, he has satisfied three creditors, is making 
payments to one creditor, has three others incorporated into his debt management 
program, and has rehabilitated his two mortgages. The Personal Conduct allegation 
was unsubstantiated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 18, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 20, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 13, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on May 21, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
June 8, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented Exhibits (AE) A 
through G, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. On June 17, 2010, Applicant submitted a 
packet of 85 pages, which were marked AE H through W and admitted without 
objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 30, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was married in 
1990 and divorced in 1999. He has no dependents. He has successfully held a security 
clearance from 1986 to 1988, in connection with his prior employment. (GE 1; Tr. 25-30, 
50-52.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges nine1 delinquent debts as listed on credit reports obtained in 
2009 and 2010 totaling $68,759. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 7.) Applicant denies 
each debt in his answer to the SOR.  
 
 Applicant began experiencing financial problems in approximately 1998, when 
his then wife quit her job due to her dissatisfaction with her manager. Applicant testified 
that the loss of a second income impacted their financial status. The couple divorced 
shortly thereafter. Applicant was further financially drained when he assisted his ex-wife 
in finding and paying for an apartment after their divorce. As a result of the divorce, 
Applicant assumed responsibility for all of their joint debts. (Tr. 50-53.) 
 
 In June 2009, Applicant enrolled in a debt management program. He pays the 
debt management program $285 per month to negotiate with his creditors. The debt 
management program then pays off the creditors in a lump sum when it has 
accumulated enough money to pay the negotiated debt. He has successfully paid off 
one creditor listed on the SOR, as well as a creditor not listed on the SOR, through the 
debt management program. (Tr. 64-67.) 
  
 Applicant is indebted to a phone company as listed in allegation 1.a. in the 
approximate amount of $1,309. Applicant became past due on this account because of 
the loss of a double income. In approximately January 2010, Applicant reached an 
agreement with this creditor to make monthly payments of $155.34 on his debt. He 
provided documentation that he made five payments under this plan. His balance on 
this account as of May 21, 2010, was $872.34. (AE O at 3, 10, 24, 31, 38; Tr. 54-61.) 
 
                                                          
1 There are twelve debts alleged, however, 1.i. is a duplicate of 1.e., and 1.j. is a duplicate of 1.a. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is indebted to the creditor listed in allegation 1.b. in the approximate 
amount of $2,694. This debt is currently being managed by the debt settlement 
program. The current status is “Active Negotiation.” (AE D; AE L; AE M; Tr. 61-67.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted to the creditor listed in allegation 1.c. in the approximate 
amount of $635. This account was settled in full on June 4, 2010, as evidenced by a 
letter from the collection agent. (AE Q; Tr. 67-69.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to the creditor listed in allegation 1.d. in the approximate 
amount of $1,277. This debt is currently being managed by the debt settlement 
program. In June 2010, Applicant was offered a settlement with this creditor for 
$353.35. He contended he paid off this debt, by accepting the settlement. He submitted 
a copy of a check made out to the creditor for $353.35 dated June 17, 2010, as proof of 
payment. (AE D; AE L; AE M; AE R; Tr. 69-70.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to the creditor listed in allegation 1.e. in the approximate 
amount of $1,461. This debt is currently being managed by the debt settlement 
program. The current status is “Active Negotiation.” (AE D; AE L; AE M; Tr. 70-75.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to the creditor listed in allegation 1.f. in the approximate 
amount of $1,703 on a debt that was 120 days past due. In approximately 2002, 
Applicant purchased a home for $215,000. He refinanced the house twice, and now has 
a first and second mortgage. The first mortgage is for approximately $340,000. The 
instant debt was for Applicant’s first mortgage. He reached a loan modification 
agreement with his creditor in September 2009 and is “paying under a partial or 
modified payment agreement,” according to his credit report. The creditor reduced the 
mortgage rate from 5.85% to 3%, and Applicant is now current on his monthly 
payments, as evidenced by his bank statement showing his payments under the 
modified agreement. (GE 6; AE E; AE K; AE O; AE T; Tr. 79-92.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to the creditor listed in allegation 1.g. in the approximate 
amount of $55,681. This debt was for the second mortgage on Applicant’s residence. 
He reached a loan modification agreement with his creditor in 2009 and is “paying under 
a partial or modified payment agreement.” In September 2009, the creditor reduced 
Applicant’s payments from $400 per month to $350. Applicant is current on his modified 
payment agreement, as evidenced by his bank statement showing his payments under 
the modified agreement. (AE F; AE O; Tr. 79-92.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted to the creditor listed in allegation 1.h. in the approximate 
amount of $67. He satisfied this debt on June 10, 2010, as evidenced by a letter from 
the creditor. (AE S; Tr. 93-94.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to the creditor listed in allegation 1.i. in the approximate 
amount of $1,461. This debt is a duplicate of 1.e., addressed above. (Tr. 95-96.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a phone service provider listed in allegation 1.j. in the 
approximate amount of $1,745. Applicant credibly avers that this is the same debt as 
listed in allegation 1.a. His credibility is attested to by his colleagues. (Tr. 97-99; AE I.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to the creditor listed in allegation 1.k. in the approximate 
amount of $2,187. This debt is currently being managed by the debt settlement 
program. The debt settlement program has not yet distributed any payments to this 
creditor. (AE V; Tr. 99-103.) 
 
 In April 2010, Applicant received a promotion and now has additional income to 
devote to the satisfaction of his delinquent accounts. He currently lives within his means 
and has not incurred any additional debt. (GE 7; AE B.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant was employed by a community college in a non-faculty position for 
seven-and-a-half years. During his employment, Applicant engaged in a romantic 
relationship with a 34-year-old student and part-time employee of the college. He 
brought the relationship to the attention of the college and was told that such 
relationships were permitted. He was not aware of any college policy that prohibited 
non-faculty members from dating students. However, another student, who had a 
romantic interest in Applicant herself, became aware of Applicant’s relationship and filed 
numerous complaints against the Applicant. The jealous student began harassing 
Applicant. She even broke into his office. Applicant approached the student after the 
break-in. The student then reported to the college that Applicant was offensive and rude 
to her. Applicant felt he was not supported by the college and he filed a complaint with 
his union. In February 2008, Applicant tendered his resignation pursuant to a settlement 
agreement with the college. (GE 2; Tr. 31- 48.) 
 
 Applicant is highly recommended by his colleagues. He has impressed his 
superiors with his “drive, dependability, and professionalism.” His Operations Supervisor 
calls him a “reliable, capable employee able to manage several tasks at the same time.” 
He has demonstrated that he is “very security conscious.” In addition, his performance 
appraisals reflect that he consistently meets and frequently exceeds expectations. (AE 
B; AE C.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
5 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise a security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts since 1999 and has been unable or 
unwilling to pay his obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Three of five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were largely caused by the loss of his ex-wife’s 
income due to her decision to terminate her employment, and their subsequent divorce. 
Since 2009 (and prior to receiving the SOR), he has been acting responsibly with 
respect to his debts. He has clearly addressed his debts, either through the debt 
management program or through independent payments. He has been continuously 
making monthly payments to the debt management program since September 2009. Of 
his nine debts, he has satisfied three creditors, is making payments to one creditor, has 
three others incorporated into his debt management program, and has rehabilitated his 
two mortgages. His recent actions in addressing his debt show reasonableness and 
adherence to his duty to his creditors. He has not attempted to get out of any of his 
debts through foreclosure or by relying on statutes of limitations, but has systematically 
addressed all but one debt. His financial problems are largely being resolved. He now 
lives within his means and has additional income which he will be able to use to satisfy 
his debts in a more timely fashion. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
 
7 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
 The Government failed to present sufficient evidence to substantiate allegation 
2.a. Applicant did resign from his position with the college, however, the evidence 
suggests that Applicant was the victim in the situation. Evidence reflects no wrong-doing 
on the part of the Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is well respected by his colleagues. He is gainfully employed and 
recently received a promotion. He has no dependants. He can now afford to satisfy his 
past due indebtedness and has been working diligently for over a year to satisfy his 
delinquent accounts. While it took Applicant a while to begin to satisfy his delinquencies, 
he showed that overall; he is now conscientiously focusing on repaying his 
indebtedness.  
 
Further, his actions with respect to terminating his employment with the college 
appear to be reasonable, in light of the circumstances presented in the evidence. The 
Government failed to indicate that he acted improperly. The letters of support attests 
that Applicant acts professionally at all times in his current position.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.k.:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
