 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03760 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Barry W. Rorex, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Remand Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations.  Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 24, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing version of a Security 
Clearance Application (e-QIP).1 On June 8, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) furnished him a set of interrogatories pertaining to his financial 
situation. He responded to the interrogatories on July 15, 2009.2 On November 3, 2009, 
DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (e-QIP), dated February 24, 2009.  
 
2 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated July 15, 2009). 
 
2 
                                      
 
modified (Directive);  and Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access 
to Classified Information (effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006) (hereinafter AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 9, 2009. In a sworn, 
written statement, notarized on November 24, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on December 31, 2009, 
and the case was assigned to Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran on January 
12, 2010. It was reassigned to me on February 12, 2010, due to caseload 
considerations. A Notice of Hearing was issued on March 12, 2010, and I convened the 
hearing, as scheduled, on March 30, 2010. 
 
 During the hearing, seven Government exhibits were admitted into evidence, 
without objection. Although Applicant did not submit any exhibits, it was noted that he 
had attached a number of documents to his Answer to the SOR, and those documents 
were considered, though not given specific exhibit designations. Applicant testified. The 
record remained open to afford Applicant the opportunity to supplement it, and on April 
12, 2010, he submitted three additional exhibits that were also admitted into evidence, 
without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 7, 2010.  
 
On May 18, 2010, after having considered all of the evidence, I issued a decision 
in the case. The decision was that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Accordingly, his eligibility for access to 
classified information was denied. Applicant subsequently appealed that decision. 
 
 On July 16, 2010, the DOHA Appeal Board issued a decision, remanding the 
case for the following reason: 
 
As a preliminary issue, we note that the record does not contain 
Government Exhibits 1-7, the documents submitted by Department 
Counsel and admitted at the hearing. Tr. at 13. Without a complete record 
we cannot perform appellate review. Accordingly, we remand the case to 
the Judge for the purpose of reconstructing the record in consultation with 
the parties. Upon completion of that task, the case file should be returned 
to the Board for processing of Applicant’s appeal in accordance with the 
Directive. 
 
 At the time the original decision was submitted to my administrative staff for 
issuance, Government Exhibits 1-7 were in the case file. Between the times the 
decision was issued and the case file was transferred to the Appeal Board, those 
 
3 
                                      
 
exhibits disappeared from the case file. Despite extensive efforts to locate those 
exhibits, they were not located. Copies of Government Exhibits 1-7 were previously 
furnished Applicant’s Counsel as well as retained by Department Counsel. In light of 
such circumstances, I ordered both Counsel to prepare another compilation of those 
exhibits, and directed Department Counsel to furnish me with that approved compilation 
by the close of business on August 10, 2010. On July 27, 2010, Department Counsel 
furnished me with new copies of the missing exhibits, with copies also sent to Counsel 
for Applicant. There being no objection interposed, the documents are once again 
accepted into evidence as identical substitutes for the original Government Exhibits 1 
through 7. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The Findings of Fact set forth in my initial decision, dated May 18, 2010, are 
hereby incorporated herein as though they were expressly rewritten below. 
 
Policies 
 
The Policies set forth in my initial decision, dated May 18, 2010, are hereby 
incorporated herein as though they were expressly rewritten below. 
 
Analysis 
 
The Analysis, including the Whole-Person Concept Analysis, set forth in my initial 
decision, dated May 18, 2010, are hereby incorporated herein as though they were 
expressly rewritten below. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The Formal Findings set forth in my initial decision, dated May 18, 2010, are 
hereby incorporated herein as though they were expressly rewritten below. 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
