KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant made no assertion of harmful error.  Rather, he submitted new evidence,
which the Board cannot consider.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 09-01960.a1
DATE: 08/31/2010
DATE: August 31, 2010
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-01960
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On October 1, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On June 22, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Michael H. Leonard
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief makes no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge.
Applicant does offer additional written materials which he asserts support a reversal of the Judge’s
adverse security clearance decision.  For example, he supplies information about a bankruptcy
petition filed after the close of the record.  However, the Board may not consider new evidence on
appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  The Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases in which
the appealing party has alleged that the Judge committed harmful error.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge denying Applicant
a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
