1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-07841
SSN: -----------          )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern raised under Guideline F,
financial considerations. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On January 12, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline F, financial considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG).
Applicant answered the SOR on February 23, 2010, admitted all of the
allegations and requested an administrative determination instead of a hearing. On
March 1, 2010, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM).
2
Applicant received it on March 2, 2010, and was instructed to file any objections or
provide any supplementary information by April 9, 2010. Applicant did not file any
additional information and the case was assigned to me on May 6, 2010. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 61-year-old married man with two adult children. A previous
marriage ended in divorce in 1982. He has been married to his current wife since 2003.
Applicant has a junior high school education. He served in the United States (U.S.)
Army from 1966 to 1969, and was honorably discharged.
Since 1998, Applicant has worked as a cable technician. For the past four years,
he has worked for a federal government contractor installing video surveillance cameras
in metro transit stations across the eastern U.S.
During the past ten years, Applicant has accrued approximately $23,500 of
delinquent debt including two delinquent credit card accounts (SOR subparagraphs 1.a
and 1.d), an IRS tax lien (SOR subparagraph 1.b), and the deficiency from a car that the
creditor repossessed (SOR subparagraph 1.c).
Applicant’s financial problems began in 2000 when a woman whom he was
dating made multiple purchases on his credit card without his knowledge. (Item 3 at 2)
After the relationship ended in 2001, Applicant moved in with his daughter where he
lived rent-free for approximately two and a half years through December 2003. (Item 5
at 4; Item 4 at 13) Later, Applicant was unemployed for six months between October
2005 and April 2006. (Item 5 at 4)
Applicant’s delinquent credit card accounts total approximately $11,000. In 2009,
he unsuccessfully attempted to negotiate a settlement with the creditor listed in SOR
subparagraph 1.d. (Item 5 at 8) 
Applicant purchased the car, listed in SOR subparagraph 1.c, in January 2003.
(Item 5 at 6) A few months later, the transmission failed, and Applicant did not have
enough money to repair it and make the car payments. (Item 5 at 6) In October 2003,
he arranged for the car to be voluntarily repossessed.
The federal tax lien totals approximately $6,100. Applicant contends he has
reduced the delinquency to $3,000 through $268 monthly payments. (Item 3 at 2-3) He
provided no supporting documentation.
Applicant has not begun satisfying any of the other delinquencies, nor has he
attended any credit counseling. (Item 5 at 8) He intends to begin repaying the other
delinquencies once he satisfies the tax lien. He anticipates that his delinquencies will be
satisfied in five years. (Id.)
3
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security. Under Directive ¶
E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden
of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security decision. 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information”
(AG ¶ 18). Moreover, “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds” (Id.). Applicant’s financial delinquencies
trigger the application of AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and
19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The following mitigating conditions
under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control, and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
4
Applicant’s financial problems were caused in part by a spendthrift ex-girlfriend in
2000, and a six-month period of unemployment between October 2005 and April 2006.
However, Applicant has neither provided any documentary evidence of steps to address
his delinquencies, nor attended any financial counseling. Absent any concrete evidence
of rehabilitation, the cause of Applicant’s financial difficulties has minimal probative
value. Moreover, Applicant failed to adequately explain why his financial problems
lingered when he was living with his daughter rent-free. I conclude none of the
mitigating conditions apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are as follows: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant promised to eliminate his delinquencies within the next five years. Such
promises absent any demonstrated track record of financial reform have limited
probative value. Upon considering this case in light of the whole-person concept, I
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d: Against Applicant
5
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
