                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
   
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-08321
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
August 30, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) dated October 2, 2009.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On February 19, 2010, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865
(as amended), and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January
2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR on March 3, 2010, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned Administrative Judge on March 23, 2010.  A notice of hearing was issued
on April 2, 2010, and the hearing was scheduled for May 11, 2010.   At that hearing the
Government presented six exhibits referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 6,
which were admitted into evidence without objection.  The Applicant presented seven
2
exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through G, which were admitted without
objection.  The Applicant also testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open
until close of business on May 21, 2010, to allow the Applicant to submit additional
documentation.  The Applicant submitted eleven Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 1 through 11.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received
on May 18, 2010.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
   
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on the Applicant’s Answer to the SOR,
the testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 31 years old and has a Bachelor’s
Degree in Mathematics and is pursuing his MBA in Business Administration.  He is
employed by a defense contractor as a Logistics Analyst and is seeking to obtain a
security clearance in connection with his employment.  
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  After a complete and
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of the same,
the following findings of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the
SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance because he is financially overextended
and at risk to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
The Applicant admits each of the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR under this
guideline that include unpaid debts totaling in excess of $16,000.  Credit Reports of the
Applicant dated October 10, 2009; January 27, 2010; and March 19, 2010; collectively
reflect each of the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 3, 4 and
5.)
The Applicant attended the United States Naval Academy Prep School from
1997 to 1998.  He then attended the Naval Academy from 1998 to May 2002.  In 2004,
he got married.  He served in the United States Navy until 2007.  When he left the Navy
in 2007, he pursued different network marketing ventures.  These jobs were multi-level
marketing opportunities that did not come with a base pay, only commission.  The pay
was not enough to support his family and he turned to credit cards.  As a result, in 2008
and 2009, he became indebted to each of the creditors set forth in the SOR.  Although
he started pursuing other full time positions, until his current employment, he was
unable to earn enough money to resolve his past due indebtedness.  (Tr. p. 35.)    
The Applicant has been working diligently to resolve his indebtedness.  A debt in
the amount of $1,202.00 to a bank has been settled.  (Tr. p. 23, and Applicant’s Exhibit
A.)  The Applicant is in the process of paying off a debt to a bank in the amount of
3
$11,766.00.  For the past four months, he made payments on the debt.  His payment
plan requires him to pay $75.00 monthly.  (Tr. pp. 25 -27, and Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  A
debt in the amount of $1,185.00 owed to a department store has been resolved.
(Applicant’s Exhibit C.)  A debt in the amount of $1,416.00 has been resolved.
(Applicant’s Exhibit D, and Tr. pp. 29-30.)  A debt owed to a cellular telephone company
in the amount of $818.00 has been settled.  (Tr. pp. 30 - 31, and Applicant’s Exhibit E.)
A debt owed to a bank in the amount of $2,113.00 has been settled.  (Tr. pp. 32-33.)      
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement indicates that at the end of the month,
after paying his monthly expenses, he has a net remainder of $337.32.  This includes a
regular monthly payment of $100.00 toward his largest debt of about $11,700.
Applicant plans to continue making payments on the debt until it is paid in full.     
Letters of recommendation from the Applicant’s pastor, and from a Special Agent
from the Drug Enforcement Administration, who know the Applicant well, attest to his
strong moral character, leadership abilities, positive attitude, trustworthiness, and
reliability.  He is strongly recommended for a position of trust.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G.) 
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
19(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20(b) the condition that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
4
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstance;
20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
5
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, a security clearance is entrusted to civilian workers who
must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information twenty-four hours per
day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore appropriately concerned when
available information indicates that an Applicant for such access may be involved in
instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Circumstances largely beyond the Applicant’s control, namely his loss of Navy
employment, difficulty finding a decent paying civilian job, and his reliance on credit
cards, caused his financial hardship.  Since starting his new employment, he has been
prudent and exercised good judgment in an effort to resolve his debts.  He has paid off
all but one of his delinquent debts, or otherwise resolved them.  He is making regular
monthly payments on the debt that is outstanding and plans to  continue doing so until
the debt is paid in full.  He is living within his means and currently demonstrates
financial rehabilitation.  He has presented sufficient evidence to demonstrate a track
record of financial responsibility and has resolved his financial indebtedness.  He also
understands that he must maintain financial responsibility at all times.
There is sufficient evidence of financial rehabilitation at this time.  Under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19(a) inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts and 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations
apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20(b) the condition that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstance and, 20(d) the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts also apply.  The
Applicant has indeed made a good faith effort to repay his overdue creditors or
6
otherwise resolve his debts.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations.)  
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole-person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness, reliability, candor, a
willingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that
the person may properly safeguard classified information.  
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.  
     
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: For the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
