 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08299 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 18, 2010 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Drug Involvement security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 11, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvment. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 26, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 24, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on July 1, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
July 28, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted 
 
2 
 
without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through C and testified on his 
own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 5, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant used marijuana, with varying frequency, 
to include one to two times a week between October 1984 to at least April 2009 (SOR 
1.a.); that he has purchased marijuana (SOR 1.b.); that he was cited in 1985 or 1986 
with possession on marijuana (SOR 1.c.); that he used methamphetamines from 1984 
to 1994 (SOR 1.d.); that he used cocaine from 1985 to 1990 (SOR 1.e.); and that he 
used psilocybin mushrooms three times during the period 1986 to 1988 (SOR 1.f.). The 
Applicant admitted each of the SOR allegations. 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor since November, 
2009. Applicant’s use of illegal substances began in high school. He knew it was illegal 
to use drugs, but gave in to peer pressure. He experimented with substances like 
methamphetamines, cocaine, and mushrooms during the 1980’s and early 1990’s, but 
marijuana was his drug of choice. From 2007 to 2009, he used marijuana approximately 
ten times. He continued using marijuana until April of 2009, even after applying for a 
security clearance with another defense contractor in October 2008.1 (GE 1; GE 2; GE 
3; Tr. 31-36, 44-46.) 
 
 From 2001 to 2009, Applicant’s drug use occurred with two friends who were on 
his baseball team. Applicant no longer associates with either individual. In 
approximately November 2009, he relocated to another town away from their influence. 
Further, Applicant has signed a letter of intent not to use drugs in the future. (AE A; Tr. 
42-43, 47.) 
 
 Applicant’s commitment to abstain from illegal substances is directly attributable 
to his new responsibilities as a father. Applicant has a son, born in May 2005, who was 
the product of a one night stand. The mother of his child raised his son with another 
man for a year-and-a-half, until the other man conducted a paternity test and realized 
the boy was not his son. The mother then contacted Applicant in May of 2007 and 
informed him he had a son. Applicant requested a paternity test, but immediately 
stepped into the child’s life and provided financial support. A paternity test confirmed 
that Applicant was the father. In approximately December of 2007, Applicant learned 
that the mother of his child was addicted to methamphetamines. The mother of his child 
would disappear for periods of time and not let Applicant see his son. In January of 
2008, he began a long court fight to enable him to see his son. Initially, he was granted 
20% custody. During the custody battle, both parents were ordered to take drug tests. 
Applicant passed the tests each time, although the mother failed her second and third 
tests, screening positive for methamphetamines. In April of 2009, Applicant was granted 
full custody of his son, in light of the mother’s positive drug tests. It is his growing bond 
with his son, his newfound responsibilities, and his realization, after obtaining full 
                                                          
1 There is no evidence to suggest Applicant was granted a clearance in 2008 or 2009. 
 
3 
 
custody of his son, of the effects that the mother’s drug use had, which make his 
promise to abstain from future drug use credible. (AE A; Tr. 22-29, 38-42.) 
 
 The effects of Applicant’s involvement in his son’s life were set out in a letter by 
his son’s maternal grandfather. The grandfather, an M.D., explained, “After visits to his 
father, [child] demonstrated his acquired social skills, with less frustration, less hitting, 
and more basic social graces like ‘please’ and ‘thank you’ and respect for others.” 
Further, Applicant’s management team believes he displays honesty and integrity. (AE 
C.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
4 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR 1.a.-1.f.). Applicant began using illegal substances 
in 1984 and last used marijuana in April 2009. He admits that he sometimes purchased 
marijuana. The facts established through the Government’s information and through 
Applicant’s admissions raise a security concern under all of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant used illegal drugs over a period of 25 years, which is a considerable 
amount of time. He has only abstained from drug use for a little over a year. Normally, 
such a short period of abstinence would not be mitigating, given his extended history 
with drugs. However, in this case Applicant has demonstrated a concrete and 
substantial change in his life since April 2009. He has signed a statement clearly 
 
5 
 
indicating that he will not use drugs in the future. His dedication to parenting his son full 
time is unquestionable. He is sincere in his pledge to not allow drugs to interfere in his 
care of his son. He has seen the tangible effects that having a mother dependent on 
illegal substances had on his son, and he is committed to remaining drug free. He has 
changed their environment by moving away from his former drug-using friends and he 
no longer associates with them. His circumstances appear to have changed enough to 
support his stated intentions to abstain from future drug use. Available information is 
sufficient to mitigate the security concerns about Applicant’s past drug use. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Independent of my analysis under 
Guideline H, I find that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under the whole-
person concept. 
 
Applicant’s life has drastically changed in the past 15 months. He has been 
awarded sole custody of his son and stopped using illegal substances. He has matured 
since stepping in as the sole caregiver for his son. He now is providing the love and 
care to his five-year-old child, who had been neglected and negatively influenced by the 
mother’s dependence on illegal substances. Applicant’s dedication to his son and his 
decision to get a fresh start by moving away from any past negative influences, provide 
genuine motivation to adhere to his promise to continue to abstain from using illegal 
substances. In addition, Applicant is well respected by his colleagues.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Drug Involvement security concerns.  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
