1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-04400
SSN: ----------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
Applicant has a history of financial problems, to include student loans in collection. He
did not present sufficient documentary evidence to show (1) clear indications that his
financial problems are resolved or under control; or (2) that he has initiated a good-faith
effort to repay his delinquent debts. His ongoing financial problems justify current
doubts about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  Accordingly, as explained in
further detail below, this case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Tr. 76–82. 2
 Exhibit G. 3
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on March 11,1
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline F for financial considerations. The SOR also recommended that the
case be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether to deny or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me April 22, 2010. The hearing took place June 1, 2010, but was
continued, after Department Counsel had presented his case-in-chief, at Applicant’s
request to allow him to consult with or retain an attorney and for additional time to
prepare. The hearing resumed 30 days later on July 1, 2010. Applicant elected to
represent himself; he testified and offered a single documentary exhibit, Exhibit A, which
was admitted. The hearing transcripts (Tr.) were received June 8, 2010, and July 12,
2010.
The record was kept open until July 20, 2010, to allow Applicant an opportunity to
submit additional documentary evidence to prove that he paid, settled, or otherwise
resolved the delinquent debts, to include the student loans.  To date, Applicant has not2
submitted additional matters.  
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He began his current
employment as a network engineer in September 2008.  He then worked two full-time3
jobs until he was laid off from his job as a mechanic in February 2010. As a network
engineer, he earns an annual salary of about $38,000, although he anticipates a
substantial raise if he obtains a security clearance. 
 Tr. 12. 4
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, and 1.g. 5
 Exhibits 3 and 4. 6
3
He is divorced and has two children from the marriage, ages 13 and 10. He pays
child support of $770 monthly, and he reports that he is current on that financial
obligation. His educational background includes a high-school diploma, some basic
military education, and technical college. He attended four quarters at the technical
college to obtain the knowledge and skills necessary to change careers and find
employment in the field of information technology (IT). He paid for the technical college
with student loans.           
Applicant’s employment history includes four years of honorable military service
in the U.S. Marine Corps during 1997–2001. Trained in motor transport, Applicant then
went to work for a trucking company as a mechanic in October 2001, and he worked
there until he was laid off several months ago. Overall, Applicant has worked on a full-
time basis since 1997.  
Applicant has a history of financial problems, which he does not dispute. He
points to his divorce in 2005 as the primary cause of his financial problems, because his
wife’s irresponsible spending caused financial problems.  In addition to losing his wife’s4
income, Applicant is obligated to pay child support. His recent job loss is also a
contributing factor. 
The SOR alleged 11 debts in some form of delinquency. The debts consist of
three medical debts in collection for $495, four student loans in collection for $11,618,
three consumer credit accounts in collection for $910, and one unpaid judgment for
$6,868, for a total of about $19,891 in delinquent debt. Applicant addressed the debts in
his hearing testimony, but he failed to present documentary evidence about the current
status of the debts except for the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.c. Exhibit A shows the judgment
was settled in full in February 2010, and no further funds are due the creditor. 
Neither the SOR  nor the Government’s evidence (the credit reports)  identified5 6
the creditors for the three medical debts. Likewise, the credit reports do not provide
contact information that could aid in identifying and communicating with a creditor. In his
hearing testimony, Applicant explained he was unable to identify or contact the creditors
for the medical debts. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a7
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.8
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 15
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).16
4
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As7
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt8
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An9
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  10
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting11
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An12
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate13
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme14
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.15
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.16
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.17
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 18
 See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an19
applicant is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness
or recurring financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  20
 AG ¶ 19(a).  21
 AG ¶ 19(c). 22
5
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it17
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant18
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline19
F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  20
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information within the defense industry. Indeed, the practice of evaluating a person
based on their record of financial responsibility (or lack thereof) is used in various
industries. For example, the insurance industry uses credit-based insurance scores
when determining insurance rates because the scores have been found to be effective
in predicting future losses.  
The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. This history raises concerns because it indicates inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within21 22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.3. 23
 AG ¶ 20 (a) – (f). 24
6
the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying
conditions. But in reaching this conclusion, I did not give any weight to the three medical
debts with unknown creditors. Given that the creditors are not identified by name, the
SOR allegations for these three debts are not legally sufficient because they are not “as
detailed and comprehensive as the national security permits.”  23
Under Guideline F, there are six conditions that may mitigate security concerns:24
(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Of those mitigating conditions, the most pertinent here are subparagraphs (b) and (d).
Each is discussed below.
Applicant’s attributes his financial problems to a problematic marriage due to a
spendthrift spouse. Although that may be a circumstance beyond one’s control,
Applicant does not receive credit in mitigation because the divorce took place about five
years ago, which is too far in the past to receive credit under subparagraph (b). By now,
Applicant should have been able to overcome any financial setback stemming from the
divorce. The recent job loss is not a decisive factor because Applicant incurred the
delinquent debts before the job loss. 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).25
7
In addition, Applicant has not initiated a good-faith effort to repay his overdue
debts or otherwise resolve the debts. Other than settling the judgment, which was not
insubstantial, Applicant failed to present reliable documentary evidence to prove  that he
paid, settled, or otherwise resolved the three consumer credit accounts in collection as
well as the four student loans in collection. The delinquent student loans are especially
troubling given the nature of the financial obligation. 
Based on the evidence here, it is too soon to tell if Applicant is willing and able to
conduct his financial affairs in a responsible manner. Applicant is facing a large amount
of delinquent debt, primarily student loans, which he has done little to address. Such
inaction militates against a favorable clearance decision because it raises doubts or
questions about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
To conclude, following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these
doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due
consideration to the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence.25
Nevertheless, Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a
favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 1.f, 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.h–1.k: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
