                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03510 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns created by the 
short sale of his home and the resulting second mortgage deficiency. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 16, 2009, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. On 
March 11, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; 
Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
 
2 
 
 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. 
 
Applicant’s answered the SOR on March 22, 2010. He elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated April 21, 2010, was provided to him. He submitted his 
answer to the FORM on May 12, 2010. His response included three documents in 
refutation, extenuation, and mitigation, which were admitted as Applicant exhibit (AE) 1, 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on June 21, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegation and provided an explanation. His 
admission is incorporated as a finding of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of 
record, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old technician employed by a defense contractor. He 
attended a technical college and received his associate’s degree in May 2002. He 
married his spouse in November 2007. They have a two-year-old son. 
 
Applicant has been continuously employed since May 1998, with no periods of 
unemployment. (Item 4) He has worked for his current employer, a government 
contractor, since May 2002. Pursuant to his employment, he has had access to 
classified information at the secret level since February 2002. There is no evidence he 
has ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. 
 
In his March 2009 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed he had one 
account that was charged off -- the debt alleged in the SOR (a charged-off second 
mortgage of around $45,000).  
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation. In April 
2009, he was interviewed about his charged-off account. Applicant explained that in 
May 2005, he purchased a $490,000 home with a 10% out-of-pocket down payment of 
$49,000. He took a first mortgage for $390,000, and a home equity line of credit 
(HELOC) second mortgage of $49,000. Because of the downturn of the real estate 
market, Applicant decided that the purchase of the home was no longer a good 
investment. In August 2008, with the agreement of the credit union holding the first and 
second mortgages, he sold the home on a short sale. The short sale covered the 
payment of the first mortgage. The value of the second mortgage ($45,993) was 
charged off. Applicant was never delinquent on his first or second mortgage payments. 
In accordance with the terms of the short sale agreement, the credit union considers the 
second mortgage loan uncollectable, and fully satisfied. (AE 1) He also submitted an 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Form 1099-C, indicating that the second mortgage debt 
has been canceled. (AE 1) 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
Applicant’s personal financial statement (PFS) indicates he and his wife have a 
net monthly income of around $6,300, with monthly expenses totaling $3,575. Applicant 
revealed no monthly debts in his PFS. He also disclosed a savings account with 
$19,000; stocks and bonds totaling $55,000; and a $45,000 car. I note that credit 
reports from March and October 2009, and March 2010 show approximately 30 different 
accounts (each), all of which are current and have been in good standing. The only debt 
with derogatory information is the account alleged in the SOR. There is no evidence 
Applicant has had any other financial problems. 
 
As previously mentioned, Applicant disclosed his financial problem in his March 
2009 security clearance application. He provided detailed information about his financial 
problem in his application, during his interview with a government investigator, and in 
his response to the DOHA financial interrogatories. He has been forthright during the 
security clearance investigation process.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence.”1 Once the 
 
1 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is 
 
4 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive 
¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleged one charged-off debt totaling approximately $45,000. AG ¶ 
19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
“more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant sold his home after negotiating a short sale agreement with the credit 
union that held his first and second mortgages. He felt compelled to sell the house 
because he considered it no longer a wise investment in light of the downturn of the real 
estate market, the national economy, and decreasing home values. There is no 
evidence he was ever delinquent in his mortgage payments, nor is there evidence that 
he was delinquent on any other accounts. He presented documentary evidence that the 
SOR debt has been canceled, and the credit union considers the debt satisfied, but for 
less than the full amount. 
 
There is no evidence Applicant currently has financial problems, and he appears 
to be living within his means. I find Applicant acted with initiative on his efforts to resolve 
a possible future financial problem. Although there is no evidence Applicant participated 
in financial counseling, he demonstrated he has the initiative and self-discipline 
necessary to reduce and resolve his debts.  
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find AG ¶¶ 20 (a) and (c) apply. 
Applicant’s past behavior and current financial situation do not raise doubts about his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Financial considerations concerns are 
mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant should have been more careful in his investment. Notwithstanding, he 
was diligent and aggressive in his efforts to resolve his debt. Considering his and his 
wife’s current salaries, he appears to be in a solid financial situation. He has worked for 
a government contractor since May 2002. He has held a security clearance since 
February 2004. There is no evidence he has ever compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information. These factors show responsibility and judgment. On 
balance, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security 
concern. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance for 
Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
