1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-04476
SSN: ------------------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Dana D. Jacobson, Esq.   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
Applicant has connections or ties to Yemen, a country where the current security
environment has deteriorated and where terrorist organizations are present. The
evidence also shows Applicant has a depth of loyalty to the United States, so that he
can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S. interest. He demonstrated
the depth of his commitment to the United States by working as an Arabic linguist for
more than three years supporting the U.S. armed forces in Iraq. Accordingly, as
explained in further detail below, this case is decided for Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Tr. 15–16. 2
 Tr. 131–132. 3
 Tr. 116–130; Exhibits A–D. 4
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on March 26,1
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline B for foreign influence. The SOR also recommended that the case
be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether to deny or revoke Applicant’s
security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me June 23, 2010. The hearing took place July 9, 2010, as
scheduled. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received July 19, 2010. 
Rulings on Procedure
At hearing, the SOR was changed in two respects. First, Department Counsel
withdrew the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c.  Second, the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.h was2
amended to conform with the admitted evidence.3
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleges that Applicant may be subject to foreign influence due to his
ties or connections to Yemen. Applicant admits, with explanations, the vast majority of
the SOR allegations. In addition, the following facts are established by substantial
evidence. 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a federal contractor. A native of Yemen,
he has worked as an Arabic linguist since March 2006. He has lived and worked in Iraq
for about three and one-half years on behalf of the U.S. armed forces.  As a result, he4
served in harm’s way under fire on numerous occasions. He is married to a U.S. citizen
and has three children, also U.S. citizens, all of whom live in the United States where
the children attend public schools.  
 Exhibit E (many of the facts are based on this document). 5
3
Applicant was born in Yemen in 1962.  He earned a bachelor’s degree from a5
Yemeni university in 1984. He immigrated to the United States on a student visa in 1984
to study English at a language school. He later earned an MBA in 1988. He became a
U.S. citizen in 1992. He lived in the United States until late 1996 when he returned to
Yemen, using his U.S. passport, to care for his sick mother. His mother passed away in
1997. He remained in Yemen to care for his father who was also sick. His father passed
away in 1998. He returned to the United States in 1998 for a brief period and then went
back to Yemen to close a computer training business he had owned and operated. In
1999, he returned to the United States where he has since resided except when
working in Iraq in support of the U.S. armed forces. 
Applicant had a store front computer business in Yemen during the 1990s, when
he was there caring for his sick parents. Through this business, Applicant had contact
with Yemeni governmental agencies when he submitted bids and provided services.
The direct contact was usually done by sales representatives who worked for Applicant.
During this period, he also served as part-time advisor or consultant to a bank in
Yemen. He has not maintained contact with any of these individuals or organizations
since his departure from Yemen. 
Applicant’s parents divorced when he was about 17 years old. Applicant, along
with two brothers, elected to remain with his mother. Another brother and sister elected
to remain with their father. Applicant’s father remarried and had additional children.
Applicant has no real relationship with his half-siblings. He has not had a good
relationship with his stepmother, and he last saw her in the 1990s. 
Applicant has three brothers and one sister, all of whom are citizens of Yemen.
Two brothers immigrated to the United States in 2008 with Applicant’s assistance. Both
brothers are lawfully residing in the United States. One brother is accompanied by his
wife, Applicant’s sister-in-law, who is also a Yemeni citizen. The other brother’s spouse
along with their children are in Yemen awaiting permission to come to the United States.
Applicant’s third brother lives in Yemen where he is employed as a high-school
administrator. He has a wife and children as well. Applicant is not close to this brother,
and he last saw him in the 1990s.
Applicant’s sister lives in Yemen. She is married with children. Applicant is not
close to his sister, and he last law her in 1990s.
In addition to his family ties to Yemen, Applicant has two other matters that were
alleged in the SOR as potential concerns. First, Applicant is a distant relative to a high-
ranking military official in Yemen. Applicant discovered his relative’s military position by
chance when he was working in Iraq. Applicant was about eight years old the last time
he saw this person. Second, Applicant is acquainted with the half-brother of a very high-
 Appellate Exhibit I and Exhibits 4–9. 6
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a7
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.8
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
4
level official in the Yemeni government. Applicant grew up in the same neighborhood as
the half-brother. Applicant’s last contact with this individual was in about 2000.  
 
Administrative notice was taken of certain facts concerning Yemen and the
current security environment there.  In brief, Yemen faces a number of security,6
political, economic, and humanitarian challenges, including the activity of Yemen-based
al-Qa’ida in the Arabian Peninsula. A recent example of the security threat is the
involvement of al-Qa’ida in the Arabian Peninsula in the Christmas Day 2009 attempted
bombing of an international passenger flight from Amsterdam to Detroit. In light of this
event, the President publicly announced a moratorium on transferring Yemeni detainees
held at Guantanamo back to Yemen. 
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As7
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt8
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An9
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  10
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 15
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).16
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.17
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 18
 AG ¶ 6.  19
5
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting11
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An12
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate13
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme14
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.15
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.16
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it17
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline B for foreign influence,  security concerns may arise due to18
foreign contacts and interests “if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial
interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization,
or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or
coercion by any foreign interest.”  Of course, the mere possession of close family ties19
with a person in a foreign country is not—as a matter of law—disqualifying under
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8,20
2001).
 AG ¶ 7(a). 21
 AG ¶ 8(b). 22
 AG ¶ 8(c). 23
 See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) (“an applicant’s proven record of action in24
defense of the U.S. is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B
case.”) (citation omitted). 
6
Guideline B. But if only one relative resides  in a foreign country and an applicant has
contact with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.20
The most pertinent disqualifying and mitigating conditions in Applicant’s case are
the following three conditions (the first is disqualifying and the next two are mitigating): 
Contact with a foreign family member, business, or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or a resident in a foreign country
if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  21
There is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  and22
Contact or communications with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation.  23
The disqualifying condition applies due to Applicant’s ties to family members who
are citizens of or residents in Yemen. He comes from a large family, many of whom live
in Yemen, although it is apparent that his relationship with those in Yemen is distant.
These circumstances create the potential for a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
In mitigation, the evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a depth of
loyalty to the United States, so that he can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor
of the U.S. interest. He demonstrated the depth of his commitment to the United States
by working for more than three years supporting the U.S. armed forces in Iraq.  His24
work was not minor or trivial, as he performed important duty as an Arabic linguist. In
addition, his ties to individuals who may be connected to high-level officials in Yemen
 AG ¶ 6. 25
7
are not a serious concern. The evidence shows these ties are distant, and Applicant has
not had any contact with these persons in years. His ties or connections to these
persons are causal and infrequent and they are not of current security concern. 
This is not a case of “divided loyalties”  with an applicant who has one foot in the25
United States and one foot in his native country. On the contrary, the evidence shows
Applicant has both feet in the United States and that he has substantial contacts and
ties to the United States. His presence in Yemen in the 1990s is best understood as a
son doing his duty caring for his sick parents. Furthermore, his work on behalf of the
United States in Iraq is persuasive evidence of his strong ties to the United States. This
circumstance deserves great weight. Taken together, the totality of facts and
circumstances support a conclusion that Applicant can be expected to resolve any
potential foreign influence or pressure by either coercive or non-coercive means in favor
of the U.S. interest. 
In addition, given that the United States is producing relatively few Arabic
speakers, Applicant’s skill set cannot be ignored in the post–9/11 world. It is enhanced
by his understanding of the region and cultural nuances that may be lost on a foreign
Arabic speaker. This circumstance does not dictate the outcome of the case, but it does
receive some consideration under the whole-person concept. 
To conclude, based on the evidence as a whole, both favorable and unfavorable,
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the foreign
influence security concerns. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a
favorable clearance decision. This case is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.d—1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Withdrawn 
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.       
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
