                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03521 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has established a plan to resolve his financial problems and has taken 
significant actions to implement his plan. He mitigated the financial considerations 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 23, 2009, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. On 
December 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive (DOD) 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. 
 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR was received by DOHA on March 4, 2010. He 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
April 5, 2010. DOHA issued the notice of hearing on April 29, 2010, convening a hearing 
on May 13, 2010. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objections. GE 7 is 
Department Counsel’s comments to Applicant’s post-hearing exhibits. Applicant testified 
and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 81, which were admitted without 
objection. AE 30 through 81 were received post-hearing. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on May 25, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.h, 1.j, 1.p, and 1.t. He denied 
the remaining allegations. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the evidence of record, and having considered Applicant’s demeanor 
and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old software program analyst employed by a defense 
contractor. He completed a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering in 1996. He 
married his wife in September 2009. They have a daughter who was born in January 
2010. 
 
From 1998 until 2007, Applicant worked for a private company as a software 
engineer. His annual salary was approximately $70,000. Additionally, he had a second 
job that increased his income to $90,000 a year. Around 2001, Applicant and two uncles 
started a business purchasing distressed properties to rehabilitate them and set them 
up as rental properties or to sell them for profit. Uncle A contributed financially to the 
venture and assisted in the management of the business. At the time, he was fully 
employed with an income of around $90,000. Uncle B was retired, and contributed to 
the business by making the repairs on the houses. 
 
Between 2001 and 2006, Applicant purchased around 14 real estate properties 
for their business venture.1 Most of the properties were purchased for less than 
$20,000. They initially used their own savings to purchase the first two properties. Then 
they mortgaged most of the properties for around $40,000 each. Half of the money was 
used to pay the initial investment and to rehabilitate the properties. The other half of the 
money was used to purchase additional properties. In addition to the mortgage loans, 
Applicant took home equity loans against most of the properties to pay for the 
improvements. Applicant’s initial business model was to rehabilitate the properties and 
 
1 Three of the properties were unimproved lots of land which the Applicant still owns. According to 
Applicant, he owns the three lots outright and they have doubled in value.  
 
3 
 
 
sell them as soon as possible. Applicant changed his mind and decided to establish a 
retirement portfolio composed of the rental properties.  
 
In 2007, Applicant’s business took a downturn because Uncle A was laid off and 
he was hired by Applicant’s business to assist in managing the properties. This brought 
additional expenses to the business. Applicant also was laid off and was unemployed or 
underemployed from February 2007 until December 2007. The company he worked for 
was bought out by another company and his services were no longer needed. Uncle B 
became sick and was not able to repair the houses.  
 
Applicant hired outside construction companies to rehabilitate the properties and 
he obtained two construction loans. Applicant had problems with the construction 
companies not complying with the contracts which increased the cost of the business 
expenses. Applicant rented some of the houses to family members and these and other 
tenants were not paying the rent. Finally, Applicant and Uncle A parted ways because of 
their different investment philosophies. Uncle A took three properties to manage. 
Applicant retained the remainder of the properties. Additionally, Applicant’s grandmother 
passed in April 2007, and he had to use some of his savings to assist with the funeral 
expenses.  
 
Although the business was a “family business,” because Applicant had good 
credit, all the loans and property purchases were made only in Applicant’s name. Thus, 
he is individually financially responsible for all of the accounts alleged in the SOR. There 
is no evidence Applicant (or the business) had any financial problems before he and 
Uncle A were laid off. When Applicant started to have financial problems, he tried to sell 
several of the properties. He was not able to sell any of the properties because of the 
downturn of the real estate market. As a result of his financial problems, Applicant’s 
mortgage and home equity loans, as well as his credit cards and consumer retail cards 
became delinquent. Most of his accounts were delinquent from around 2007 until 2009-
2010. Applicant lost two real estate properties to foreclosure. He has not been notified 
that he owes money after the foreclosures, but he expects that will be the case. He 
intends to establish a loan repayment plan to pay the debts. 
 
From the beginning of his financial problems, Applicant maintained 
communication with the banks and his other creditors concerning his delinquent 
accounts. At his hearing, Applicant submitted documentary evidence showing his efforts 
to resolve (payments, settlement negotiations, contract modifications) most of the 
delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR and many other legal obligations not alleged in 
the SOR. The status of the accounts alleged in the SOR is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.r. These accounts have been paid. See AE 14, AE 11, 
and AE 8, respectively. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($4,471), 1.h ($23,818), and 1.p ($2,051). These three loans are 
connected to Uncle A’s residence and other properties under his management. 
Applicant is financially responsible because he obtained the loans on the properties. 
 
4 
 
 
These loans are unresolved. Uncle A has not been able to modify the mortgage 
contracts or establish payment plans. Applicant is allowing Uncle A a period of time to 
resolve the delinquent accounts. If Uncle A cannot do so within a reasonable period, 
Applicant will take control of the property or sell it to resolve the delinquent accounts. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($1,916), 1.e ($4,536), 1.f ($4,617), 1.l ($4,104), 1.m ($2,121), 1.n 
($2,124), 1.o ($1,792), and 1.q ($2,717). These accounts involved mortgages and home 
equity loans connected to Applicant’s business properties and his home. All of these 
loans were delinquent and some properties were pending foreclosure. Applicant 
rehabilitated these loans by entering into loan modifications and loan repayment 
programs. The foreclosures have been closed. He is making payments on the loans 
which are now current and in good standing. For SOR ¶ 1.d, See AE 10, 42-45. For 
SOR ¶ 1.e, See AE 38-41. For SOR ¶ 1.f, See AE 6, 35-37, 46. For SOR ¶ 1.l, See AE 
58-59. For SOR ¶ 1.m, See AE 35-37, 46. For SOR ¶ 1.n, See AE 38-41. For SOR ¶ 
1.o, See AE 10, 42-45. For SOR ¶ 1.q, See AE 12, 47-50. 
 
Concerning SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($2,856), 1.j ($3,470), and 1.k ($8,783), Applicant 
attempted to modify these loans, but they did qualify for a modification program. He is 
working with the lenders attempting to set up a loan repayment program to rehabilitate 
the loans. (AE 79.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g ($2,374) is a delinquent credit card account. (GE 3.) Applicant used 
the credit card to pay for his day-to-day expenses and to keep his business afloat. 
Applicant settled the account in 2008-2009, and he is making payments on it. He 
claimed he is current on his payments. He did not submit documentary evidence to 
support his claims. 
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 1.s ($8,000), Applicant owes his state approximately $10,000 
in taxes as a result of his real estate transactions. He intends to pay the debt by 
applying his Federal tax return to the debt and setting up a payment plan with the state. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.t ($4,500) alleges a delinquent utility debt for services provided to one 
of Applicant’s rental properties that was foreclosed. Applicant disputes part of the debt. 
He intends to establish a payment plan and start making payments in the near future. 
 
Applicant disclosed his financial problems in his November 2008 security 
clearance application. He provided detailed information about his business and finances 
in response to DOHA financial interrogatories and at his hearing. He has been forthright 
and honest during the security clearance investigation process.  
 
Applicant has worked for his current employer since February 2009. He is 
considered to be dependable, responsible, and dedicated. He is an asset to his 
employer. His current net monthly salary is $3,370. He receives from his tenants net 
monthly rent of $6,050. His spouse is working and contributes financially to the 
business. He testified they do not live a lavish lifestyle. He and his wife are modifying 
their lifestyle to reduce expenses so that they can address their financial obligations. 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant acknowledged his financial mistakes and his inability to resolve his delinquent 
debts. He made the mistake of becoming financially overextended in part because of 
the number of his investments and the optimistic view of the real estate market, which 
was widespread when he purchased the properties.  
 
Applicant’s financial situation has improved substantially since he started his 
current job. He provided documentary evidence showing that, in addition to resolving 
many of the SOR debts (making payments, settling some debts, and making loan 
modifications), he has paid or resolved numerous other debts. (AE 17-22, 27-29, 54-57, 
76, 80, and 81.)  
 
Applicant and his wife have a budget and they try to follow it. He plans to bring 
the properties out of foreclosure, finish the renovation of three properties to rent or sell 
them, and ultimately sell them to cover the outstanding loans.  
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his financial problems and for not being more 
responsible addressing his debs. With his wife’s assistance, he is now in a better 
financial position to address his past debt. He complied with his promise to a 
government investigator to make payment arrangements with his creditors and to 
modify his real estate loans to bring the loans current. His diligent efforts to resolve his 
debts show considerable fortitude and financial responsibility.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence.”2 Once the 
Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive 
¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleged 20 delinquent debts totaling approximately $92,000, which 
were delinquent for a number of years. Applicant resolved 12 of the alleged delinquent 
debts. However, SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.h-1.k, 1.p, 1.s, and 1.t ($57,949) remain unresolved. AG 
¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not 
meeting financial obligations, apply. 
 
 
2 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is 
“more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
7 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant presented documentary evidence to show that he has settled, paid, or 
brought to current status 12 of the alleged SOR debts. His documentary evidence 
shows that from the beginning of his financial problems he maintained contact with his 
creditors and attempted to resolve his debts. Applicant stopped the foreclosures that 
were pending on most of his real estate rental properties. Most of his loans are now 
current. Although he also has other delinquent debts not alleged in the SOR, his 
evidence shows he has been addressing most of his debts and that he has resolved 
other debts in addition to the ones mentioned above.  
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because his 
financial problems are ongoing. He established some circumstances beyond his control, 
which contributed to his inability to pay his debts, i.e., his and his uncle’s period of 
unemployment, the current downturn in the real estate market, and the expenses 
associated with the illness of Uncle B and the death of his grandmother. I find Applicant 
acted with initiative and that he acted responsibly under all the circumstances of his 
situation in his efforts to resolve his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) fully applies. Although Applicant has not participated in financial 
counseling, he demonstrated he has the self-discipline necessary to reduce and resolve 
his debts. He followed a budget, settled and established payment plans with creditors, 
 
8 
 
 
                                           
and substantially reduced his debts. He has also established partial mitigation under AG 
¶ 20(d) because he showed good faith3 in the resolution of his SOR debts. He receives 
only partial credit because he should have been more circumspect in the acquisition of 
his properties and debts, and he should be more aggressive with his uncle who has the 
properties related to three substantial debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, there are clear indications that his financial 
problems are being resolved or are under control. Applicant’s evidence shows he 
maintained contact with his creditors, he paid, settled, or resolved 12 of his delinquent 
debts. He has a viable plan to resolve his financial predicament and I believe that he will 
be able to avoid similar financial problems in the future. Although Applicant should have 
been more circumspect in his investments and he still has unresolved debts, his past 
behavior and current financial situation do not raise doubts about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. Financial considerations concerns are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant should have been more 
careful in his investments. He overextended himself financially and that contributed to 
his accounts becoming delinquent. He also was irresponsible when he failed to plan or 
ignored his obligation to pay his county property taxes. Notwithstanding, he has been 
diligent and aggressive in his efforts to modify his loans, establish payment plans, and 
to pay his delinquent debts. Considering his current salary, rent income, and his wife’s 
financial assistance, Applicant appears to have sufficient income to make progress in 
his delinquent debt resolution. These factors show some financial responsibility and 
judgment. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis 
in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted).  
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is sufficient to warrant 
granting Applicant’s security clearance. He has worked for a government contractor 
since February 2009. He has worked well for his employer. There is no evidence he has 
ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. He has a 
reputation as a law-abiding citizen and a family man. He is considered to be honest and 
trustworthy. His financial problems were caused, in part, by factors beyond his control. 
Moreover, he has taken control of his financial situation, and has made significant 
progress in resolving his debts. He has established a plan to resolve his financial 
 
10 
 
 
                                           
problems and has taken significant actions to implement his plan. He understands what 
is required of him to be eligible to possess a security clearance. These factors show 
responsibility, good judgment, and mitigation. On balance, I conclude that Applicant has 
mitigated the financial considerations security concern.4 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.t:     For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance for 
Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
 
4 Of course, Applicant is aware that the government can re-validate his financial status at any 
time through credit reports, investigation and/or additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now 
does not bar the government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. Violation of a promise made in a 
security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and may 
support future revocation of a security clearance. 
