 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,
1
as amended and modified (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-04269
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns caused by her recent and long-
term abuse of alcohol and her history of abusing a variety of controlled substances.
Clearance is denied. 
On February 16, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and G (alcohol
consumption). Applicant’s response to the SOR was received by DOHA on March 5, 2010.
She admitted all SOR allegations and requested a decision based on the record without
a hearing.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 19, 2010,
which was mailed to Applicant the same day. Applicant was notified she had 30 days from
receipt of the FORM to submit her objections thereto or any additional information she
wanted considered. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on April 27, 2010.  She
did not submit a response to the FORM or object to anything contained in the FORM within
the time allowed her. The case was assigned to me on July 7, 2010.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 24-year-old single woman who has been employed as a receptionist
by a defense contractor since January 2009. She graduated from high school in May 2004,
and she obtained a bachelor’s degree in May 2008. She worked as an intern for a U.S
Congressman from June to August 2008. She was then unemployed until she obtained her
current position.  
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) on February 16, 2009, in which she candidly admitted a rather extensive history of
abusing both alcohol and drugs. She acknowledged in the e-QIP that she had been
charged with public intoxication in October 2004, October 2005, and April 2008. She was
given a deferred sentence in each case which included, as one of a number of terms of the
sentences, that she attend alcohol awareness classes. She successfully completed all the
requirements that were imposed upon her in each of these cases.
Applicant also acknowledged in the e-QIP that she had repeatedly abused
marijuana, cocaine, and ecstasy between May 2001 and July 2008. More specifically, she
admitted using ecstacy four times in the preceding six years; marijuana as a sometimes
habitual abuser from May 2001 until July 2008; and cocaine experimentally from 2003-04,
frequently during the summer of 2004, and about ten times while she attended college. 
In the course of an interview conducted on March 19, 2009, Applicant provided more
details about her history of alcohol and drug abuse. She reported that she began using
ecstasy in March 2008, and thereafter used it three or four times over the course of the
following two or three month period. She became concerned about the possible
consequences of continuing the use of ecstasy based on horror stories she saw in
commercials, and, therefore, decide to discontinue using the drug.
Applicant reported that she didn’t like marijuana when she first began using it, but
she then began using the substance as a way to relax before going to sleep. Her use of
marijuana was random until her senior year of college. She estimated she used the drug
four to five times a week between October 2007 and April 2008. She last used marijuana
in July 2008, and she stated she has no intention of using it in the future.
Applicant began using cocaine in 2004 with her then boyfriend. She used it four or
five times a week during the summer of 2004, and once a month or less while she attended
3
college. She only used cocaine three times during her senior year of college, and she last
used this drug in early 2008. She does not intend to use cocaine in the future.
Applicant began consuming alcohol in either 2003 or 2004 while she was still a high
school student. When she started college, Applicant refused to drink beer and, instead,
would only drink hard liquor. After her first arrest for public intoxication, Applicant reduced
her alcohol consumption to once or twice a week from her prior pattern of drinking about
three times a week. She became intoxicated every time she consumed alcohol during this
time period. Following this arrest, she decided to switch her intoxicant of choice to beer.
Following her second public intoxication arrest, Applicant abstained from consuming
alcohol for three or four weeks. Thereafter, she resumed her prior pattern of drinking
alcohol about three times a week. Applicant continued to consume alcohol after her third
public intoxication charge and after she began working as an Congressional intern. While
working as an intern, Applicant became intoxicated once or twice a week. Applicant
believes she became an alcoholic after her Congressional internship ended in August
2008, because she was depressed about not having any job prospects. She was
consuming alcohol four to five times a week at this time. 
In October 2008, Applicant sought counseling from a minister because of problems
in her relationship with her boyfriend that were exacerbated when they had been drinking.
The minister referred her to a psychologist and the church paid for three counseling
sessions between December 2008 and January 2009. The psychologist provided an Axis
I diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder for Applicant. Applicant discontinued the
counseling sessions in January 2009, after the church stopped paying for them. 
During the March 2009 interview, Applicant reported that she still gets drunk on
occasion but not in bars. She also reported that she does not drive home when she gets
drunk but, instead, takes a taxi. Applicant revealed that her consumption of alcohol had
negatively impacted her by causing her to report to work late or not at all when she interned
for the Congressman and to report late for work when she was in college.
On September 21, 2009, in response to interrogatories propounded to her by the
Department of Defense, Applicant stated she consumed 3-4 glasses of red wine weekly
and five to six glasses of vodka or bourbon a month. She also reported that she became
intoxicated twice a month or less, that she last consumed alcohol on September 7, 2009,
and she last became intoxicated on August 29, 2009.              
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Clearance decisions must be fair and
impartial decisions based upon relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole
person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although
the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not
outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against this policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole,
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
4
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.6
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 Id at 531.10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
4
Guidelines G (alcohol consumption) and H (drug involvement), with their disqualifying and
mitigating conditions, are most relevant in this case. 
  The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of2 3
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,4
although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden
of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of5
the evidence.”  Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant6
to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
her.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable7
clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard9
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access10
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.    11
  
Analysis
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability
and trustworthiness. (Adjudicative Guideline [AG] ¶ 21)  
5
Applicant began consuming alcohol while she was still in high school. She was
charged on three occasions between October 2004 and April 2008 with public intoxication.
Following each of those arrests, she was given a sentence of a deferred adjudication with
various conditions imposed, including that she attend alcohol awareness classes. Her
alcohol consumption exacerbated problems in her relationship with her boyfriend resulting
in her seeking counseling with a psychologist who diagnosed her as suffering from a major
depressive disorder. While serving as a Congressional intern, Applicant would sometimes
either not report for work or report late to work as a consequence of her excessive alcohol
consumption. As recently as September 2009, Applicant reported that she still consumed
alcohol to the point of intoxication as often as twice a month and as recently as August 29,
2009. 
Disqualifying Conditions (DC): 22(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such
as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace,
or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and DC 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of
alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed
as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent apply.
As of September 2009, Applicant continued to consume alcohol to excess, despite
the arrests and relationship problems she experienced as a result thereof. Accordingly,
Mitigating Conditions (MC) 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so
infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; and MC 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol
abuser) do not apply. The remaining mitigating conditions have no applicability to the facts
of this case.
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 24
Applicant reported she used ecstacy four times, either in the preceding six years
before she submitted her e-QIP in 2009, or during the span of a few months in 2008. She
used marijuana, sometimes on an habitual basis, from May 2001 until July 2008. She used
cocaine experimentally from 2003-04, frequently during the summer of 2004, and about
ten times while she attended college. DC 25(a): any drug abuse applies.
Applicant’s last reported abuse of a controlled substance was in July 2008, and she
has repeatedly stated that she has no intention of ever abusing any controlled substance
in the future. However, while two years have passed since Applicant last used a controlled
substance, as of at least September 2009, she continued to abuse alcohol.
6
Applicant has been repeatedly arrested because of her abuse of alcohol. Her
relationship problems with her boyfriend were exacerbated by their alcohol use. She found
it necessary to seek counseling, and she was diagnosed as suffering from a major
depressive disorder. She discontinued counseling after only three sessions because the
church would not pay for further sessions. She continued to at least the date she
responded to interrogatories to drink to intoxication on a more or less regular basis.
Applicant’s continuing alcohol abuse, despite the problems it has caused her in the
past, calls into question her ability to control her desire to consume substances that create
problems in her life. As such, it prohibits a finding that she will not abuse controlled
substances in the future. Therefore, I find that MC 26(a): the behavior happened so long
ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; and MC 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such
as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding
the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation do not
apply. The remaining mitigating conditions have no application to the facts of this case. 
 
I have considered all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this
case, the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the
Directive, and the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions. Applicant failed to
mitigate the security concerns caused by her abuse of alcohol and controlled substances
She failed to overcome the case against her or satisfy her ultimate burden of persuasion.
It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

