                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
1
                       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-00439 
SSN: ----------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 15, 2008, Applicant submitted her electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On October 30, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 16, 2009. Applicant 
requested her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On March 19, 2010, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. In the written case the Government amended Paragraph 1 of the SOR to add two 
 
 
 
 
 
2
additional financial allegations. Those allegations were Subparagraphs 1.e for $100 and 
1.f for $1,140.  
 
 A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on March 25, 2010, when she received the file. She was given the opportunity 
to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
filed a Response to the FORM beyond the 30 day time allowed that would have expired 
on April 24, 2010. She filed her Response on May 5, 2010. Department Counsel had no 
objection to the inclusion of the Response in the file. 
 
I received the case assignment on June 2, 2010. Based upon a review of the 
complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the financial allegations in Paragraph 1 of the SOR, including 
the two paragraphs added in the SOR amendment. She denied the allegations 
concerning falsification in Paragraph 2 of the SOR. (Item 4) 
 
Applicant is 47 years old and has one child. She was married and divorced twice 
since 2000. She works for a defense contractor. She was unemployed from January 
2005 to May 2008. During that time she married her second husband and spent 
$50,000 from her retirement account to buy a house. She obtained a second mortgage 
on the house and used the proceeds to finance a honeymoon, to defease the debt on 
her husband’s vehicle, to repay Applicant’s credit card debt, and make two or three 
mortgage payments. (Items 4, 5; Response)  
 
Applicant has six delinquent debts alleged in the SOR as amended, totaling 
$29,132. Those debts and their current status are as follows: 
 
1. A medical account debt for $387 was owed from 2008 
(Subparagraph 1.a). This debt was unpaid until 
Applicant’s Response showed it was paid in January 
2010. This debt is resolved. (Items 7-9; Response)  
2. An auto loan debt owed to a credit union. The collection 
account (Subparagraph 1.b) and the credit union account 
(Subparagraph 1.d) are the same loan under two 
creditors. This debt was awarded to Applicant’s first 
husband in their divorce decree. Applicant is not 
responsible for the debt. This debt is mitigated. (Items 4, 
7-9; Answer) 
3. A credit card debt owed to a bank (Subparagraph 1.c). 
Applicant opened this account on her own in May 1998 
before any of her marriages. Applicant resolved this debt 
 
 
 
 
 
3
in April 2010 by paying $9,373 borrowed from her father. 
(Items 7-9; Response) 
4. A medical debt for $100 was resolved in November 2009 
with the payment of the debt (Subparagraph 1.e). It 
originated in 2008. The debt is resolved. (Items 7-9; 
Response) 
5. A medical debt dating from 2008 for $1,140 owed to a 
hospital was paid on April 30, 2010, and is resolved 
(Subparagraph 1.f). (Items 7-9; Response) 
 
 Applicant had a tax lien filed in May 2006 and released when she paid it in March 
2007. The amount of the individual tax lien was $2,148. Applicant did not disclose in her 
August 15, 2008, e-QIP in Question 27 (c) (“In the last 7 years, have you had a lien 
placed against your property for failing to pay taxes or other debts?”) the existence of 
this lien. She answered that question with a “no.” (Item 5) 
 
 Applicant did not answer Question 28 on the e-QIP (“a. In the last 7 years, have 
you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and b. “Are you currently over 90 
days delinquent on any debt(s)?”) with accurate answers. Her response was “no” to 
both questions. She did have the debts listed in the SOR. Applicant’s Answer of 
December 16, 2009, stated she thought her former husbands were responsible for the 
debts based on their respective divorce decrees.  
 
 She claims the February 11, 2009, divorce decree from her second husband 
requires her to pay the $11,000 credit card debt listed in Subparagraph 1.c of the SOR. 
She was waiting for a March 3, 2010, court date to “resolve” the auto loan debt listed in 
Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.d of the SOR. The divorce decree from her second husband 
does not list the credit card debt as a marital debt, therefore, it is Applicant’s debt from 
1998 which she is responsible to pay. The auto loan debt is allocated to Applicant’s first 
husband in the divorce decree of July 7, 2005. The other debts in the SOR are not 
mentioned in either divorce decree and are properly debts of Applicant. The 2009 
divorce decree stated Applicant and her second husband spent $90,000 of her savings 
in the six months they lived together after their marriage. (Items 4, 5, 7) 
 
 Applicant submitted three character letters from three supervisors. Those letters 
describe her as conscientious and diligent in her work. She is also described as honest 
and professional in her attitude. (FORM Response) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
 
 
 
 
5
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy; and,   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 1998 to the present, Applicant accumulated six delinquent debts, totaling 
$29,132 that remained unpaid or unresolved when the SOR was issued.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Three mitigating conditions might have partial 
applicability: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) applies because Applicant’s two marriages and divorces adversely 
affected her ability to pay her debts in a timely manner. The auto loan debt listed twice 
in the SOR was the result of her first husband’s failure to pay the debt. The second 
marriage dissipated $90,000 of Applicant’s savings in a six month spending spree. 
Applicant was responsible for allowing that to occur, but she did stop the expenditures 
and now has divorced that husband.  
 
AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because Applicant has resolved her debts by payment or 
settlements with required payments. She paid the credit card debt of $11,000 after 
negotiating a lump sum payment of $9,373. 
 
 
 
 
 
6
 AG ¶ 20 (e) applies to the auto loan debt because the first divorce allocates that 
debt to her former husband, making him responsible for it. She has a legal basis to 
dispute that debt listed in the SOR as being her debt.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to meeting 
with a security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms 
or releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; 
and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness 
determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities. 
 
Applicant did not disclose her financial delinquencies as alleged in SOR 
Paragraph 1. She disclaims any intentional action in doing so. Applicant claims she 
thought her divorce decrees made her former husbands responsible for the debts listed 
in the SOR. Only the auto loan was the financial obligation of her first husband to pay. 
The other debts listed in the SOR were Applicant’s to pay. It is obvious from the entire 
body of evidence that Applicant is not astute with her money and did not read fully or 
comprehend the totality of the divorce decrees. Applicant committed an inadvertent 
 
 
 
 
 
7
error, not a deliberate effort to mislead the Government. This guideline is found in her 
favor. Hence, it is not necessary to consider any mitigating condition.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when she 
incurred the debts. She was dilatory in resolving her delinquent debts, but after she 
realized the debts were her obligation she moved quickly to pay them. All the debts 
listed in the SOR were resolved in some manner. She incurred her debts voluntarily. 
There is no potential now for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. After two failed 
marriages and the six month expenditure of $90,000 during the short-lived second 
marriage, Applicant should have learned her lesson and there is almost no likelihood for 
a recurrence of such conduct.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or substantial doubts 
as to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations and the security concerns under the guideline for Personal 
Conduct. I conclude the “whole person” concept for Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
