                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07998 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John F. Mardula, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 29, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
H and F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 10, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 2, 2010. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on July 19, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 11, 
2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant did not object and 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
they were admitted. Applicant and one witness testified on his behalf. Applicant offered 
Exhibits (AE) A through I, which were admitted without objection. After the record 
closed, Department Counsel received AE K. He did not object to its consideration and it 
was admitted. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 18, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, and 2.c. He admitted parts of 
SOR allegations ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b, and denied ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. He graduated from high school in 1990 and attended 
college for one year before beginning employment. He worked in retail from 1994 to 
1995, and from approximately 1995 to 2000, in information technology at a law firm. At 
the same time he resumed attending college from 1995 to 1997, but did not earn a 
degree. He worked as an independent contractor from 2001 until approximately 2004, 
when he realized that he needed to complete his college degree. He reduced his 
expenditures and used his savings to pay for his schooling. He did not take out any 
student loans. Applicant completed his bachelor’s degree in May 2006, and continued in 
school completing his master’s degree in May 2009. He began working for his current 
employer in July 2009, as a systems administrator.1  
 
 Applicant used marijuana from 1990 to 2010. Some years he might not use it at 
all, other years he might use it more than twice, but on average over the years he used 
it two to three times a year. He did not consider his marijuana use a big part of his life. 
He did not use it at work and it did not impact his professional performance. He would 
usually use it at parties, social gatherings, or camping trips. He does not think he needs 
any type of drug counseling, and does not consider his marijuana use as a gateway to 
additional drug use. In the 1990s, Applicant purchased marijuana, but he has not 
purchased it since then.2   
 
In July 1993, Applicant was arrested and charged with felony possession of a 
controlled substance, hallucinogenic mushrooms. Applicant’s friend asked him to 
provide transportation so the friend could transact an illegal drug deal. Applicant 
admitted he knew that his friend was going to pick up illegal drugs and he was assisting 
him by providing a ride. The police arrested both Applicant and his friend. Due to 
Applicant’s limited involvement in the transaction the charge against him was reduced to 
a misdemeanor for possession of a controlled substance. He was sentenced to six-
months supervised probation. He successfully completed the probation and his record 
was expunged. His friend was convicted of a felony.3  
1 Tr. 54-58. 
 
2 Tr. 60-62, 101-104, 115. 
 
3 Tr. 62-67, 120-121. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s most recent uses of marijuana were March 2009, mid-August 2009, 
and New Year’s Eve 2009-2010. He was apprised during the interview process for his 
current employment that certain employees in the company held security clearances. 
He did not believe he would need to obtain a security clearance because he was not 
working on projects that required it, but rather was working at the headquarters of the 
company. Sometime after his August 2009 marijuana use, he was told by his employer 
that he needed to complete a security clearance application (SCA) and obtain a security 
clearance. He signed the SCA on August 28, 2009, and disclosed his prior drug use.4  
 
In October 2009, Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator. He explained he did not have future plans to use 
marijuana, but he would evaluate his use on a case-by-case basis. He would have to 
consider the circumstances at the time in order to decide if he would use marijuana. 
However, he would not use marijuana if he was granted a security clearance. At his 
hearing, Applicant provided a signed letter of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future 
and he consented to an automatic revocation of his security clearance if he committed 
any violation. He stated he does not associate with the people with whom he previously 
used marijuana.5 At his hearing, Applicant confirmed that he did not intend to use illegal 
drugs in the future if he was granted a security clearance. He further stated: “If I’m not 
granted my clearance, there would still be serious questions. I’m—I’m not going to say 
that when I’m a 60-year-old man I’m—I’m—I’m still never going to be smoking.”6 He 
further stated: “It is not my intent to use regardless of whether I have the clearance or 
not. I am at this point in my life focusing exclusively on my professional career and that 
it has been made clear to me by this and other things that that can’t be a part of my life 
anymore.”7  
 
Applicant acknowledged that after he completed his SCA in August 2009, and 
after he was interviewed by the OPM investigator, he used marijuana at a New Year’s 
Eve party on December 31, 2009. He acknowledged he knew using marijuana is 
illegal.8 
 
Applicant did not file his 2004, 2006, 2007, and 2008 federal and state income 
tax returns on time. He believes he filed his 2002 and 2003 federal and state income tax 
returns on time, but did not have the documents to verify it. He believes the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) would have indicated his failure to file, when he began resolving 
his tax issues.9  
4 Tr. 67-68, 104-111. 
 
5 Tr. 119-120; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. 68-69. 
 
7 Tr. 69-74. 
 
8 Tr. 114-115,122-124. 
 
9 Tr. 74-75, 124-125. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant earned $3,621 in 2004 and owed $256 for federal taxes. He did not 
owe anything for state taxes. In 2006, he earned $13,609, and owed $953 for federal 
taxes, and $121 for state taxes. In 2007, he earned $11,044, and owed $1,636 in 
federal taxes, and did not owe any state taxes. In 2008, he earned $50,852, and owed 
$12,091 for federal taxes, and $2,155 for state taxes. Applicant stated that he did not 
believe he earned sufficient income in 2004, 2006, and 2007 that would have required 
him to file tax returns. He was unaware that he owed self-employment taxes on his 
income. Applicant explained that while he was attending school he was paying for all of 
his expenses by himself. He did not have any help or have loans. He did not actually do 
the math calculations to determine if he owed any taxes in 2004 because of his low 
income.10 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he did not file his 2008 tax returns on time. He 
stated: “The time of filing 2008 is of course April 2009. That was at the apex of my final 
semester of my master’s. I was in the middle of a project that I was literally [working] 12 
hours a day.”11 He further stated: 
 
I didn’t file because I didn’t have the time to gather again, this was all 
independent. I didn’t have the time to gather the paperwork, all the–the 
independent invoices that I had to get them over to the accountant on 
time. And beyond that I knew that I was basically running on fumes in 
terms of finances and there was no way that I could pay any amount of tax 
that would have been due.12  
 
Applicant knew he would not have the money to pay the taxes he owed so he 
chose not to file the returns. He explained he did not think about filing the returns 
because he was entirely focused on completing his studies and it was a very stressful 
time in his life. He received his master’s degree in May 2009. He contacted an 
accountant in January or February of 2010. He filed all of his tax returns on May 10, 
2010.13 With his savings and a loan he acquired he paid all of his federal and state 
income taxes, including any penalties and interest he owed.14  
 
Applicant filed his 2005 tax returns on time. He explained that his parents gave 
him money to hire someone to do his taxes that year. His earned income was $30,669. 
He received a refund.15 
10 Tr. 75-85, 125-127. 
 
11 Tr. 85. 
 
12 Tr. 86. 
 
13 Tr. 127-130; AE B, C, D, E, F. 
 
14 Tr. 85-92; AE B, C, D, E, F, G, J. 
 
15 Tr.78-81, 95-98. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 A vice president from Applicant’s company testified on his behalf. She has known 
him for about 15 years. He is a friend of her daughter and has been to her house many 
times. She is not his supervisor, but they work for the same company. She has never 
heard any derogatory issues about Applicant. She considers him responsible, stable 
and he uses good judgment. She has no concerns about him handling classified 
material. She was never aware of any issues regarding his drug use. She believes that 
he would follow all prescribed rules.16  
 
 Applicant acknowledges he has made mistakes. He has always been careful with 
sensitive and proprietary information when working. He described himself as meticulous 
at work and his peers consider him well-adjusted and mature.17  
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from a retired Air Force officer who is a 
senior executive for his employer. Applicant is described as dependable, trustworthy, 
and a person of integrity. He has no reason to question his character and ability to 
protect classified information or loyalty to the United States. Applicant follows corporate 
processes and policies. He is capable of operating in the company’s own sensitive 
environment and produce positive results. He sets the standard for the technical team. 
His candidacy for a security clearance is “fully endorsed.”18   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
16 Tr. 24-52. 
 
17 Tr. 58-60. 
 
18 AE H. 
 
6 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment 
and because it raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply 
with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering 
substances, and include: (1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical 
direction.” 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following disqualifying conditions under AG &25 as potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
7 
 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.  
 
Applicant used marijuana from 1990 to New Year’s Eve 2009-2010. He 
purchased marijuana during the 1990s and possessed it. He provided transportation for 
a friend whom he knew was conducting a drug transaction. He pled guilty to a 
misdemeanor for drug possession, received supervised probation, and his record was 
later expunged. In his interview with an OPM investigator, as part of his background 
investigation, he stated he was not sure if he would use marijuana in the future and he 
would have to evaluate the situation on a case-by-case basis. Subsequent to the 
interview, and after completing his SCA, he used marijuana at a New Years Eve party in 
2009-2010. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 
26. The following three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant has a 20-year history of marijuana use. His last uses were in March 
2009, August 2009, and on New Year’s Eve 2009-2010. He used marijuana after he 
completed his SCA which casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. I find AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. Applicant recently signed a statement 
of intent with an automatic revocation of clearance for any violation if he used illegal 
drugs. However, in October 2009, as part of his background investigation, he was 
uncertain if he would use illegal drugs in the future. He then proceeded to use marijuana 
less than three months later, demonstrating he was not committed to abstaining from 
future drug use, fully aware at the time that his use was a concern to the Government. 
He has not demonstrated an appropriate period of abstention or a genuine commitment 
to refraining from future use of illegal drugs. Although AG ¶ 26(b)(4) technically applies, 
Applicant has not demonstrated, through his actions, a true commitment to not abuse 
 
8 
 
 
any drugs in the future. Therefore, I find AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. Applicant does not 
believe he needs any type of drug counseling or treatment program and has not 
attended or completed one. I find AG ¶ 26(d) does not apply  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
Applicant failed to provide proof that he filed his 2002 and 2003 federal and state 
income tax returns. After his hearing and after the record closed he provided a copy of 
his 2005 income tax return. He did not file his 2004, 2006, 2007, and 2008, federal and 
state income tax returns on time. He did not pay the taxes for these years on time. I find 
the disqualifying conditions apply.   
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
9 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant did not provide documented proof that he filed his 2002 and 2003 
federal and state income tax returns. Rather he relies on documents from the IRS 
reflecting his tax debts and resolution for subsequent tax years. There is insufficient 
evidence to show when and if his 2002 and 2003 tax returns were filed.  
 
 Applicant admitted he did not file his 2004, 2006, 2007, and 2008 federal and 
state tax returns on time. His explanation that he believed he was below the income 
threshold to file is believable based on his income in tax years 2004, 2006, and 2007. It 
is also believable that he was unaware that he was required to pay self-employment tax 
on his meager income for those tax years. However, in 2008, he earned more than 
$50,000, and was aware of his tax responsibilities, but because he did not have the 
money to pay his taxes, he made a conscious and deliberate choice not to file his 
federal and state tax returns. He also explained he was too focused and busy with the 
final requirements for earning his master’s degree. He completed the degree in May 
2009, began employment in July 2009, but waited until May 2010, after receipt of the 
SOR to file his tax returns and resolve all of his tax issues. His behavior casts doubt on 
his trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. His tax issues were within his control. 
I find AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) do not apply.  
 
 As of May 2010, Applicant has filed and paid his delinquent federal and state 
income taxes and the problem appears to be resolved and under control. I find AG ¶ 
20(c) applies. I find AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because Applicant did not take action to 
resolve his tax issues until shortly before his hearing. I do not find his delayed actions 
constitute a good-faith effort. I find AG ¶ 20(e) partially applies because it was 
reasonable for Applicant to conclude that he did not have to file income tax returns in 
2004, 2006, and 2007, because of his meager income and he was unaware of the self-
employment tax requirement. I find AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to his failure to file his 
2008 federal and state income tax returns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
10 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a bright and articulate 
young man. He realized that he needed a college education to advance in his career 
and he devoted himself to his education for several years to complete his goal. He is a 
valued and trusted employee. Applicant has a 20-year history of illegal use of 
marijuana. He signed a statement that he did not intend to use illegal drugs in the 
future. However, Applicant’s actions are a cause of concern. He completed an SCA in 
August 2009, and became aware that illegal drug use is a concern of the Government. 
He was not committed to refraining from drug use in October 2009, when he told the 
OPM investigator that he would decide on a case-by-case basis whether he would use 
drugs in the future. Three months later, he decided to use marijuana while his SCA was 
pending. It is too early to conclude Applicant is truly committed to refraining from future 
drug use. His most recent use was on New Year’s Eve 2009-2010, less than a year 
ago. Applicant failed to file his federal and state income tax returns. Although he had a 
legitimate explanation for not filing during the years his income was low, his failure to file 
his 2008 tax return is a concern. He was aware of his obligation, but was too busy. I 
have considered that he recently filed his delinquent 2004, 2006, 2007, and 2008 tax 
returns and paid the amounts he owed. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the guidelines for Drug Involvement and Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
11 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.c:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
