KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F; Guideline B; Guideline L
DIGEST: Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising from his Egyptian relatives, his
suspension from the practice of law, and his false statements on the SCA.  Judge erred in
concluding that State Supreme Court action upholding the suspension was not a civil court action
for purposes of the SCA.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASENO: 09-02708.a1
DATE: 08/24/2010
DATE: August 24, 2010
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-02708
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Tarek H. Zohdy, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 18, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Guideline
F (Financial Considerations), Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and Guideline L (Outside Activities)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On April 22, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  Department Counsel cross-appealed pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.28. 
The Judge’s favorable findings under Guidelines F and L are not at issue either in Applicant’s appeal or in1
Department Counsel’s cross-appeal.  
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether certain of the Judge’s findings of
fact were erroneous; whether the Judge failed to consider record evidence favorable to Applicant;
whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis was in error; and whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Department Counsel raises the
following issue on cross appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding that Applicant was not
required to list a State Supreme Court case to which he was a party on his security clearance
applications (SCA).   Consistent with the following discussion, we affirm the Judge’s ultimate1
decision.  Regarding the cross-appeal, we reverse the Judge’s favorable finding concerning
Applicant’s omission on his 2006 SCA.  
Facts
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a linguist employed
by a Defense contractor.  He was born, raised, and educated in Egypt, where he received degrees in
law and police science.  In the 1970s and 1980s, Applicant was employed by an agency of the
Egyptian government.  He held a high-level Egyptian security clearance.
Applicant first traveled to the U.S. in the late 1970s, staying with an Egyptian-born uncle.
The uncle is a professor at a U.S. university who, early in life, had been a member of a terrorist
organization.  He became a U.S. citizen in the 1960s.
Applicant met his wife in Egypt, and they immigrated to the U.S. in the mid-1980s.  They
became U.S. citizens approximately 10 years later.  They have three adult children who are citizens
and residents of the U.S.  Applicant has three siblings who are citizens and residents of Egypt.  At
one time, one of them had been a professor at an Egyptian university.  Another sibling was killed by
sniper fire while in another Middle Eastern country. 
Applicant’s wife has three siblings, one of whom is a citizen and resident of Egypt.  She
speaks with this sibling approximately twice a month.  Applicant’s wife has traveled to Egypt several
times, to visit relatives and sightsee. Applicant also visited Egypt in the mid-1990s and three times
in the early-2000s.  He did not list the visits in the 2000s on his security clearance applications,
although he was required to do so.  One of these visits was for the purpose of renouncing his interest
in his mother’s will.  He was to inherit between $50,000 and $60,000.  He did not corroborate his
claim to have renounced his interest.
In the early 2000s, the IRS obtained a lien against Applicant and his spouse for unpaid federal
taxes.  He subsequently paid the taxes and the lien was removed.  However, in his 2004 SCA, he
answered “no” to a question inquiring if he had had tax liens within the previous 7 years.
In the early 1990s Applicant was admitted to the practice of law in a U.S. State.  He held
himself out as licensed to practice law in Egypt, although he stopped representing clients in that
country in the mid-2000s.  He also maintained a “legal business cooperation agreement” with a
We have found no record evidence establishing that Applicant’s sibling had been a professor.  Government2
Exhibit (GE) 8, Memo with Attachments, states that a review of Applicant’s background disclosed reasons to deny him
access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI).  However, prior to resolution of this matter, his nomination for
SCI was withdrawn.  It also states that Applicant had been granted a security clearance in December 2005.  GE 10, Letter
from Applicant to DIA Director, at 4, states that his security clearance had been “pulled.”  The Judge’s finding as to the
dollar amount of Applicant’s inheritance is supported by GE 8.  
former law professor in Egypt.  Decision at 7.
In the mid-1990s, Applicant was involved in two complex class action lawsuits in U.S.
federal courts.  A court sanctioned Applicant for violating court orders, filing frivolous claims, and
lying to the court.  As a consequence of this misconduct, he was disqualified from practicing before
federal courts.   
In the late 1990s, Applicant’s State Bar Disciplinary Board looked into the misconduct
referenced above.  The Board substantiated that Applicant had committed the following ethical
infractions:  lack of professional competence, misleading the courts with non-meritorious claims,
lack of candor (false statements under oath), obstructing litigation, disrupting a tribunal, and conduct
prejudicial to the administration of justice.  The Board suspended Applicant from practicing law for
three years, with one year suspended.  In January 2005, the State Supreme Court affirmed the
Board’s decision.  
In November 2004 and again in June 2006, Applicant completed SCAs, both of which
inquired whether, within the previous seven years, he had been a party to any public record civil
court action.  Applicant answered “no” on both SCAs.  
Applicant was granted a security clearance in 2004, which was later withdrawn.  There is no
evidence that he had compromised classified information.  
Egypt has an excellent relationship with the U.S. and receives substantial U.S. foreign aid.
However, terrorist groups carry out attacks in Egypt, targeting U.S. interests.  “Terrorist groups
conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services.”  Decision at 11.
Extremist activities in certain areas of Egypt have created instability and public disorder.
Additionally, Egypt has a poor human rights record.  
Discussion
Applicant’s Appeal
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in some of his findings of fact.  For example, he
states that his sibling had never been a professor at a Egyptian university; that his inheritance was
actually $8,000 rather than $50,000 to $60,000; and that there is no evidence that his 2004 security
clearance was withdrawn.  We have examined Applicant’s contentions in light of the record as a
whole.  The Judge’s material findings are based on substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable
characterizations or inferences that could be drawn from the record.  To the extent that the Judge’s
findings may contain errors, the errors are not likely to have affected the outcome of the case.2
Considering the record evidence as a whole, the Judge’s material findings of security concern are
sustainable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-07528 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2009).
Applicant contends that the Judge failed to consider all of the record evidence.  He argues
that the Judge did not consider the entirety of GE 8.  Also he cites record evidence that none of his
Egyptian siblings work for the government, that one of his siblings was killed by a sniper, and that
he testified that he had no reason to have lied on his SCAs.  The thrust of Applicant’s argument is
that the Judge ignored these pieces of evidence.  Furthermore, he contends that his two SCAs,
admitted as GE 5 and 7, were each missing about 25 pages and that in GE 8, favorable evidence was
inexplicably redacted.
A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 09-05830 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2010).  Applicant’s apparent disagreement with the weight
which the Judge assigned the evidence, for example his testimony that he did not falsify the SCAs,
is not sufficient to rebut the presumption.  The SCAs appear to be complete, although neither of
them contain the standard form whereby an applicant waives his privacy interests in his medical
records, etc.  However, these waivers were not at issue in the hearing, so their absence is without
significance.  There is no reason to believe that the SCAs contain 25 additional pages not included
in the record.  Furthermore, the redactions in GE 8 appear to have been for the purpose of protecting
privacy interests.  There is no reason to believe that the redactions were in contravention of the law
or that the information would have exculpated Applicant.  In any event, as Department Counsel
noted in a post-hearing memorandum, Applicant did not object to this document when it was
proffered into evidence, waiving any error he might otherwise have raised concerning it.  
Applicant points to some of the Judge’s statements which appear to be inconsistent with his
adverse decision, such as his giving partial application to certain mitigating conditions.  However,
when read in context, these statements appear simply to be the Judge’s acknowledgment of favorable
aspects of Applicant’s record.  The Judge’s decision, read as a whole, provides a reasonable basis
for his conclusion that the favorable record evidence was not sufficient to mitigate the security
concerns alleged in the SOR and is supported by the record evidence.  The sentences to which
Applicant alludes do not undermine the Judge’s adverse decision.
Applicant requests that the Board exercise de novo review over his appeal.  However, we do
not have authority to review a case de novo.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32 concerning the extent of our
power of review.  See also ISCR Case No. 08-10204 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
We have considered Applicant’s brief in light of the record as a whole.  Considering the
nature and extent of Applicant’s foreign contacts, his suspension from the State Bar and the
circumstances underlying the suspension, and his false statements about his tax lien and foreign
travel, the Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be
granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
Department Counsel Cross Appeal
The Court states that, in resolving Applicant’s case, it was exercising original jurisdiction under the State3
Constitution.  Referring to its responsibilities in Bar disciplinary matters, it stated “we act as triers of fact and conduct
an independent review of the record to determine whether the alleged misconduct has been proven by clear and
convincing evidence.”  The  Court docketed the case for oral argument.  GE 6 at 9.  Taken together, these actions serve
a judicial, rather than administrative, function.  
Question 40 on both the 2004 and 2006 SCAs asked the following: “In the last 7 years, have
you been a party to any public record civil court actions not listed elsewhere on this form?”  GE 5
at 11; GE 7 at 11.  Applicant answered “no” to this question on both SCAs.  SOR ¶ 1(b) alleged that,
in answering as he did on the 2004 SCA, Applicant intentionally failed to disclose the attorney
disciplinary action which led to his suspension by the State Supreme Court.  SOR ¶ 1(d) alleged that,
on his 2006 SCA, Applicant had intentionally failed to disclose the State Supreme Court case.
The Judge found in Applicant’s favor on these two allegations.  He found that the
proceedings in question were “administrative in nature” rather than civil court actions.  Accordingly,
he concluded that Applicant was not required to list them.  In effect, the Judge concluded that these
two allegations did not demonstrate security concerns.
Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s conclusions regarding these two allegations are
in error, insofar as Applicant was a party in a court proceeding adjudicating the Disciplinary Board’s
recommendation that he be suspended from the practice of law.  Department Counsel notes that the
case was heard in the highest court of the state and was published in the West Regional Reporter.
Accordingly, Department Counsel argues that Applicant was required to list this proceeding on his
SCAs.
We have considered Department Counsel’s argument in light of the record as a whole.  The
record demonstrates that the Disciplinary Board issued its decision in September 2004.  Applicant
completed his SCA in November 2004.  The State Supreme Court decision was handed down in
January 2005.  Applicant completed his next SCA in June 2006.  It is not clear when Applicant
appealed the Disciplinary Board’s decision to the State Supreme Court.  Although there is reason
to suppose that he did so prior to completing his 2004 SCA, the record contains no evidence to that
effect.  As it stands, the record demonstrates only that, as of the date Applicant completed his 2004
SCA, Applicant had been recommended for sanctions by his State Bar Association, which was
purely administrative in nature rather than judicial.  Accordingly, the Judge did not err in ruling as
he did on SOR ¶ 1(b).
However, we reach a different conclusion as to SOR ¶ 1(d).  When Applicant completed his
2006 SCA, the State Supreme Court had issued its decision almost 18 months prior.  That decision
is styled “In Re: [Applicant],” and it refers to him throughout as “respondent”  See, e.g., GE 6, State
Supreme Court Opinion, at 1.  The opinion clearly resolves a  matter–Applicant’s fitness to practice
law–through the exercise of the State Supreme Court’s judicial authority.   Furthermore, the nature3
of the matter in controversy is civil as opposed to criminal.  Therefore, this is a  “civil court action”
within the meaning of Question 40 of the SCA, and, insofar as Applicant was the respondent whose
legally protected interests in practicing law were at stake, he was a party to it.  We conclude that the
Judge erred in his finding that Applicant was not required to list this case on his 2006 SCA.  The
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission . . . of relevant facts from any personnel security4
questionnaire[.]” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 16(b): “deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an . . . investigator . . . or other official government representative[.]”  
record contains substantial evidence that Applicant’s omission was deliberate, satisfying the
requirements of two Guideline E disqualifying conditions.   This matter should have been evaluated4
in the context of Applicant’s burden of persuasion as to mitigation.  On this last point, the record
viewed as a whole does not support a conclusion that Applicant has met this burden.  See Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 17 for the Guideline E mitigating conditions.    
Although we have found error, we conclude that the error is harmless.  In light of the Judge’s
sustainable adverse formal findings discussed above, the erroneous formal finding regarding SOR
¶ 1(d) did not affect the outcome of the case.  See ISCR Case No. 08-07528 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 29,
2009). 
Consistent with the above, the Judge’s adverse formal findings under Guidelines E and B of
the SOR are affirmed.  The Judge’s favorable formal finding under SOR ¶ 1(d) is reversed.
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                            
                                       Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                 
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
