 
 1 
 
 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                                 ) 
               )   
       )  ISCR Case No. 09-07652   
                  ) 
                        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                        ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude 
that Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
alcohol consumption. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) dated March 13, 2009. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were 
 
 2 
                                                
unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
On April 9, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that 
specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive under 
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 Applicant 
submitted an undated Answer to the SOR, in which he admitted to all the SOR 
allegations. Applicant requested a decision before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 25, 2010, and the case was assigned to me 
on July 2, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 13, 2010, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on July 28, 2010. 
 
During the hearing, I admitted six exhibits offered by Department Counsel and 
identified as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. I also admitted three exhibits offered 
by Applicant, identified as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C. I held the record open to 
allow Applicant to submit further documentation. He timely submitted one document, 
admitted as AE D. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 5, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein as findings 
of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and 
the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 34 years old, is a high school graduate. He has been married since 
1994 and has three children who are 4, 12, and 16 years old. He has worked for his 
current employer, a defense contractor, since 2007. His position is network engineer. 
This is his first application for a security clearance. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 46-48) 
 
Applicant started consuming alcohol in approximately 1990, when he was 14 
years of age. In 2004, when he was 28 years old, he consumed alcohol once per week, 
usually on a weekend, and usually beer. His pattern was to drink six to eight 12-ounce 
bottles of beer. He testified that he did not engage in binge drinking, never experienced 
blackouts, and was never in a situation where drinking affected his work performance. 
(Tr. 49-53)  
 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines that were implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines 
listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations 
in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
In February 2004, when he was 28 years old, Applicant went drinking with his 
father and cousin. Afterward, when he parked in front of his house, police arrested him 
on a charge of Driving Under the Influence. At the station, he registered 0.14 blood 
alcohol content (BAC). He had consumed six 12-ounce beers over a period of two to four 
hours. In April 2004, he pled guilty. He was fined and sentenced to 10 days incarceration 
(suspended); six weekly sessions of Alcohol Safety and Prevention Program (ASAP); 
and his driver’s license was suspended for 12 months. Applicant met the requirements of 
his sentence. (GE 2, 3; Tr. 54-57, 60) 
 
In September 2008, Applicant attended a fund raiser at a golf course. Over a 
period of 10 hours, he consumed about 12 small cups of beer. He told his wife he would 
stay at the hotel overnight, but then drove home. He was stopped by police for speeding. 
Applicant failed the field sobriety test and was arrested on charges of Driving Under the 
Influence of Alcohol. At the station, he registered a 0.12 BAC. In January 2009, he pled 
guilty and was fined $720. He was sentenced to 75 days incarceration (65 suspended); 
he served 10 days. His license was suspended for three months, and restricted for three 
years. The restriction limits his driving to going to and from work or a court-ordered 
facility; and installation of an ignition interlock. The restriction started on September 25, 
2009 and is scheduled to end on January 30, 2012. Applicant was ordered to attend 
either ASAP or an alcohol behavior program. He chose the latter, and was required to 
attend 20 sessions. (GE 2, 5, 6; Tr. 58-61) 
 
Applicant began attending outpatient individual alcohol behavior counseling in 
April 2009. He attended once or twice per week. He had not attended Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) since 2004, but began attending meetings again as part of his 2009 
counseling program. As of the hearing date, he had last attended in March 2010. He 
does not have a sponsor, and has not participated in the 12-Step program. (Tr. 86) His 
therapist noted that Applicant's wife was aggravated about his drinking, having to drive 
him because of his license restrictions, the money spent on fines, and the time he spent 
in jail. The therapist also noted Applicant had periods when he stopped drinking: in 1995, 
he stopped for two years; in 2008, he stopped for two to three months, but then relapsed 
and soon after, received his second DUI. She also noted that he had stopped drinking 
during the previous ASAP program. Her notes indicate that Applicant reported he drank 
a wine cooler on June 4, 2009, his anniversary. According to the therapist’s notes, 
Applicant's wife reported that in late June, Applicant “stayed out all night drinking after 
being asked not to and coming home still smelling of ETOH [alcohol] the next day.” 
Applicant's wife confirmed at the hearing that this was true. (Tr. 37) The therapist 
diagnosed Applicant with alcohol dependence.3 Applicant’s goal was to remain abstinent 
during the program and after discharge because of the positive effects it had on his 
family and marriage. In November 2009, his diagnosis was changed to Alcohol 
Dependence (Early Partial Remission). After he completed the program in January 2010, 
he asked the counselor if he could return intermittently, if he needed to talk. (GE 6; AE B; 
Tr. 37, 62-64, 67) 
 
                                                 
3 The therapist’s credentials include master of science degree, Licensed Professional Counselor (LPC), 
and Certified Clinical Addiction Counselor (CCAC). (AE D) 
 3
 
Applicant informed his counselor that he relapsed on December 24, 2009. (Tr. 69) 
He drank three beers at a friend’s house, stayed the night, and drove home the next 
morning. His license restriction, which is in effect until 2012 permits him to drive only to 
work, day-care, counseling sessions, and AA meetings. In early 2010, Applicant asked 
the counselor if he could be prescribed the medication Antabuse to prevent him from 
drinking. He testified that he wished to do whatever he could to demonstrate that he was 
serious about ending his drinking. However, in May 2010, he had a seizure as a result of 
the drug, and has discontinued it. When asked if he believes he is an alcoholic, he said, 
“To an extent, yes.” (AE C; Tr. 33, 68, 70, 73-74, 76-77) 
 
Applicant was questioned at the hearing about his relapses since starting the 
counseling program in April 2009. He testified that he had only the one relapse on 
December 24, 2009, and that he intends to remain abstinent in the future. However, the 
report of Applicant's security interview of May 2009 indicates that Applicant consumed 
eight to ten beers per week, usually on weekends with family or friends. This interview 
occurred after Applicant had started his counseling in April 2009. At the hearing, he 
stated that the report was inaccurate, because he had stopped drinking when he started 
counseling. However, when Applicant received a copy of the report in December 2009, 
he signed a notarized statement that he had read the report and found it accurate. The 
report also indicated that Applicant had not stopped or reduced his drinking, and that he 
had never had alcohol treatment. Applicant testified that this portion of the report was 
also inaccurate. When asked if he had a wine cooler on his anniversary, he said, “That 
could be accurate.” However, he denied he had stayed out all night drinking in late June, 
as his wife reported to the therapist. (GE 2; Tr. 70, 76-80, 82-84) 
 
Applicant's therapist at the alcohol program he attended in 2009 – 2010 submitted 
a letter dated July 28, 2010. She stated that during Applicant's 20-session treatment, he 
relapsed twice. His attendance was “somewhat” regular, and his AA attendance was not 
as consistent as it had been earlier. He had not followed the recommendation to find a 
sponsor. He had not put the relapse-prevention plan he had developed into action. She 
also noted that Applicant's wife told her Applicant continues to put himself in positions 
where drinking is an issue. The therapist “has serious concerns about [Applicant’s] ability 
to maintain abstinence from alcohol” and recommends him for a higher level of care. (AE 
D) 
 
Applicant's manager has known him for eight years, and supervised him for three 
years. He submitted a letter describing Applicant as an outstanding person who is 
responsible, trustworthy, and dependable, and has a strong work ethic. He is aware of 
Applicant's past and opined that Applicant has “taken many steps to resolve this issue 
and is moving forward to ensure this never happens again.” (AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
 4
 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4 Decisions 
must reflect consideration of the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
the cited guideline.   
 
 A security clearance decision resolves only the question of whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of producing 
admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to 
an applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.6  
 
 A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as his 
or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution 
of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the 
Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern about alcohol consumption is that “excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” AG ¶ 22 includes the following disqualifying conditions that are 
relevant to the facts of the case: 
 
                                                 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
7 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 5
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, 
disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse 
or alcohol dependence; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication on numerous occasions 
over the past 20 years. He drove after becoming intoxicated and was subsequently 
arrested and convicted of DUI in 2004 and in 2008. He participated in outpatient 
treatment for alcohol dependence following the 2008 DUI. He was diagnosed by a 
licensed alcohol counselor with alcohol dependence in 2009. Applicant consumed 
alcohol twice in June 2009, and once in December 2009, all while attending counseling. 
These facts support application of AG ¶¶ 22 (a), (c), (d) and (f). 
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides the following relevant factors that can mitigate security 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed 
 6
 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program. 
 
Applicant’s alcohol-related behavior was frequent: he drank alcohol, sometimes 
to the point of intoxication, over two decades. He not only became intoxicated, but 
demonstrated poor judgment by driving after becoming intoxicated. Although almost two 
years have passed since his last DUI in 2008, Applicant has not remained abstinent, 
which raises the question of whether or not he will be able to avoid alcohol use in the 
future. As of the date of the hearing, he had been abstinent only seven months, since 
December 2009. Although his efforts to abstain reflect well on his current judgment, his 
negative alcohol-related conduct was both frequent and recent. Only partial mitigation is 
available under AG ¶ 23(a). 
 
Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol-dependent, and subsequently completed an 
alcohol treatment program. To his credit, he has tried to maintain abstinence. However, 
he relapsed three times during treatment. His acknowledgement of his alcohol problem 
at the hearing was unconvincing: He responded to the question of whether he was an 
alcoholic, “To an extent, yes.” He has not maintained consistent attendance at AA, 
procured a sponsor, or participated in the 12-Step program. Applicant has abstained 
from alcohol during periods in the past, only to return to drinking. Although he was 
diagnosed as being in “early partial remission” in November 2009, his therapist’s more 
recent evaluation in July 2010 did not provide a good prognosis. In fact, she 
recommended him for a higher level of care. AG ¶ 23 (b) and (d) do not apply. These 
factors raise questions as to whether Applicant will maintain sobriety or repeat his past 
pattern. Taking all the facts and circumstances together, including the short duration of 
his abstinence compared to the length of his negative alcohol history, the mitigation 
available is insufficient to overcome the disqualifying conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
 7
 
 8
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guideline, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 The record contains mitigating evidence, specifically that Applicant has 
demonstrated a wish to abstain from alcohol, as shown by his request for Antabuse, 
and his abstinence from alcohol for seven months as of the date of the hearing. 
However, Applicant has abstained from alcohol in the past, only to relapse. His short 
period of sobriety must be compared to the length of time that he abused alcohol. He 
continued to drink despite the negative effects on himself and his family. Applicant's 
decisions to drink and drive posed a danger to others and to himself. Applicant does not 
appear fully committed to abstinence, as shown by his fitful attendance at AA, lack of a 
sponsor or 12-step program participation, and minimization of his relapses. At this point 
in time, I cannot conclude that Applicant's short period of abstinence will overcome his 
history of alcohol dependence, and his pattern of returning to alcohol use after 
abstaining.  
 
 Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from the alcohol 
consumption guideline. Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised 
about Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.f.  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
