1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-02707
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
August 19, 2010
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP), on October 14, 2008 (Government Exhibit 1). On September 4, 2009, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing
security concerns under Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior) and E (Personal Conduct). The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR on September 26, 2009, and
requested a decision without a hearing. Pursuant to Paragraph E3.1.7 of the Additional
Procedural Guidance at Enclosure 3 of the Directive, Department Counsel requested a
hearing before an administrative judge on December 3, 2009. Department Counsel was
prepared to proceed on December 2, 2009. The case was assigned to another
administrative judge on December 7, 2009. The case was reassigned to me on January
2
15, 2010. DOHA issued notices of hearing on December 7, 2009; December 15, 2009;
and January 13, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 15, 2010. The
Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received without
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing, and the record closed, on January 27, 2010. Based upon a review of the case
file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Procedural Ruling
Applicant submitted an email request to reopen the hearing in his case on
February 18, 2010. Department Counsel opposed the request, and I denied it. The
correspondence is Hearing Exhibit I, and is included in the record for information
purposes only.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 50 and married.  He seeks to obtain a security clearance in
connection with his employment. 
Guideline D - Sexual Behavior
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he has
engaged in sexual behavior which may be illegal, shows a lack of judgment or
discretion, or which may subject him to coercion, exploitation or duress. Applicant
admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. Those admissions are hereby deemed
findings of fact.
Applicant admitted visiting prostitutes in the United States and overseas several
times during the 1980s. (SOR 1.a. and 1.b.) (Government Exhibits 2 and 4; Transcript at
36-37.)
During the 2002-2004 time frame, the Applicant visited a strip club several times
and became involved with a topless dancer. On at least two occasions, the Applicant
took this woman to a hotel, paid for a room, and paid her $500 hundred dollars each
time to perform various sexual services with him. Applicant maintains that the services
did not include intercourse or oral sex. He has not engaged in any such activity since
that time. (Government Exhibits 2, 3 at 3, and 4; Transcript at 47-50.) 
As of the time of the hearing, the Applicant had not told his wife about this activity
with the prostitutes and the lap dancer. In addition, his children and his employers did
In Hearing Exhibit I, the Applicant asserts that he had told his wife about his activities and asked that a new1
hearing be held. As stated earlier, I denied this request.
3
not know he had engaged in this activity. (Government Exhibit 3 at 3; Transcript at 50-
56.)1
Applicant’s program access was denied by another government agency on May
22, 2006. (Government Exhibit 3.)
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating
an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for
each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on his own
common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature and the ways of the
world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
4
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of
compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access
to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Sexual Behavior is set out in AG
¶ 12:
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a
personality or emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion,
or which may subject the individual to undue influence or coercion,
exploitation, or duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  No adverse
inference concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely
on the basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Based
on the evidence presented, the following conditions have applicability in this case: AG ¶
13(c), “sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion,
exploitation or duress,” and ¶ 13(d), “sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that
reflects lack of discretion or judgment.”
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG & 15:      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
5
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns given the facts
of this case. Under AG & 16(e), “personal conduct, or concealment of information about
one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal,
professional or community standing . . .”
Applicant engaged the services of prostitutes in the 1980s and a lap dancer to
give him “sexual services” six to seven years ago. Standing by themselves, these
actions may not be sufficient to deny the Applicant a security clearance. The problem
here, however, is that for many years he has hidden this information from his wife. As of
the day of the hearing, he still had not told his wife what he had done. The Applicant
may deny it, but the evidence convincingly shows that he feels he has something to
hide concerning his conduct.  It is axiomatic that having something to hide makes you
vulnerable to exploitation, coercion or duress.  He has done nothing to reduce or
eliminate that vulnerability. 
None of the Mitigating Conditions under Guidelines D or E have application in
this case.  Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR are found against the Applicant.
 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. My Guidelines D and E analysis is
applicable to the whole-person analysis as well. The evidence shows that the Applicant
engaged in sexual behavior and personal conduct of a kind that makes him vulnerable
to coercion, exploitation or duress. In particular, his failure to inform his wife of his
conduct makes him particularly vulnerable. I find that there is great “potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress” as set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)(8). Using the
whole-person standard, the Applicant has not mitigated the security significance of his
sexual behavior and related personal conduct. He is not eligible for a security clearance.
6
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance. Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Government's Statement of
Reasons.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline D: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against the Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.: Against the Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
