                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-03086
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On November 3, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs), effective within the Department of
Defense on September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 23, 2009, and requested a
hearing.  The case was assigned to me on February 3, 2010, and was initially scheduled
2
for hearing on February 24, 2010. The case was continued, and rescheduled for hearing
on April 1, 2010. A hearing was held on the rescheduled date. At the hearing, the
Government's case consisted of three exhibits (GE); Applicant relied on one witness
(himself) and ten exhibits (AE).  The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 9, 2010.
Besides its three exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of
seven documents covering Afghanistan: Background Note: Afghanistan, U.S.
Department of State (November 2008); Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-
2008: Afghanistan, U.S. Department of State (February 2009); Country Specific
Information: Afghanistan, U.S. Department of State (March 2009); Annual Threat
Assessment of Intelligence Community, Director of National Intelligence (January 2007);
Travel Warning: Afghanistan, U.S. Department of State (September 2008);Threats to
American Citizens in Kabul City, U.S. Department of State (April 2009); Country Reports
on Terrorism 2008, Chapter 5-Terrorist Safe Havens, U.S. Department of State (April
2009); and Country Reports on Terrorism 2008, Chapter 2-Country Reports South and
Central Asia Overview, U.S. Department of State (April 2009).
The Government also requested administrative notice of 16 documents covering
Iran: Background Note: Iran, U.S. Department of State (September 2009); Country
Specific Information, Iran, U.S. Department of State (October 2009); Travel Warning,
Iran, U.S. Department of State (July 2009); Notice: Continuation of the National
Emergency with Respect to Iran, Letter from the President to the Speaker of House of
Representatives and the President of the Senate (November 2009); Annual Threat
Assessment of the Director of National Intelligence for the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence (March 2009); State Sponsors of Terror, U.S. Department of State
(September 2008); Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of
Terrorism, U.S. Department of State (April 2009); Remarks on Iran and Resolution 1737,
U.S. Department of State (December 2009); Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices - 2008, Iran, U.S. Department of State (February 2009); UN Calls on Iran to
Address Serious Human Rights Violations, U.S. Department of State (November 2009);
Secretary Clinton and Foreign Minister Canon Express Concern over Continued
Detention of U.S. and Canadian Nationals in Iran,  U.S. Department of State (September
2009); Robert Livinson’s 1000  Day Missing, U.S. Department of State (Decemberth
2009); Pennsylvania Company Fined for Export Violations Involving Iran, U.S.
Department of Commerce (December 2007); Singapore Businessman Convicted of
Secretly Diverting U.S. Military and Civilian Aircraft Parts to the Islamic Republic of Iran,
U.S. Department of Commerce (May 2006); New York Man Sentenced for Illegally
Exporting Stolen NBC Night Vision Lenses for Delivery to Iran, U.S. Department of
Commerce (August 2005); and Iranian Pleads Guilty to Attempted Exportation of Arms
and Money Laundering, U.S. Attorney’s Office (April 2005).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007).
Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that are well
known. See Stein, Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  For good cause
shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the above-named background
3
reports addressing the geopolitical situations in Afghanistan and Iran. Administrative
notice was extended to the documents themselves, consistent with the provisions of
Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid. This notice did not foreclose Applicant from challenging the
accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the reports addressing the current
status in Afghanistan and Iran.    
Procedural Issues and Rulings
Prior to the close of the hearing, the Government moved to amend subparagraph
1.a of the statement of reasons to read Applicant’s mother is a citizen of Afghanistan
who resides in Iran. There being no objection from Applicant, and for good cause shown,
the Government’s amendment was granted.  
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
afford him the opportunity to provide additional documentation of his professional
pursuits in the U.S. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted ten days to
supplement the record. The Government was afforded two days to respond.  Applicant
did not supplement the record.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged in the SOR to have: (a) a mother who is a
citizen and resident of Iran (see amendment, supra); (b) two brothers who are citizens
Afghanistan and residents of Iran; (c) a sister who is a citizen and resident of
Afghanistan; (d) four sisters who are citizens of Afghanistan and residents of Iran; (e) a
father-in-law and mother-in-law who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan; (f) a
brother-in-law who is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan (g) a brother-in-law who is a
citizen of Afghanistan and resident of England; and h) a brother-in-law and sister-in-law
who are citizens of Afghanistan and residents of Germany.  Additionally, Applicant is
alleged to send financial support to family members in Afghanistan and Iran. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations.  He added
explanations to his admission of the allegations set forth in ¶ I.  He claimed he stopped
providing financial support to his family in 2007. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 50-year old linguist for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted
as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant’s background
Applicant was born and raised in Afghanistan. He immigrated to Pakistan in 1998
to escape the Taliban.  See GE 3; Tr. 90.  He was educated in Afghanistan and earned a
medical degree from an accredited Afghan university.  He practiced for almost 20 years
4
in Afghanistan before immigrating to Pakistan in 1998 to escape the Taliban. See AE J;
Tr. 89-93, 126-27. 
In May 2001, Applicant immigrated to the United States (U.S.). Tr. 93, 95. After
obtaining green card status in February 2004, he applied for U.S. citizenship. Tr. 129-31.
Applicant was naturalized a U.S. citizen in 2008.  See GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 96, 132.  His wife
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2007. Tr. 96.  
Applicant married his wife in 1992, while both resided in Afghanistan.  GE 1.  He
has three children from this marriage: ages 16, 14, and 11. GE 1; Tr. 89. Two of the
children were born in Afghanistan and immigrated with Applicant and his wife, first to
Pakistan, and then to the U.S. See GEs 1 and 3. His youngest child was born in
Pakistan.  GE 1. Applicant has no significant assets in the U.S., and no inheritance rights
in Afghanistan.  Tr.  He intends to stay in the U.S.  
In 2009, Applicant returned to Afghanistan to visit his in-laws and relatives.  Tr.
134-35. Cautioned by his U.S. security office to be vigilant while in Afghanistan,
Applicant was never approached by Afghanistan government agents or terrorists
individuals during his two week stay.  Tr.  136.  Were he ever approached by suspicious
Afghan individuals, Applicant would promptly report the contact to appropriate Embassy
personnel. Tr. 136-37.
Applicant’s mother currently resides in Iran. Tr. 90, 102. He has four sisters and
two brothers who also reside in Iran. Tr. 91-92, 107-08.  Before she escaped to Iran in
2000 (or thereabouts) with one of his brothers and sisters, one of his two brothers was
tortured by the Taliban. Tr. 90, 105-116. The Taliban is known to attack civilians and
non-combatants (including women and children).  While both of his brothers currently
reside in Iran, only one lives with his mother. Tr. 90-91, 108-10.
Before Applicant’s mother, sisters, and brothers relocated to Iran, one of his
sisters moved there with her husband. Tr. 90-91.  She is a nurse and lived 15 years in
Iran before she returned to Afghanistan. Tr. 92.  Her husband has a physics degree and
was a member of the medical faculty of an Afghanistan college before he moved to Iran.
Tr. 113-14. He practiced medicine in Iran for a number of years before he returned to
Afghanistan in 2005 and resumed his medical practice. Tr. 112-16.  He has four other
sisters who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan.  See GEs 1 and 3.  They relocated
to Iran in late 2000 to join their mother. Tr. 117-18.  Neither his mother nor any of his
sisters and brothers residing in Iran have any working relationships or contacts with the
Iranian government Tr. 143-44.
Applicant used to provide monthly financial support to his mother and siblings in
Iran, but stopped doing so in 2007. Tr. 126, 145. The linguist position he applied for
would require that he relocate to Afghanistan.  Tr. 142.  As a U.S. resident, Applicant
does not own a home or savings account Tr. 132-33. Nor does he have any inheritance
rights or other assets in the U.S. or Afghanistan. Tr. 133-34.
5
Besides his own brothers and sisters, Applicant has a father-in-law and mother-in-
law who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Tr. 119-20.  Additionally, he has two
brothers-in-laws who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Tr. 120. He also has two
bothers-in-law and a sister-in-law who are citizens of Afghanistan and residents of
England and Germany, respectively.  Tr. 121-25.
Applicant maintains bi-monthly telephone contact with his mother in Iran.  GE 3;
Tr. 107-08. He talks to his brothers in Iran by telephone every three months, and his
sisters every six months. See GE 3; Tr. 111, 138.  He maintains infrequent contact with
his wife’s family members, who still reside in Afghanistan. Tr. 139-40.  Applicant has not
had any face-to-face contact with any of his family members living overseas since 1998.
See GE 3.  He did return to Afghanistan for a short family visit in November 2009 to see
his mother-in-law who had suffered a stroke.  Tr. 135-36.  Were he ever asked what kind
of work he did in the U.S., he would either report the contact to U.S. law enforcement, or
inform the U.S. Embassy.  Tr. 136-37.
Afghanistan’s country status
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is sometimes referred to as the
crossroads of Central Asia.  See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 2.  It has had
a turbulent history. 
Early history
 Following invasions by Alexander the Great, the Scythians, the White Huns, and
the Turks, the Arabs invaded Afghanistan in 642 AD and introduced Islam.  Id., at 3.
Arab rule held for several hundred years before giving way to the Persians who
controlled the region to 998 before succumbing to the Turkic Ghasnavids. Id. Turkish rule
under Mahmud was short-lived and was followed by attempts of various princes to rule
sections of the country before the Mongol invasion of 1219 under Genghis Khan. Id. For
many centuries following Khan’s death in 1227, the country was contested by a
succession of chiefs and princes. By the late 14  century, Tamerlane (a Khanth
descendent) incorporated Afghanistan into a vast Asian empire.  Id.
In 1747, Ahmad Shah Durrani (the founder of what is known today as
Afghanistan) established his control over most of Afghanistan.  British expansion in the
19  Century was countered by Russian advances and precipitated Anglo-Afghan wars.th
These conflicts later led to a boundary accord that created what would become modern
Afghanistan.  See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 3.
Since the British relinquished control in August 1919, Afghanistan has been an
independent state. Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 2-3.  Between 1919 and
1973, Afghanistan moved away from its longstanding isolation under a succession of
Muslim rulers: King Amanullah (1919-1929), Nadir Khan (1929-1933), and Mohammad
Zahir Shah (Nadir Khan’s 19-year-old son), who ruled Afghanistan for over 40 years
(1933-1973).  See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra. 
6
Prime minister between 1953 and 1963, Sardar Mohammad Daoud mounted a
military coup in 1973 and seized power amid charges of corruption and malfeasance
against Zahir Shah and his royal family.  Daoud proceeded to abolish the monarchy,
abrogate the constitution, and declare Afghanistan a republic. Background Note:
Afghanistan, supra. His economic and social reforms contributed little, however, to
stabilizing political conditions in the country.   
Following a Soviet-supported overthrow and assassination of Daoud in April 1978,
a Marxist government was formed with the backing of the Soviets.  Background Note:
Afghanistan, supra, at 4.  Sur Muhammad Taraki was installed as the country’s president
of the revolutionary council.  Opposition to the Taraki government increased as many of
members of Afghan elites, religious establishments, intelligentsia were imprisoned,
tortured, or murdered.  A revolt against the Marxist government occurred in the summer
of 1978 and quickly spread into a countrywide insurgency. Id.  
Soviet invasion
Seeking to take advantage of the unrest following the April 1978 coup, the Soviet
Union quickly signed a bilateral treaty of friendship and cooperation with the new Afghan
regime and increased its military assistance to the regime. See Background Note:
Afghanistan, supra.  Faced with a deteriorating security situation, the Soviets invaded
Afghanistan in December 1979, killed the Afghan ruler, and installed Babrak Karmal (an
exiled leader of the Parcham faction) as the country’s prime minister.  Id. 
Afghan freedom fighters (mujahideen) who opposed the Karmal communist
regime, armed with increased weapons and training assistance from the U.S. and its
allies, collaborated with other Pesawar-based guerilla groups in the 1980s to destabilize
the Karmal regime. The resistance movement eventually led to an agreement known as
the Geneva Accords (signed by the front-line states of Pakistan and Afghanistan, the
United States, and the Soviet Union). The agreement served to ensure that Soviet forces
withdrew from the country as committed in February 1989.  See  Background Note:
Afghanistan, supra, at 5.
Ascendency of the Taliban  
By the mid-1990s, the Taliban had risen to power in reaction to the anarchy and
increase of warlords in the aftermath of the withdrawal of Soviet forces.  Many of the
Taliban had been educated in madrassas in Pakistan with roots in rural Pashtun areas of
the country.  See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 6.  Beginning with its capture
of Kandahar in 1994, the Taliban mounted an aggressive expansion of its control
throughout Afghanistan.  By the end of 1998, its forces occupied almost 90 percent of
the country, and reduced its opposition largely to a small sections of the northeast and
the Panjshir valley.  Id.   
Bolstered by its imposition of an extreme interpretation of Islam on the entire
country, the Taliban committed massive human rights violations (particularly directed at
7
women and children), and committed serious atrocities against minority populations.
From the mid-1990s, the Taliban provided sanctuary to Osama bin Laden, and provided
a base of operations for his and other terrorist organizations. Background Note:
Afghanistan, supra.  Bin Laden and his Al-Qaida group are known to have provided
financial and political support to the Taliban and Al Qaida, and acknowledged their
responsibility for the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks against the U.S.    
Beginning in October 2001 (following the Taliban’s refusal to expel bin Laden), the
U.S. and its coalition partners initiated a military campaign, targeting terrorist facilities
and Taliban military and political assets within Afghanistan. U.S. military and anti-Taliban
forces routed the Taliban and caused their rapid disintegration. 
After the fall of Kabul to Coalition Forces in November 2001, a UN-sponsored
conference was created to restore stability and governance in Afghanistan. See
Background Note: Afghanistan, supra.  From this conference emerged a Transitional
Authority headed by President Hamid Karzai. This authority (renamed the Transitional
Islamic State of Afghanistan) was charged with the responsibility of drafting a
constitution. 
A new constitution was drafted and ratified by a constitutional loyal jirga on
January 4, 2004.  The Afghan constitution provides for indirect election of the National
Assembly’s upper house by the provincial councils and by reserved presidential
appointments. On December 4, 2004, the country was renamed the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan.  See id.; Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2008: Afghanistan,
supra. Hamid Karzai was sworn in as Afghanistan’s President on December 7, 2004 and
presided over the new government’s first convened parliament in late 2005. See
Country Specific Information, Afghanistan, supra.  Presidential and provincial elections
are to be coordinated by the Afghanistan Independent Election Commission (IEC), with
assistance from the UN.  Id. Challenged presidential election results in 2010 have not
been widely disseminated.   
Political conditions in Afghanistan
A new democratic government assumed control of Afghanistan in 2004 following a
popular election.  While the national government has continued to expand its authority, it
has been hampered in its ability to deliver necessary social services and remains
dependent on U.S.-led assistance. See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 7.  With
its international community support at work, its ability to secure its borders and maintain
internal order is increasing.  Still, terrorists, fueled by Taliban and Al Qaida support,
continue to assert power and intimidation within the country. See Annual Threat
Assessment of Intelligence Community, Director of National Intelligence, supra, at 16-17.
Safety and security remain key concerns because these terrorist organizations continue
to target U.S. and Afghan interests by suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, car-
jackings, assaults, and hostage taking. See Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices-2008: Afghanistan, supra, at 9-10; Country Specific Information, Afghanistan,
supra, at 2.  Risks of terrorist activity remain extremely high at the present time.
8
Human rights conditions in Afghanistan remain poor by all reported accounts.
State Department reports confirm active insurgent activity in Afghanistan.  See Country
Reports on Human Rights Practices-2008: Afghanistan, supra; No section of Afghanistan
is safe or immune from violence.  See Travel Warnings, Afghanistan, supra.  Kabul, in
particular, has experienced increased militant attacks in recent years, including rocket
attacks, vehicle-borne IEDs, and suicide bombings. Id. Foreigners throughout the
country continue to be targeted for violent attacks and kidnappings: some motivated by
terrorism, and others by common criminal activity.  
Where infrastructure is concerned, Afghanistan has still not been able to build
effective, honest, and loyal provincial and district institutions and lacks a coherent tribal
engagement strategy for unifying the country. See Annual Threat Assessment of
Intelligence Community, Director of National Intelligence, supra, at 17. The Afghan drug
trade remains a major source of revenue for corrupt officials, the Taliban, and other
insurgent groups who conduct operations in the country. See Country Reports on
Terrorism 2008, Chapter 5-Terrorist Safe Havens, supra, at 4.
U.S.-Afghanistan relations
Since the fall of the Taliban, the U.S. has supported the creation of a broad-based
government in Afghanistan, and has made a long-term commitment to help Afghanistan
reconstitute and rebuild following years of war and unstable governments.  The U.S.  and
its coalition partners in the international community currently provide important
humanitarian assistance, capacity-building, security protection, counter-narcotic
programs, and infrastructure projects. The U.S. has also brought important political
influence to bear on the establishment of durable democratic principles that promote the
rule of law and encourage transparent and accountable forms of government.  See
Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 13.
The U.S. and its international partners remain committed to assisting Afghans to
realize their aspirations for a stable, democratic, and economically prosperous nation.
See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra. The U.S. is also supportive of the
Afghanistan government’s commitment to the protection of women’s rights, human
rights, and religious tolerance.  Id.
Political and economic background of Iran
According to official U.S. State Department documents, Iran is an Islamic republic
that is constitutionally constructed and has a head of state, an elected president and
counsel of ministers, a legislative body composed of a 290-member Islamic consultative
assembly, and a judiciary. See Background Note on Iran, supra, at 5. Throughout its long
history, Iran has been ruled by numerous dynasties. Following a nationalist uprising
against the Shah in 1905, Iran enacted a limited constitution in 1906.  Two years later, oil
was discovered, and Iran began its steady ascension  to a modern, secularized political
system.  Under the reign of Reza Shah Pahlavi (an Iranian officer, who seized control of
the government in 1921), Iran enacted policies of modernization and secularization,
9
established a central government and reasserted its authority over the tribes and
provinces. See id., at 3.  During the Allied occupation of western Iran in 1941, the Shah
was forced to abdicate and was succeeded by his son, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi.  See
Background Note on Iran, id.
Domestic turmoil swept Iran in 1978 as the result of heated religious and political
opposition to the Shah’s rule and political/economic programs (especially the Shah’s
internal security and intelligence service).  And in February 1979, exiled religious leader
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini returned from France to direct a revolution resulting in a
new, theocratic republic guided by Islamic principles.  Iran’s 1979 constitution allocates
the duties of the chosen religious leaders and governing bodies in such a way that their
duties often overlap.  Legislative issues on which the Majles (Iran’s legislative governing
body) and the Council of Guardians (making up Iran’s religious leadership) fail to agree
are resolved by the Council of Expediency (a body created by Ayatollah Khomeini in
1988). Following the Ayatollah’s death in June 1989, the Assembly of Experts (an
elected body of senior clerics) chose the outgoing president of the republic (Ali
Khamenei) to be the Ayatollah’s successor as national religious leader. See  Background
Note on Iran, id., at 4.
Iran’s post-revolution has been marked by an eight-year war with Iraq, internal
political struggles and unrest, and economic disorder.  Its post-revolution regime has
been associated with human rights violations and political turmoil, including the seizure
of the U.S. Embassy in November 1979 by Iranian militants and the hostage taking of 52
Americans.  See Background Note on Iran, supra, at 6.  Succeeding power struggles
have severely eroded the center and left of Iran’s political institutions, leaving only the
clergy.  Both human rights and state sponsored terrorism remain serious problems in
Iran and the Middle East. According to State Department reports, Iran’s Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps and Ministry of Intelligence and Security Forces have been
directly involved in terrorist acts, and continue to support Palestinian groups with
leadership cadres in Syria and Lebanese Hizballah to use terrorism in pursuit of their
goals. See Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 2008, supra, at 1-5; Country
Reports on Terrorism , Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of Terrorism Overview, supra, at 1-2.
State Department reports claim Iranian authorities continue to provide military support
and guidance to some Iraqi militant groups that target Coalition and Iraqi security forces
and Iraqi civilians.  See Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of
Terrorism Overview, id..
Long estranged from the West, Khomeini’s regime charted regional goals that
curtail the presence of the U.S. and other outside powers in the region.  Iran’s Islamic
foreign policy continues to stress (1) vehement anti-U.S. and anti-Israel positions, (2)
elimination of outside influence in the region, (3) support for Muslim political movements
abroad, (4) critical support to non-state terrorist groups, and (5) considerable increase in
diplomatic contacts with developing countries. See U.S. Dept. of State Background Note
on Iran, supra; Iran: Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2007, supra, at 1-16;
Country Reports on Terrorism 2007, Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of Terrorism Overview,
10
supra, at 1-2.  In this vein, Iran maintains regular diplomatic and commercial relations
with Russia and the former Soviet republics.  Of special U.S. concern has been Russian
sales of military equipment and technology to Iran.  See  Background Note on Iran, id., at
8).
Potential obstacles to improved relations between Iran and the U.S. include
Iranian efforts to acquire technology that could be used to develop nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction. See Pennsylvania Company Fined for Export
Violations Involving Iran, supra;  Singapore Businessman Convicted of Secretly Diverting
U.S. Military and Civilian Aircraft Parts to the Islamic Republic of Iran, supra;  New York
Man Sentenced for Illegally Exporting Stolen NBC Night Vision Lenses for Delivery to
Iran, supra; Iranian Pleads Guilty to Attempted Exportation of Arms and Money
Laundering, U.S. Attorney’s Office, supra.  Other barriers to better relations between the
U.S. and Iran include Iran’s support for and involvement in international terrorism; its
support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and its dismal human
rights record.  See Notice: Continuation of the National Emergency with Respect to Iran,
Letter from the President to the Speaker of House of Representatives and the President
of the Senate, supra; Annual Threat Assessment of the Director of National Intelligence
for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence National Intelligence, supra; Remarks
on Iran and Resolution 1737, supra; Secretary Clinton and Foreign Minister Canon
Express Concern over Continued Detention of U.S. and Canadian Nationals in Iran,
supra;  Robert Livinson’s 1000  Day Missing, supra.  th
Iran’s failure to “comply fully with its nuclear obligations and to cooperate fully with
the I.E.A.” continues to draw State Department concerns. See Remarks on Iran and
Resolution 1737, supra. The U.S. response to Iran’s problematic policies and behavior
has been to try to convince Iran to abandon its nuclear weapons ambitions, cease its
support of terrorist groups, and begin the process of forging constructive partnerships in
the region.  Looking to the future, the U.S. has made it abundantly clear to the Iranian
government that Iran has an historic opportunity to restore the confidence of the
international community in its nuclear intentions and provide its own people important
access to technology, nuclear energy, education, and foreign investment. See Annual
Threat Assessment of the Director of National Intelligence for the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence National Intelligence, supra. This dual track strategy of the
U.S. is broad based and is designed to build cooperative relationships with Iran and
promote Iran’s relationship with the international community.  The strategy has yet to
produce any material results, and remains a work in progress. 
State Department country reports cite significant restrictions on the right of
citizens to change their government, summary executions (minors included),
disappearances, torture and severe punishments (such as amputations and flogging),
violence by vigilante groups with ties to the government, poor prison conditions, arbitrary
arrest and detention (including prolonged solitary confinement), lack of judicial
independence and fair public trials, political prisoners and detainees, excessive
government violence in Kurdish areas and unknown groups in Arab regions of the
11
country, severe restrictions on civil liberties and freedom of religion, official corruption,
government transparency deficiencies, legal and societal discrimination against women,
ethnic and religious minorities, trafficking in persons, incitement of anti-Semitism, severe
restriction of workers’ rights, and child labor. See Iran, Country Reports on Human
Rights Practices-2008, supra, at 1-24). 
Addressing reports of human rights violations in Iran, the UN General Assembly
adopted a human rights resolution on Iran in December 2005 that expressed serious
concern at the continuing use of torture in Iran, trafficking in persons, and inhuman and
degrading treatment or punishment, such as floggings and amputations, as well as public
executions. See Iran, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2008, supra, id., at 3-
24). 
Even though Iran’s constitution prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention, these
practices remain common. Its regular and paramilitary security forces that share
responsibility with Iranian police for law enforcement and maintaining order are reported
to have committed numerous, serious human rights abuses in recent years (see Iran,
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2007, Iran, supra.). Security forces
responsible for arrest and detention often do not inform family members of a prisoner’s
welfare and locations, and often deny visits by family members and counsel.
State Department travel warnings urge U.S. citizens to carefully consider the risks
of travel to Iran (see Travel Warning, Iran, 2009, supra), a country with which the U.S.
does not currently have diplomatic or consular relations.  Citing Iran’s non-recognition of
dual citizenship and general declination to permit the Swiss to provide protective
services for U.S. citizens who are also Iranian nationals, Americans who travel to Iran
are strongly encouraged to register through the State Department’s travel registration
website.  See Travel Warning, Iran, 2009, id.).  Dual citizens residing or visiting in Iran
are subject to all Iranian laws affecting U.S. citizens, as well as laws applicable to
persons of Iranian nationality that impose special obligations on citizens of that country
(see Travel Warning, Iran, 2009, id.; Iran, Country Specific Information, supra, at 1-2).
Dual nationals remain subject to Iran’s military service requirements and can be
conscripted into service while on Iranian soil. While Iran’s conscription laws would not
appear to apply to Applicant or any of his family members residing in Iran, these dual
citizenship laws pose some potential risk to Applicant and his family, should he ever
determine to travel to Iran to visit his family. 
Reports indicate, too, that Iranian security personnel may at times place foreign
visitors under surveillance, and even arrest or detain Iranian-Americans suspected of
“acting against national security.” See Country Reports on Human Rights 2008 supra, at
5-6; Iran, Country Specific Information, Iran, id., at 2-3. Hostage risks continue to run
high in Iran. id.; Secretary Clinton and Foreign Minister Canon Express Concern over
Continued Detention of U.S. and Canadian Nationals in Iran, supra.  Because the Iranian
government does not recognize dual nationality and will treat U.S.-Iranian dual nationals
as Iranian citizens, regardless of their U.S. naturalization status, dual nationals who enter
12
Iran only on a U.S. passport risk detention absent persuasive proof of their formal
renunciation or loss of their Iranian citizenship.  See  Iran, Country Specific Information,
Iran, supra,  at 1-2.
Endorsements and credits
Applicant is a certified on-call role player for his employer (AE C), and is credited
with certificates of appreciation of his outstanding contributions to his employer’s training
missions.  See AEs A and B.  Applicant was highly regarded as well by his previous
employer, where he worked for several years as a patient care technician. AE D.  The
director of nursing with this dialysis center described Applicant as very conscientious,
knowledgeable, and professional with all of his fellow team members, patients, and their
families. Applicant is credited with participation in a national community service program
between September 2003 and January 2005. See AE E. Since immigrating to the U.S.,
Applicant has completed course work in English at an accredited institution (AEs F and
G), and documents participation in a Pakistani rescue organization and an international
chapter of the Red Cross.  See AEs H and I.  
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and all of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns,” if any. These guidelines must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or
denied.  Although, the guidelines do not require judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, judges must take into account the pertinent
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in 2(a) of the AGs,
which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial, commonsense
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the context
of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period
of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the
applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct: (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
13
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: “Foreign contacts and interests may be a security
concern if the individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests,
may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.  Adjudication
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located,
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.”   See AG ¶ 6.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800 (1988).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge
cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
14
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis
Applicant is a respected linguist for a defense contractor who has family
members who reside in Afghanistan and Iran. Trust concerns are raised under the
foreign influence guideline due to Applicant’s longstanding family ties to Afghanistan,
and more recently to Iran. Although his contacts with family members residing in
Afghanistan appear to be limited, they do involve one sister and a host of in-laws. His
Iranian contacts involve his mother and six siblings, and create considerable security
concerns. Afghanistan itself is a country with a checkered history of wars, political
instability, and violence.  Afghanistan is also a strong ally of the U.S. and its coalition
partners, who are committed to rebuilding the country.  By contrast, Iran has a long
and troubling history of hostility to the U.S., and is best known for its nuclear
enrichment activities, poor human rights record, and reputation for hostage taking.
The Government raises security concerns over risks associated with
Applicant’s mother, siblings, and his wife’s family members who are either Afghan
citizens residing in Iran, England, or Germany,  or are still residing in Afghanistan. Key
to the Government’s foreign influence concerns are Applicant’s immediate family
members who either reside in Iran or remain in Afghanistan.
Despite encouraging efforts in the development of strategic partnerships
between Afghanistan and the U.S. in recent years, Afghanistan remains a war-torn
country and one still in the process of establishing a stable democratic government
that is able to build effective, honest, and loyal provincial and district institutions,
provide effective protections for its constituent groups, and maintain cross-border
security. The historically close relationship between Applicant and his immediate
family members (who reside in Afghanistan and Iran) makes them potentially
vulnerable to coercion and non-coercive measures.  
Because Taliban and Al Qaida insurgents operating in Afghanistan have a
history of violating Afghan domestic laws and regulations, as well as international
laws, they are more likely to use improper and illegal means, or one of the other, to
obtain classified information in Applicant’s possession or control through his family
members still residing in Afghanistan. By virtue of the Iranian residency of Applicant’s
mother, two brothers, and four sisters, and Applicant’s personal access to them by
telephone, they, too, present potential heightened security risks covered by
disqualifying condition   DC ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
15
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”
To date, none of Applicant’s family members residing in Afghanistan and Iran
have any history of being subjected to any coercion or influence. These historical
antecedents do limit the severity of any potential conflict situation. However, the
absence of any past coercive measures taken by Afghan or Iranian authorities do not
completely absolve Applicant from coercive risks in the future. Considering both
countries’ protracted history of wars, political instability, violence, hostage taking, and
abusive measures taken against their own citizens, they continue to present
heightened security risks. For these reasons, ¶ DC 7(b), “connection to a foreign
person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and
the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that
information,” has some application to Applicant’s situation.
To be sure, none of Applicant’s immediate family members or in-laws have any
identified prior affiliations or connections with any foreign governments (Afghanistan
and Iran included). Any potential conflict that might be associated with his mother and
siblings and his wife’s family is small and not likely to pose any conflicts of interest for
Applicant in the foreseeable future. 
As a nation, Afghanistan continues to be a country with emerging strategic
relationships with the United States and is a front-line partner in the war on terror.
Because of the security dangers that still confront U.S. and Afghan forces operating in
the region, Afghanistan remains a country that presents a heightened risk.
Afghanistan is also a country that is benefitting from long-term U.S. commitments to
help the Afghan government and its tribal regions reconstitute and rebuild their
institutions and infrastructure in the aftermath of years of war, human rights abuses,
and political and economic mismanagement under Soviet-backed regimes and Taliban
rule. Given the current geopolitical infrastructure that exists in Afghanistan, the risk of
a pressure or influence situation involving an immediate or extended family member of
Applicant’s can be characterized as somewhat reduced, commensurate with improved
security and political conditions on the ground in the country. 
Conditions in Iran, though, require more vigilance.  Iran has long been known to
be a repressive country, which has committed numerous, serious human rights
abuses in recent years, and shown little respect for the rule of law. The U.S. has no
diplomatic relations with Iran.  Iran remains a country on the State Department ‘s state
terrorist list, and is a country with a known history of hostage taking and human rights
abuses of wide magnitude and scope. Iran is consistently characterized as a country
hostile to American political and security interests since the 1979 fall of the Shah of
Iran and ensuing establishment of an Islamic republic with close ties and support to
non-state terrorist groups. Based on reported terrorist activities in the country and in
other countries in the region with support links to Iran, Iran cannot be deemed to
16
provide an acceptable political and security environment for managing hostage risks.
Without such assurances, no reasonable conclusions can be reached that Applicant’s
mother and siblings are not in a position to be exploited by Iranian authorities.
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or
mandate particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of
foreign countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one
foreign country may not be in another.  While foreign influence cases must by practical
necessity be weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for
referencing in the supplied materials and country information about Afghanistan and
Iran. Unlike the old AGs, the new ones do take into account of the country’s
demonstrated relations with the U.S. as an important consideration in gauging whether
the particular relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a heightened
security risk. The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign regime
involved do matter. 
Applicant’s situation is a special one for reasons that pertain wholly to his
unique status and circumstances. Although he comes to these proceedings with
considerable medical background and language proficiency, he only became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008, and still has close family members residing in both
Iran and Afghanistan. So, even though he has been careful to date to avoid any
frequent contact with his family members in Afghanistan, he maintains regular contact
with his mother, and to a lesser extent some of his siblings in Iran. 
In special circumstances involving linguists who put themselves in harm’s way
by working in unstable countries where they have family members residing, the
Appeal Board has been quick to note that such individuals are more likely to
recognize, resist, and report any attempts to by a foreign power, terrorist group, or
insurgent group at coercion or exploitation.  See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App.
Bd. Feb. 5, 2008).  Applicant’s strong connections to his mother and siblings residing
in Iran makes it problematic to resolve any potential conflict against his U.S. interests,
his stated linguistic contributions to the U.S. notwithstanding.  .  
Based on Applicant’s case-specific circumstances, MC 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or
the persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.”  is not available to Applicant.  Neither Applicant nor his mother and siblings
residing in Iran can be characterized as sufficiently insulated from potential pressures
and influence from the Iranian government and its military and intelligence officials to
warrant application of this mitigating condition. 
Of some benefit to Applicant, too, is MC ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest,
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person,
17
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant’s
demonstrated loyalty, patriotism, and professional commitments to the U.S. is
exhibited in the two-plus years he has held U.S. citizenship. 
One other mitigating condition has mixed application to Applicant’s situation.
MC 8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, groups, or
organizations from a foreign country,” has some prospective value based on
Applicant’s assurances of reporting his travel plans to Iran. But there is really no
documented record of Applicant’s prior reporting of his contacts with his family
members in Afghanistan or Iran since he acquired U.S. citizenship.  Consistent with
past Appeal Board considerations, his future commitments alone do not warrant any
more than minimal consideration at this time. Historically, the Appeal Board has
accorded very little weight to stated intentions to take corrective steps in a hypothetical
set of circumstances, absent record evidence that an applicant has acted similarly
under comparable circumstances.  See ISCR Case No. 07-00029, at 4 (App. Bd. Dec.
7, 2007); ISCR Case No. 06-24575, at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).
The strategic importance of Afghanistan and high level of resources the U.S.
has invested in Afghanistan to improve the country’s governance, infrastructure, and
security are entitled to considerable weight. And were Applicant’s family connections
limited to Afghanistan, security concerns might be reconciled.  But Applicant’s mother
and siblings have chosen to make Iran their residence for reasons not fully explored.
Given that Iran remains a hostile country with no diplomatic relations with the U.S.,
and one that lacks a secure infrastructure and track record for respecting human
rights and the rule of law, the risk of a pressure or influence situation involving an
immediate or extended family member of Applicant’s cannot be safely discounted.
Iran’s strategic location and political character and the residency of his mother and
siblings in Iran, all combine to create security concerns over risks of direct or indirect
pressure or influence of a family member of Applicant’s by Iranian authorities.
To complete a  whole-person assessment of Applicant’s foreign influence risks
to ascertain whether they are fully compatible with minimum security clearance
eligibility requirements, Applicant’s medical and charitable contributions in the U.S.
require careful balancing with the raised security concerns. His endorsements, training
certificates, and cited contributions to the private health and charitable organizations
he has worked with in the past are commendable. 
Whole-person assessment is available to partially minimize Applicant’s
exposure to conflicts of interests with his Afghan family members. But such an
assessment cannot reduce the heightened security risks of coercion, pressure, or
influence that any of his family members might be exposed to in Iran.  After carefully
considering Applicant’s familial connections in the U.S. and Iran and the risks of
18
Applicant’s submission to Iranian pressures should his mother and siblings residing
there be pressured or coerced by Iranian authorities at some time in the foreseeable
future, the weighted risks of a compromise remain too substantial to become
manageable ones at this time under a whole person assessment of all of the critical
circumstances considered in this case. Overall, any potential security concerns
attributable to Applicant's relations with his mother and siblings residing in Iran are
insufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive judgments about Applicant's ability to
withstand risks of undue influence attributable to the status of his mother, two
brothers, and four sisters who reside in Iran.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by sub-paragraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d of Guideline B.
Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to sub-paragraphs 1.c and 1.e
through 1.i.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in AG ¶ 2(a).
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following
separate formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subpara. 1.a Against Applicant
Subpara. 1.b: Against Applicant
Subpara. 1.c: For Applicant
Subpara. 1.d: Against Applicant
Subpara. 1.e: For Applicant
Subpara. 1.f:            For Applicant
Subpara. 1.g: For Applicant
Subpara. 1.h            For Applicant
Subpara. 1.i:            For Applicant
 Conclusions  
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified
information.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
19
