1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-01286
SSN: -------------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
Applicant has a history of not meeting financial obligations as well as inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts. This is demonstrated by more than $100,000 in unpaid
delinquent debts, including many student loans in collection. He did not present
sufficient  evidence of a good-faith effort to repay or otherwise resolve his indebtedness.
There is insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns
stemming from his financial problems. Accordingly, as explained in further detail below,
this case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 2
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting evidence, some3
of which is identified as exhibits in this decision.  
 Exhibit 5. 4
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on March 9, 2010,1
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline F for financial considerations. The SOR also recommended that the
case be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether to deny or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion, and he did not request a
hearing. Accordingly, the case will be decided on the written record.2
On May 26, 2010, the Agency submitted its written case consisting of all relevant
and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file of3
relevant material (FORM) was received by Applicant on June 2, 2010. He then had 30
days to respond with objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, but he
did not respond within the 30-day period. The case was assigned to me August 11,
2010. 
Findings of Fact
Based on the evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has never
married and has no children. His educational background includes a bachelor’s degree
in computer science awarded in December 2005. As reported in his security clearance
application, he attended college during the period of 1997–2005.    4
 Exhibit 6 at 2 of 14. 5
 Exhibit 5. 6
 Exhibit 6 at 11 of 14. 7
 Exhibits 7 and 8. 8
 Exhibit 6 at 12 of 14. 9
 Exhibit 6 at 13 of 14. 10
 Exhibit 6 at 14 of 14. 11
 Exhibit 6 at 4 of 14. 12
3
Applicant is currently employed as a software engineer.  His security clearance5
application reflects that he has worked in the information technology (IT) field since
June 2006, shortly after he earned his bachelor’s degree.  His annual gross income is6
about $67,680.7
Applicant has a history of financial problems. The SOR alleges 20 delinquent
debts with various creditors for more than $100,000. The delinquent debts are
established by Applicant’s admissions and the information in the credit reports.  Many of8
the delinquent debts are student loans in collection. 
Applicant did not present documentary evidence showing he paid, settled, or
otherwise resolved the debts. He did present documentary evidence showing the
following: (1) payments on a judgment with a balance of $267 as of December 2009;9
(2) entry into a loan-rehabilitation program for a student loan with a balance of $4,470
as of January 2010;  and entry into a debt-management plan for five accounts for a10
total of $1,290 as of January 2010.  He attributes his financial problems to falling11
behind on his payments in about 2006 because he was not earning sufficient income.   12
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to13
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.14
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 15
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 16
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).17
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.18
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.19
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.20
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 21
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).22
4
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As13
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt14
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An15
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  16
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting17
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An18
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate19
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme20
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.21
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.22
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of all the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.23
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 24
 See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an25
applicant is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness
or recurring financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  26
 AG ¶ 19(a).  27
 AG ¶ 19(c). 28
5
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it23
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant24
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline25
F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  26
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information within the defense industry. Indeed, the practice of evaluating a person
based on their record of financial responsibility (or lack thereof) is used in various
industries. For example, the insurance industry uses credit-based insurance scores
when determining insurance rates because the scores have been found to be effective
in predicting future losses.  
The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems. This history raises concerns because it indicates inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of27 28
Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions, and
the facts suggest financial irresponsibility as well.    
 AG ¶ 20 (a) – (f) (setting forth six mitigating conditions). 29
6
Under Guideline F, there are six conditions that may, individually or in
combination, mitigate security concerns:29
 
(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Of those mitigating conditions, the most pertinent here is subparagraph (d). The
evidence shows he has taken some action to repay his delinquent debts. But the
evidence also shows his efforts have just begun and address only a small portion of his
more than $100,000 in delinquent debt. Applicant overextended himself and put himself
in a high-risk position by incurring more debt than he could repay. He is now dealing
with the consequences. What is missing here is a well-established track record of
repayment. Although he might have good intentions, his track record of repayment is
insufficient to mitigate the security concerns. Looking forward, it is too soon to rule out
the likelihood of additional financial problems. Likewise, it is too soon to determine if
Applicant is now conducting his affairs in a financially-responsible manner to avoid
similar problems in the future.  
 
To conclude, the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s ongoing
financial problems justify current doubts about his judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these
doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).30
7
consideration to the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence.30
Nevertheless, Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a
favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.t: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
