 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00411 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 30, 2010 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 12, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 5, 2010, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 16, 2010. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on June 30, 2010, scheduling the hearing for July 26, 2010. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
 
2 
 
7, which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through 
H, called one witness, and testified on her own behalf. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information until close of business August 9, 2010. 
Applicant submitted post-hearing exhibits I through U, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 11, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been 
married for the past 22 years. She previously worked in the defense industry for 17 
years, prior to relocating in support of her husband’s career advancement. After her 
relocation, she was a stay-at-home mom until 2003, when she returned to work to 
support her family. She has three daughters, ages 16, 21, and 32. Her husband worked 
for a Federal agency. (GE 1; AE C; Tr. 34-37, 44-48, 53.) 
 
 Applicant’s finances were tight because she was not working and her husband 
had started to suffer medical problems. In 2003, she and her husband filed Chapter 7 
bankruptcy (SOR allegation 1.a.). In their bankruptcy filing, they listed total liabilities of 
$93,158 and assets of $104,390. Their debts were discharged on December 15, 2003. 
(AE J; Tr. 51.) 
 
 In December 2003, Applicant’s husband became ill and was diagnosed with 
advanced liver disease. In the beginning of 2004, her husband medically retired from his 
position after 16-years service with the Government. He was earning approximately 
$90,000 per year at the time he retired. His retirement income was significantly less. 
Applicant estimates that he gets approximately $1,700 to $2,000 per month in 
retirement pay. (Tr. 49-55.) 
 
 In 2006, Applicant purchased a home for $650,000. At that time, she was 
working as a realtor and making a substantial income. She had both a first and second 
mortgage on the property. Applicant lived in the home for a little more than a year. In 
September of 2006, Applicant’s husband became very ill. Applicant had to stop working 
to care for him. In January 2007, Applicant sent her husband to live with her parents 
and in March of 2007, she put the house up for sale. As alleged in subparagraph 1.b., 
eventually the house was sold, for less than the value of the two mortgages, although 
her second mortgage reflects on her credit report with a zero balance. (GE 2; AE K; Tr. 
37, 56-62.) 
 
 Applicant’s husband’s condition continues to cause hospitalization. His hospital 
records show that in 2009, he was hospitalized in every month but one. In 2010, 
Applicant’s husband was hospitalized on January 20; February 8-15; February 28-
March 10; March 24-26; April 18-21; April 26, May 13-17; May 24-26; June 17-20; July 
1; July 3; and July 7-22. Applicant’s daughter testified that during her father’s 
hospitalizations, her mother “gets out of work, comes home, takes care of my sister’s 
needs, goes to the hospital and doesn’t get home to [sic] probably after eight . . .” (AE 
U; Tr. 92.) 
  
 
3 
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts as listed on credit reports obtained in 
2009 through 2010. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 7.) They are as follows: 
 
 Allegation 1.c. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a collections account for the 
approximate amount of $205. This was incurred as a result of medical treatment for 
Applicant’s husband. As of August 2010, Applicant owed $215.01 on this debt. At the 
close of the record, it remained unpaid. (AE L; Tr. 63-65.) 
 
Allegation 1.d. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a medical account for the 
approximate amount of $137. This was incurred as a result of medical treatment for 
Applicant’s husband. Applicant has submitted this account to her medical insurance and 
requested their insurance pay the debt. (AE M; Tr. 65-66.) 
 
Allegation 1.e. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a medical collections account 
for the approximate amount of $698. This was incurred as a result of medical treatment 
for Applicant’s husband. Applicant has submitted this account to her medical insurance 
and requested their insurance pay the debt. (AE M; Tr. 65-66.) 
 
Allegation 1.f. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a collections account for the 
approximate amount of $10,023. This debt was for a delinquent credit card. Applicant 
contends that the card was largely used to pay co-pays for her husband’s medical 
treatments. In 2009, Applicant began making $100 per month payments on this debt. 
She continued making payments until February 2010. Payments stopped in February 
2010, because Applicant’s husband was again hospitalized. She became emotionally 
overwhelmed and ceased payments. He has been in and out of the hospital since then. 
She indicated that she will start making payments on this debt again in August 2010. 
(GE 2; AE 0; Tr. 66-72.) 
 
Allegation 1.g. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a collections account for the 
approximate amount of $1,023. This debt was for an unpaid family cell phone plan. 
Applicant began making payments on this debt in approximately May of 2009, in the 
amount of $50 per month. She stopped payment in 2010, after her husband was 
hospitalized. She has not yet resumed payments. (GE 2; AE P; Tr. 72-74.) 
 
Allegation 1.h. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a collections account for the 
approximate amount of $2,968. This was a credit card debt that Applicant incurred in 
approximately 2003. Applicant began making payments on this debt in approximately 
May of 2009, in the amount of $50 per month. She stopped payment in January 2010, 
although she had not satisfied the debt. She has not yet resumed payments. (AE Q; Tr. 
75-76.) 
 
Allegation 1.i. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a collections account for the 
approximate amount of $410. Applicant provided copies of a money order made out to 
this creditor for the full amount of this debt. (GE 2; AE D; AE R; Tr. 28-30, 76-77.) 
 
Allegation 1.j. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a medical collections account 
for the approximate amount of $52. This was incurred as a result of medical treatment 
 
4 
 
for Applicant’s husband. Applicant has submitted this account to her medical insurance 
and requested their insurance pay the debt. (AE M; AE S; Tr. 65-66.) 
 
Allegation 1.k. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a medical collections account 
for the approximate amount of $91. This was incurred as a result of medical treatment 
for Applicant’s husband. Applicant provided copies of a money order made out to this 
creditor for the full amount of this debt. (AE T; Tr. 77.) 
 
Applicant has had no security incidents while working for her employer. She is 
well respected by her supervisor who notes that “with her integrity, honesty, and loyalty, 
I would endorse entrusting her with sensitive information without doubt and without 
reservation.” (AE A; AE B.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
5 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and has been unable to pay her 
obligations. Her financial problems have been ongoing since prior to her 2003 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 Three Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
 
6 
 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are recent and have been on-going for a number 
of years. She discharged her debt through Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2003, only to incur 
additional indebtedness shortly thereafter. While the majority of her debts are medical 
bills for her husband, one is for a credit card and another is for a phone bill. Her 
husband’s condition is on-going and further hospitalizations are likely to recur. Her 
debts largely remain unpaid, with the exception of the two small debts alleged in 1.i and 
1.k., which were paid recently. Her financial delinquencies are attributable to her 
husband’s health, in part, as he has been ill for at least eight years. Yet, they are also 
attributable to Applicant’s choices. For instance, the house she sold at a loss just prior 
to foreclosure was a debt she took on after her husband had taken ill and had medically 
retired. In the past eight years, she has not been focused on recovering financially. She 
has made payments on some of her debts, but stopped in approximately February of 
2010. While her husband was hospitalized at the time she stopped making payments to 
the creditors, she failed to distinguish why she was able to pay her creditors through the 
hospitalization in 2009, but not in 2010. She has failed to show that she has acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F, in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
7 
 
 
Applicant is well respected by her supervisor. She previously worked 
successfully in the defense industry for 17 years. She is currently employed and has 
satisfied two of her smaller debts. Despite her accomplishments, she has failed to 
demonstrate a substantial effort to satisfy her financial delinquencies. While she has 
spent tremendous time and effort contending with her husband’s medical condition over 
the past eight years, her choices, with respect to her debts do not demonstrate the 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness needed to hold a security clearance. There are 
significant unresolved concerns about Applicant’s finances.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
