                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00311 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On April 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in an undated response and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 2, 2010. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on July 15, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
August 9, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant did not object 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
and they were admitted. Applicant testified on his own behalf and did not have any 
documentary evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 13, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 45 years old. He graduated from college in 1989. He married in 1993 
and divorced in 2005. He has three children, ages 10, 12, and 14. He began 
employment with his current employer, as an operations manager, in January 2008. He 
was promoted to project manager in January 2009.1  
 
On August 19, 2009, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). 
He indicated that he occasionally used marijuana from March 1989 to the present.2 
During his background interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator, he indicated that he used marijuana an average of 5 to 10 times per year, 
from February 1988 to July 2009. There were certain years when he did not use 
marijuana at all. He first used marijuana in college. He would usually smoke one or two 
hits off of a water pipe. He never purchased marijuana, but rather it was provided to him 
by an acquaintance or his ex-girlfriend. He used it at parties in college.3  
 
After completing college, Applicant used marijuana while playing golf, boating, or 
at home. Applicant refused to provide the names to the investigator of the people he 
used marijuana with because he did not want to put them in a situation where they 
would have to lie for him. After being advised that his failure to provide information 
regarding knowledgeable sources with whom he used marijuana may affect the 
outcome of his investigation, he indicated he understood this and still refused to provide 
the information. Applicant indicated to the investigator that he did not intend to use 
marijuana in the future because he now had a job that required him to have a security 
clearance, he did not want to jeopardize his employment, and he believed he was 
getting too old to smoke marijuana. He also indicated that as of July 2009, he no longer 
associated with the acquaintances that he used marijuana with in the past. He indicated 
in his interview that his brother was aware of his marijuana use, but his ex-wife was 
unaware of it. He explained he used marijuana to escape from stress and to relax. It 
caused him to have slower motor skills, but he did not think his judgment was impaired. 
He indicated that over the 20 years he used marijuana there would be years when he 
did not use it at all. He has not attended any counseling or treatment as a result of his 
drug use.4 
1 Tr. 23, 26, 50. 
 
2 GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 17, 33. 
 
4 Tr. 17-21, 25-32; 35, 38-45, 51-53; GE 2.  
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
At his hearing, Applicant indicated that in the past two weeks he told his ex-wife 
about his drug use. He also explained that his brother has problems with substance 
abuse and has been in and out of rehabilitation. The last program his brother was in 
was six months ago. Applicant never used marijuana around his children. He is aware 
that marijuana possession and use is illegal. His last use was shortly before he 
completed his SCA in approximately July 2009. His employer does not conduct drug 
screening tests. He believes he is capable of refraining from marijuana use. When he 
smoked marijuana at home, it would be when his wife and children were not present 
and he was playing pool with his friends. His children do not know about his drug use.5 
 
The friends Applicant used marijuana with were from high school. When he and 
the friends played golf is when they used marijuana. He stated that he no longer 
maintains contact with these friends. He stated he was completely honest when 
responding to the drug questions on his SCA. Applicant does not intend to use 
marijuana in the future. He believes he is a good person and is loyal to the United 
States. He is not proud of his actions and acknowledges he made mistakes in his past 
when he used marijuana.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
5 Tr. 29-30, 33-38, 50-55. 
 
6 Tr. 21-22, 38-44, 51, 57. 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 
and especially considerer the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse, and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
5 
 
 
Applicant used marijuana approximately five to ten times a year, from 
approximately 1989 to July 2009. I find these disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 
26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, and  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
Applicant has a 20-year history of marijuana use. He used it with varying 
frequency. He did not necessarily use it every year, but then some years he would use it 
more than others. He understood its possession and use were illegal. He made a 
decision to stop using marijuana shortly before he submitted his SCA. He understood 
the need to refrain from drug use if he was to obtain a security clearance, and he 
decided he was getting too old to use marijuana. Applicant claims he no longer 
associates with the friends he used marijuana with. Applicant’s long history of drug use 
was well past the age of youthful indiscretion, but rather continued while he was 
married, after he became a father, and since accepting employment with his present 
employer. He professes he does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future. However, 
his commitment has only been since August 2009. His claim that he no longer 
associates with his friends who use drugs is a responsible attitude, but at this juncture it 
is too soon to conclude that these friendships are in his past. Applicant’s long history of 
drug use outweighs his short abstention period. I find Applicant has not met his burden 
of persuasion and the above mitigating conditions do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 45 years old and has 
worked for his employer since 2008. He is a divorced father of three children. He has a 
20-year history of smoking marijuana. He last smoked it in July 2009. He would use 
marijuana with his friends when playing golf, going boating, or at his home, when his 
family was not present. He decided to abstain because he understood the impact his 
marijuana use would have on obtaining a security clearance and he also felt he was 
getting too old. Using marijuana for 20 years and well into his 40s raises concerns about 
Applicant’s judgment. At this juncture, considering the lengthy period of time Applicant 
used marijuana and his recent commitment to abstention, it is too early to conclude that 
it is a thing of the past. He has not offered any evidence that he has attended drug 
counseling or other rehabilitation to mitigate the security concerns. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guideline for Drug Involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
