 
1 
 
 
                                                                 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-11062 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, the Government’s File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), and the exhibits, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised under Guidelines K (Handling Protected Information), M (Use of 
Information Technology Systems), and E (Personal Conduct). Her request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 29, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The SOR listed security concerns 
addressed in the Directive under Guidelines K, M, and E. In her December 21, 2012, 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all six allegations. She also requested a 
decision without a hearing. 
 
Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
prepared a written presentation of the Government’s case in a FORM dated March 20, 
 
2 
 
 
2013. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant, along with seven evidentiary documents 
(Items 1 through 7). Applicant received the FORM but did not submit a response. The 
case was assigned to me on April 26, 2013, for an administrative decision based on the 
record. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
I take administrative notice of the following requirements set out at §§ 1-200 and 
5-308 of the National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM), DOD 
5220.22-M, dated February 28, 2006, and provided in Department Counsel’s FORM. 
(Item I):  
 
§1-200. General. Contractors shall protect all classified information to 
which they have access or custody. A contractor performing work within 
the confines of a Federal installation shall safeguard classified information 
according to the procedures of the host installation or agency. 
 
§5-308. Protection of Combinations to Security Containers, Cabinets, 
Vaults and Closed Areas. Only a minimum number of authorized 
persons shall have knowledge of combinations to authorized storage 
containers. Containers shall bear no external markings indicating the level 
of classified material authorized for storage.  
 
a. A record of the names of persons having knowledge of 
the combination shall be maintained.  
 
b. Security containers, vaults, cabinets, and other 
authorized storage containers shall be kept locked when not 
under the direct supervision of an authorized person 
entrusted with the contents.  
 
c. The combination shall be safeguarded in accordance with 
the highest classification of the material authorized for 
storage in the container.  
 
d. If a record is made of a combination, the record shall be 
marked with the highest classification of material authorized 
for storage in the container. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
additional findings. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old high school graduate. As of the date of her June 2011 
security clearance application, she had been married since 2005, and had three children 
and three step-children between the ages of 23 and 29. She has held a secret security 
clearance since 2002. She has worked for her current employer, a defense contractor, 
since 1985.1 Her position is senior configuration analyst. (Items 4, 5)  
 
Between about December 2008 and December 2010, Applicant saved passwords 
for classified computer systems and combinations for classified container locks in a 
spreadsheet on her unclassified work computer. She had numerous passwords, and 
saved them in an Excel spreadsheet for ease of recall. She considered her work 
computer to be “secure”2 and did not realize that saving the information on what she 
considered a “secure” computer was a security violation. By December 2010, she 
stopped saving new passwords and combinations to her spreadsheet because she had 
fewer new passwords and combinations to remember. She continued to use the Excel 
workbook that contained the spreadsheet. However, after December 2010, she no longer 
used the specific spreadsheet with the previously used passwords and combinations. 
(Items 5, 6, 7) 
 
In about February 2011, Applicant was compiling an instruction memorandum 
using the Excel workbook. She was also having trouble accessing her company’s 
computer system from her home. She decided to send the workbook to her home 
computer using her personal email account, so that she could use it while working from 
home. She needed it to complete the instruction memorandum and to use the contact 
information it contained. During her 2011 security interview, she stated that she had not 
been using the spreadsheet containing the passwords and combinations, so she forgot 
that the workbook included the spreadsheet. Between February and March 2011, 
Applicant emailed the workbook with the combinations to classified containers to her 
unclassified home computer about three times. (Item 5, 7) 
 
The general requirement at NISPOM §1-200 states that contractors must protect 
classified information to which they access or custody. Specifically, §5-308 requires that 
“combinations be protected in accordance with the highest classification of the material 
authorized for storage in the container.” Records of the lock combinations must be 
marked with the highest classification of material stored in the container. The file 
contains no information on the classification level of the material stored in the containers. 
The file also does not indicate the classification level of the computer systems for which 
Applicant stored passwords. (Item II) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant entered 2004 as her start date with her current employer because she thought she was 
required to enter employment only during the previous seven years. She provided the correct information 
at her security interview. (Item 5) 
 
2 Other than the word “secure,” the file does not explain Applicant's understanding of the status of her 
work computer. As this decision is based on the written record, Applicant cannot be questioned to 
determine if by “secure,” Applicant meant that she thought her computer was approved to store classified 
information. (Item 5) 
 
 
4 
 
 
On March 19, 2011, Applicant's security office contacted her about sending 
classified information to her personal email account. She was informed it was a serious 
violation and that her security clearance was being suspended. In May 2011, her security 
officer entered an incident report in the DOD security database, stating, 
 
[Applicant] has been found culpable for an intentional security violation. 
[Applicant] knowingly had combinations and a password to classified 
containters (sic) and a classified information system saved in an Excel 
spreadsheet on her unclassified computer. She further compromised the 
information by sending it to her personal [---] email account. The range of 
disipline (sic) is suspension without pay with a written reprimand to 
termination, depending on the level of compromise and employee intent. 
(Item 7) 
 
In June 2011, Applicant was officially reprimanded, received a written warning, 
and was suspended without pay for one week for violation of a security rule. She was 
transferred to other duties that did not require a security clearance, and she was required 
to attend security training. She completed the training in July 2011. Before July 2011, 
Applicant had received annual security training. (Items 5, 7) 
 
During her August 2011 security interview, Applicant stated she knew she was not 
permitted to send technical information to a personal email account, but did not believe 
the workbook was a security issue because it contained only contact information and 
instructions regarding work tasks. She did not remember the workbook also included the 
spreadsheet of passwords (although some were apparently no longer in use at the time) 
and combinations to classified containers. She now understands that saving passwords 
to classified systems and combinations to classified containers, and sending such 
information to a personal email account, are security violations. She had no security 
violations or job performance issues before this event. She has no intention to engage in 
such conduct in the future. (Items 5, 6) 
 
On October 3, 2012, Applicant signed an interrogatory stating that she has 
complied with security regulations and employee rules since this event. She memorizes 
passwords, does not write them down, and does not use patterns. She has not emailed 
work-related information to her personal email account. The incident has been discussed 
in team, section, and department meetings. (Item 6) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense determination 
based on examination of all available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3 Decisions must 
also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
                                                          
3 Directive. 6.3. 
 
5 
 
 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines K, M, and E.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to 
deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must 
be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its 
burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as her or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern related to use of information technology 
systems:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations pertaining 
to information technology systems may raise security concerns about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information. 
 
                                                          
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
6 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern, 
including the following relevant conditions:  
 
(d) downloading, storing, or transmitting classified information on or to any 
unauthorized software, hardware, or information technology system; 
 
 From 2008 to 2010, Applicant engaged in unauthorized use of an information 
technology system when she stored passwords for classified computer systems and 
lock combinations for classified containers on her unclassified company computer. She 
also transmitted this classified information to her unclassified home computer. 
Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 40(d) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 41 provides the following relevant mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of a 
supervisor. 
 
 Applicant states that she did not engage in these actions intentionally. However, 
she has worked for the same employer for many years, and received security training 
every year. Given her annual security training, it is unlikely that during the two years 
when Applicant created and maintained these lists, she did not realize that passwords 
for classified files and combinations to classified safes constituted data that must be 
protected. Her belief that her work computer was “secure” and so could be used for this 
data, is not convincing. Even if true, that rationale does not apply to her home computer. 
She knew her home computer was unclassified, yet she forwarded the workbook 
containing classified information to her home three separate times. There is no record 
evidence that she contacted security officers to determine if it was appropriate to 
transmit the information, or to alert them that she had done it. Her conduct was not 
revealed until the security department discovered it. Applicant’s actions are not recent; 
however, they occurred in the normal course of her employment, not in unusual 
circumstances. Her conduct casts doubt on her reliability and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 41 
(a) applies in part, and AG ¶ 41(c) does not apply. 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
 
7 
 
 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 34 raise a security concern: 
 
(b) collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or 
in any other unauthorized location; 
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, or other information on any unapproved 
equipment including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or 
computer hardware, software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, 
"palm" or pocket device or other adjunct equipment; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information.  
 
 Applicant’s storage of passwords to classified systems and the combinations to 
classified safes on an unclassified computer violated NISPOM §§ 1-200. In addition, 
according to NISPOM 5-308(c) and §5-308(d), the combinations to classified containers 
that Applicant compiled between 2008 and 2010 would be classified at the highest level 
of the information stored in the containers. As classified information, the combination list 
was required to be stored only in classified computers. However, Applicant stored the 
list on her unclassified work computer. In February and March 2011, she transmitted it 
three times via her unclassified home email account to her unclassified home computer. 
AG ¶¶ 34(b), (c), and (g) apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 35 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns, including the 
following relevant conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and, 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
 
 Applicant stored classified information on her unclassified work computer 
between 2008 and 2010, three to five years ago. She emailed the information to her 
home unclassified computer two years ago. Her conduct is not recent. Although the file 
does not contain extensive information on Applicant's conduct since the event, it 
appears that she has received additional security training, and no further security 
 
8 
 
 
violations have occurred. Her conduct is not frequent. However, given her years of 
security training, Applicant's conduct raises questions about her reliability and judgment. 
AG ¶ 35(a) applies in part and AG ¶ 35(b) applies. Applicant received annual security 
training over many years; AG ¶ 35(c) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following conditions are relevant: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 For two years, Applicant maintained classified information on her unclassified 
work computer. She then sent that information to her home computer, which she knew 
to be unclassified. Her conduct demonstrated questionable judgment, unreliability, and 
a lack of awareness of her responsibilities toward classified information. AG ¶ 16(c) 
applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns under personal 
conduct guideline. The following conditions are relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 
9 
 
 
The offense Applicant committed is not minor: security violations undermine the 
industrial security program that protects classified information. Applicant's conduct casts 
doubt on her reliability. Regarding mitigating condition AG ¶ 17(d), Applicant has 
received additional security training, and states that she now understands the security 
rules, she has taken “this very hard,” and has learned from her errors. However, I 
balance these facts against the fact that Applicant engaged in this behavior over a 
period of three years, from 2008 to 2011. I cannot find that the situation is unlikely to 
recur, given that Applicant engaged in this behavior over an extensive period, during a 
time when she was receiving security training. AG ¶¶ 17 (c) and (d) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and 
circumstances. I have evaluated the facts and applied the appropriate adjudicative 
factors. I have reviewed the record in the context of the following whole-person factors:  
 
the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is 
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the 
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Without an in-person hearing, or further evidence of Applicant's performance and 
character through performance evaluations and references, I cannot fully assess her 
credibility and character. However, it appears from the record that she has positive 
attributes including her work for a defense contractor for the past 28 years.  
 
 However, Applicant engaged in serious security violations when she stored 
classified information on her unclassified work computer. She also transmitted that 
classified information via her unclassified email account three times, and then stored it 
on her unclassified home computer. Each time she left classified information on an 
unclassified computer—at work and at home—she placed that classified information at 
risk of disclosure. It is unlikely that Applicant was unaware of the prohibition against 
such actions--given her annual security training--or that she could have remained 
unaware of it for three years. The security personnel who were most familiar with the 
circumstances surrounding the events determined that she should receive a reprimand, 
have her security clearance suspended, be suspended from work for one week without 
pay, and be transferred to unclassified duties.  
 
 The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime event, but is 
based on applying the disqualifying and mitigating conditions to the evidence presented. 
Under Applicant’s current circumstances, a clearance is not warranted. Should she be 
 
10 
 
 
afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security clearance in the future, having 
established changed circumstances, she may be able to demonstrate evidence of 
security worthiness. However, the record evidence at this time fails to satisfy the doubts 
raised about Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by the cited 
adjudicative guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b  Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline K:   AGAINST Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b  Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline M:   AGAINST Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
