 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-03028 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 4, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. On May 17, 2014, Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
answered the SOR and requested a hearing. This case was assigned to me on August 
18, 2014. On September 12, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for September 26, 2014. The 
hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
5, while Applicant testified and offered a 66-page package of documents that was 
marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. The record of the proceeding was left open until 
October 3, 2014, to provide Applicant an opportunity to present additional matters. He 
submitted documents that were marked as AE B through D. All proffered exhibits were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was 
received on October 6, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
working for that employer since March 2010. He earned a high school equivalency 
certificate in 1984. He has been attending college since October 2010, but has not yet 
earned a degree. He served in the Air National Guard from August 1985 to January 
2008, attained the grade of master sergeant (E-7), and was medically retired. He has 
been married twice. He married his current wife in November 1990. He has four 
children, ages 9, 19, 23 and 29. Three of his children and a five-year-old granddaughter 
live with him and his wife. He has held a security clearance without incident since 
1985.1 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in September 2013 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) and that he had 22 delinquent debts totaling about $92,918 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
through 1.w). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations with the 
exception of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, which alleged $1,694 in past-due federal income 
taxes for 2010. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.2 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to a medical problem that resulted in 
periods of unemployment. From August 1985 to January 2007, Applicant worked as a 
full-time civilian employee for the Air National Guard. Throughout that period, he also 
served as a part-time drilling guardsman. In about 2006, he was diagnosed with a heart 
condition and deemed disabled. His heart disorder was originally considered to be an 
inoperable, fatal condition. In 2007, he was medically retired from his civilian and 
military positions with the Air National Guard. In June 2008, he underwent an 
experimental surgery that was successful. He then went through a recovery period of a 
year and a half. While disabled, he began to fall behind on his financial obligations. In 
November 2009, he was allowed to begin working again. He first had a couple of 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6-7, 25-27; GE 1; AE A. 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
seasonal part-time jobs with an intervening period of unemployment from about 
December 2009 to February 2010 before obtaining full-time employment.3  
 
In about March 2010, Applicant moved to another state to obtain his current job. 
At that time, he was unable to sell his home at the former location due to a poor housing 
market. He worked with the bank on a short sale, but those efforts were not successful. 
His family continued to reside in the home for about nine months before moving to 
Applicant’s present location. He eventually fell behind on the mortgage payments and 
surrendered the home back to the bank.4 
 
As a result of his financial problems, Applicant decided to file Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. The first lawyer that he hired became ill and was unable to complete the 
bankruptcy filing. He hired another lawyer and filed the bankruptcy petition in 
September 2013. The petition stated that he had $212,861 in assets and $272,793 in 
liabilities. The bankruptcy petition listed all of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 
1.w. In January 2014, Applicant was granted a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge.5 
 
In his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), Applicant 
listed that he owed the federal government about $1,500 for past-due income taxes for 
2010. This deficiency was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b and supposedly resulted from the tax 
consequences of Applicant withdrawing money from an individual retirement account. 
Applicant entered into an agreement to pay $100 per month to the IRS on this 
deficiency. In 2011, Applicant hired a lawyer to prepare his upcoming income tax return. 
The lawyer determined that Applicant improperly prepared his 2010 income tax return 
and that he was entitled to a refund for that year. Applicant filed an amended income tax 
return for 2010 and eventually obtained a refund for that year.6 
 
Since obtaining his current job, Applicant has been living within his means and 
has not incurred any new delinquent debts. His bankruptcy petition reflected that his 
and his wife’s average net monthly income was $5,487, their average monthly expenses 
were $5,408, which left them a monthly remainder of about $79. At the time of the 
hearing, they had about $2,200 in a checking account and about $100 in a savings 
account. Applicant’s wife has Lyme disease. Due to that medical condition, she has 
been unemployed and disabled since 2000. She was gainfully employed with an 
insurance company before her health problems. While her medical disorder is not a 
direct cause of the alleged financial problems, it has had a long-term negative impact on 
their potential earnings.7 
                                                          
3 Tr. 25-28, 32; GE 1, 2; AE A; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
4 Tr. 28-29, 35-37; GE 2. 
5 Tr. 29, 38; GE 2; AE D. 
6 Tr. 30-32; GE 1, 2; AE A.  
7 Tr. 39-43. 
 
4 
 
 
In a reference letter, Applicant’s manager indicated that Applicant was 
trustworthy and respected by managers and coworkers. His work performance 
evaluations reflect that he meets or exceeds expectations and is recognized as a strong 
contributor.8 
 
In the Air National Guard, Applicant was awarded the Air Force Commendation 
Medal and Air Force Achievement Medal. His enlisted evaluations reflected that he was 
an exceptional or outstanding performer. He received a number of cash and time-off 
awards.9 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
                                                          
8 AE A.  
9 AE A.  
 
5 
 
 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From about 2007 to 2010, Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was 
unable to satisfy. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
6 
 
 
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 From 1985 to 2007, Applicant was gainfully employed with the Air National 
Guard. In 2006, he was diagnosed with a serious medical condition and shortly 
thereafter medically retired. As a result of these circumstances beyond his control, he 
was unemployed for almost three years and fell behind on his financial obligations. 
Following a successful surgery and lengthy recuperation, he was cleared to begin 
working again. He filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy to resolve his financial problems. His 
debts were discharged in that bankruptcy in early 2014. Since he began working again, 
he has not incurred any new delinquent debts. His financial problems are unlikely to 
recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) apply. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. He provided 
sufficient documentation to satisfactorily dispute the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. AG ¶ 20(e) 
applies to the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
7 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant served in military and civilian capacities with the Air National Guard for 
22 years. He received many accolades for his Air National Guard service. In his current 
job, he is considered a strong contributor. He has resolved his financial problems 
through the bankruptcy process. With his financial problems behind him, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.w:  For Applicant 
    
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
