 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-03594 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On January 3, 2012, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On December 3, 2013, the Department of 
Defense issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 20, 2013. Applicant 
admitted four allegations and denied two of them. He tendered a separate letter of 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
explanation of his debts blaming his former wife. Applicant stated in a third document 
his request that the case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On January 24, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on February 11, 2014. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM 
on September 2, 2014, and stated he intended to respond to it. The file does not contain 
an explanation of why it took seven months for Applicant to receive the FORM. 
However, Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30-day time allowed 
that would have expired on October 2, 2014. I received the case assignment on 
November 3, 2014. Based upon a review of the complete case file, pleadings, and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b, and admitted the 
four remaining allegations. (Items 2-6)  
 
 Applicant is 58 years old, divorced, and has two adult children. He has worked 
for a defense contractor since 1979. Applicant’s financial statements show he has a 
weekly income of about $2,000. (Items 4-10) 
 
 Applicant’s SOR shows six delinquent debts. Two debts are duplicates and the 
Department Counsel withdrew the allegation in Subparagraph 1.d. because of that 
duplication. Applicant therefore owes five delinquent debts totaling $23,592. He has not 
repaid any of these debts. He contests several debts on the basis they were his former 
wife’s financial obligations and he has no duty to pay them, even though they are shown 
on the credit reports as joint accounts. His former wife filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy and 
Applicant asserts in “seven years he will be free,” presumably meaning his obligation to 
pay these five debts. (Items 4-10, Answer) 
 
 The delinquent debt listed in Subparagraph 1.a for $5,256 is for a gas bill on his 
marital home. He contends his estranged wife moved back into the home with one of 
their children. They allegedly arranged gas service, though Applicant’s documents claim 
it was an electric bill. He contends they did not pay the bill and he is not duty bound to 
pay it. The debt is owed from May 2011. The house is jointly owned. Applicant has not 
paid this debt. It is unresolved. (Items 1-10) 
 
 Applicant owes $288 on a cable television debt since July 2010 (Subparagraph 
1.b). This debt has been delinquent since July 2010. Applicant did not submit any 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
documents showing any payments made on this debt. This debt is unresolved. (Items 4-
10)  
 
 Applicant admits owing $7,457 to a bank for a line of credit (Subparagraph 1.c). 
This debt has been delinquent since March 2008. Applicant did not submit any 
documents showing that this debt is paid. It is unresolved. (Items 4-10) 
 
 Applicant owes $6,932 to a bank since November 2010 (Subparagraph 1.e). 
Applicant contends this debt results from his former wife’s business. He cosigned for the 
loan and it is joint account. Applicant claims he only owes half of this debt, but did not 
submit any documents showing any payments on any part of the debt by him. This debt 
is unresolved. (Items 4-10) 
 
 Applicant’s final debt owed is for $3,659 to a collection agency for a loan incurred 
for his former wife’s business (Subparagraph 1.f). Again, Applicant claims he owes only 
half of the amount shown on this joint account. He did not submit any documents to 
demonstrate he made any payments on any part of the debt. This debt is unresolved. 
(Items 4-10) 
 
 Applicant’s August 7, 2013 answers to the DOHA interrogatories show that 
Applicant admitted the debts and that he had not taken any action to resolve them. 
(Item 6) 
 
      Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2008 to the present, Applicant accumulated five delinquent debts which 
remain unpaid or unresolved. Those debts total $23,592. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 These debts have been delinquent for several years, were not infrequent, or 
occurred under unusual circumstances. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant has been employed continuously since 
1979. He failed to meet his burden of proof on that issue.  
 
Applicant has not sought or received any financial or budgetary counseling. AG ¶ 
20(c) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has not made any effort to repay any of these five debts. AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not apply.  
 
Applicant does not have a reasonable basis to contest any of these debts. He 
admits three of them and denies two debts. But he is the joint owner on all of the debts. 
Therefore, he is obligated to pay them. Also, he did not submit any documents to show 
any efforts to contest the debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
There is no affluence at issue in Applicant’s financial situation. Therefore, AG ¶ 
20(f) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts. Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts 
during the past six years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d:    Withdrawn as a duplicate of 1.c 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
