KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings were supported by substantial evidence.  The Appeal
Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Hearing Office decisions are not binding
precedent.  Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence.  The Judge considered non-alleged conduct for limited purposes consistent with
Appeal Board precedent.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 12-04293.a1
DATE: 11/24/2014
DATE: November 24, 2014
In Re:
---------------- 
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-04293
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 26, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On August 21, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
2
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors; whether the Judge considered all of the evidence; and whether the Judge’s adverse
decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact 
Applicant is employed by a Federal contractor and has worked for Federal contractors since
2011.  He served in the U.S. military from 1977 to 1981.  He received a security clearance in 2004.
He enjoys an excellent reputation for the quality of his duty performance.  Applicant and his wife
have no children from their marriage.  However, Applicant’s two adult stepsons live with him, as
does his teenage grandson.
Applicant’s SOR alleged four delinquent debts, three of which the Judge resolved against
Applicant.  Two of the adverse findings were for time-share vacation homes.  Applicant purchased
the first of these in the mid-1990s, his payments becoming delinquent about a year after purchase.
He made no effort to resolve this debt until he received the SOR.
Applicant and his wife filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2002 and were
discharged the following year.  He testified that a major reason for his bankruptcy is that he had
assumed responsibility for the care of his grandson, which entailed added expenses.  The time-share
debt was not included in the bankruptcy action.
Applicant purchased a computer for his grandson in 2006 or 2007.  He could not afford the
payments, so he stopped making them soon after the purchase.  The creditor charged off this debt
and referred it to collection.  In 2007, Applicant purchased another time-share.  He stopped making
payments soon thereafter.  He settled this debt in March 2014.  He testified that the purchase was
a “pressure sale.”  Decision at 3.  
Applicant submitted a personal financial statement in his response to DOHA interrogatories.
Among other things, this document shows debt payments to the IRS for taxes owed in 2009.  He
testified that he also owes taxes for tax years 2011 and 2012 due to insufficient withholding.  The
tax debts are not alleged in the SOR, nor was the bankruptcy petition.  The Judge stated that he was
considering these debts in evaluating Applicant’s credibility, his case for mitigation and/or
rehabilitation, and for the whole-person analysis.    
During his clearance interview, Applicant discussed his bankruptcy and his more recent time
share debt.  He did not recognize several of the debts listed in his credit report, although he later
demonstrated that he had resolved or disputed a number of debts not alleged in the SOR.
After receiving the SOR, Applicant borrowed money from his retirement account and used
it for debt resolution.  He demonstrated that he had resolved both time share debts, but, as stated
above, he did not corroborate his claim that the computer debt had been paid.
3
The Judge’s Analysis
Although the Judge cleared Applicant for a debt arising from an automobile loan, he
concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the concerns arising from the two time share properties
and the computer debt.  He stated that Applicant did not take action to resolve these debts until he
had received the SOR, that he addressed his delinquencies by taking on new debt in the form of a
loan from his retirement plan, and that he had not received financial counseling except to the extent
required by bankruptcy law.  The Judge stated that payments motivated by pressure to qualify for
a clearance do not show sufficient prudence or adherence to duty as to constitute good-faith efforts
to resolve debts.  
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s military service to the U.S. and
that he has held a clearance for several years.  He also noted that Applicant has been generous to his
stepsons and grandson.  However, the Judge stated that Applicant had demonstrated bad financial
judgment, making purchases that he could not afford.  He cited to evidence that Applicant had
bought the second time share during a time of financial trouble and that he had bought the computer
soon after he had surrendered his automobile due to missed payments.  He again noted that
Applicant had begun addressing his debts only after having received the SOR.
Discussion
Applicant challenges a number of the Judge’s findings of fact, citing evidence that provides
context for them.  Among other things, he asserts that the computer debt has been resolved.  We
have considered Applicant’s arguments in light of the record.  The Judge’s finding about the
computer debt is consistent with the record that was before him.  Even if this finding were
erroneous, it did not likely affect the overall disposition of the case.  After considering the totality
of Applicant’s arguments, we conclude that the Judge’s material findings of security concern are
supported by substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the
evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 13-12407 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2014).   Applicant has not
cited to any harmful error in the Judge’s findings. 
Applicant submitted new evidence with his appeal brief.  We cannot consider new evidence
on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  
To the extent that Applicant is arguing that the Judge did not consider favorable record
evidence, such as the expense he has undergone as result of caring for his grandson and his efforts
at debt resolution, we note that a Judge is presumed to have considered all of the evidence in the
record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-00723 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2014).  The Judge made explicit
findings about much of the evidence Applicant has cited.  Applicant’s argument on appeal is not
sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence, nor does it show
that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  
Applicant cites to other Hearing Office cases, arguing that they support his effort to obtain
a clearance.  We give these cases due consideration.  However, Hearing Office decisions are not
4
binding on other Hearing Office Judge’s or on the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-
04508 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 21, 2014).  Applicant argues that his duties do not actually require him
to view classified information.  We do not have authority to rule on this matter.  Our jurisdiction is
limited to those issues set forth in Directive ¶ E3.1.32.  
Applicant challenges the Judge’s consideration of non-alleged conduct, such as the
bankruptcy action and the IRS debt.  The Judge stated that he was considering these matters for the
limited purposes set forth in our prior cases.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-03598 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct.
10, 2012).  We find no reason to believe that the Judge treated this evidence in any other way. 
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  The Judge properly considered both the
circumstances underlying Applicant’s financial problems as well as evidence that his payments post-
date the SOR.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-12803 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 21, 2014) (In Guideline F
cases a Judge should consider the reasons for an applicant’s financial problems as well as his or her
efforts to resolve them); ISCR Case No. 12-00734, supra, at 4 (Timing of debt repayment is relevant
in Guideline F cases).  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly
consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.   
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
