The Government submitted seven items in support of its case.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-02050
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On July 30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under DOD Regulation 5200.2-R,
Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation); DOD
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG),
implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision based on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated September 25, 2014.  Applicant received the FORM on1
October 3, 2014. He timely  submitted  additional information for the record. I received
the case assignment on November 18, 2014. Based on a review of the case file, I find
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised. Eligibility for a clearance is
granted.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations under Guideline F,
¶¶ 1.a-1.d with explanation. (Item 1)
Applicant is 28 years old. He is employed with a defense contractor. He
graduated from high school in May 2003 and attended college full time from 2003 until
2007, but has not obtained a degree. Applicant  is single. He has been employed with
his current employer since April 2010. On October 25, 2011, he completed a security
clearance application. (Item 4) 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling approximately $23,600,
including  student loans, a charged-off account, and unpaid federal taxes for tax year
2011 (Item 1) Credit reports confirm the debts. (Items 6 and 7) 
Applicant explained in his Answer that his financial issues began when he was
unemployed from May 2008 to October 2008. He also was unemployed for a time in
2009. The unemployment in conjunction with low paying jobs contributed to his financial
issues.  Applicant has a number of student loans, which he could not pay. He has paid
other non-SOR debts. He maintained that he has made payment on his student loans
or entered into agreements to do so.
In December 2011, during an investigative interview, Applicant explained that he
made contact with creditors and paid some of his other debts, and he had every
intention of paying all of them. Regarding his student loans, Applicant stated that the
state student loan (SOR 1.a) had a balance of $10,0000. He obtained a three-month
financial hardship forbearance. The forbearance ended on January 31, 2012. (Item 6)
He expects to make monthly payments of $100 until the account is paid in full. 
When Applicant answered DOHA interrogatories, he admitted the SOR debts,
and stated that he is making payments to the charged-off account (SOR 1.b) but did not
submit proof of payments. He stated that he had not taken any action with respect to
the $395 debt. (SOR 1.c)
When Applicant responded to the FORM, he explained that he originally
obtained three private student loans, in addition to a number of federal student loans.
He explained that he was unable to consolidate the private student loans, as they were
based on credit scores. He consolidated other federal student loans. He stated that one
private student loan is in good standing. He acknowledges that this is not listed on the
SOR.
In response to the form, Applicant submitted documentation concerning the
student loans. The private student loan (SOR 1.a) defaulted. However, in 2014,
Applicant reestablished a payment plan with this creditor. Applicant has an agreement
for 62 months of payment, of $200 per month, with an expected pay-off date of May 17,
3
2019. He submitted his last payment of $200 on October 27, 2014. (Response to
FORM) 
Applicant provided documentation that the second private student loan (SOR
1.b) was originally $13,906. However, it is now $10,881. Applicant maintains that he
has made consistent payments on the loan since 2013. He provided documentation
that payments of varying amounts began in March 2011 and continued through October
2014. (Response to FORM) 
Applicant has not resolved the debt of $395 (SOR 1.c). He states that he
attempted to pay the debt in 2013, but has now avoided pursuing the account. He
admits that he wants to pay when he visits the college in the future. He also stated that
he has no evidence of his efforts to satisfy the debt. (Response to FORM)
As to SOR 1.d, Applicant provided notification from the IRS with a listed amount
of $135.55. He provided the copy of a check to the United States Treasury for 2011
overdue taxes. This account is resolved. (Response to FORM)
Applicant included receipts from automobile bills for repairs. These costs
hindered paying more on his student loans. 
Applicant’s net monthly income is $2,723. He has monthly expenses of $1,800.
He listed a net remainder of $223. He noted that he was paying three separate student
loans on a monthly basis. (Item 5) There is no information in the record indicating that
Applicant obtained financial counseling. He noted in his 2014 personal financial
statement that he had a savings account and some stocks. He listed total assets as
$8,284. 
Policies   
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a security clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
5
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. “An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.”
Applicant’s admissions and credit reports establish the collection accounts
delinquent debts, student loans, and unpaid federal taxes. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations)
apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against
him and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” “An unpaid debt is a
continuing course of conduct for the purposes of DOHA adjudications.”  ISCR Case No.
10-11083 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2012). Applicant still has unresolved delinquent debt.
He has provided sufficient documentation that he has addressed three of the four SOR
debts. The status of the student loans has changed due to other expenses that
Applicant incurred. He has begun to make payments again in 2014.. The delinquent
obligations remain. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC
MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) partially applies.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies. Applicant’s financial
difficulties occurred due to a lower income and unemployment. His original payment
plans were interrupted but Applicant has again started a repayment plan for the student
loans. He resolved his tax issue. He receives partial credit under this mitigating
condition. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) partially applies. Applicant paid the 2011 federal
tax. He has begun a payment plan for student loans. He paid other non SOR creditors.
He has not resolved one debt of $395, but he intends to resolve the debt. He has
presented sufficient information to show mitigation. He did not present evidence that he
received financial counseling. AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem) does not apply. Given the ultimate burden, I find that there
are clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved and are under
control. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
6
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 28 years old. He has worked for his current employer since April 2010. It is
not clear from the record whether he previously held a security clearance. Applicant
attended college and obtained student loans so that he could attend the classes. He is
trying to educate himself and develop skills to aid in employment. He had payment
plans which he disclosed on his security clearance application. He has paid non SOR
debts. He has a track record of making payments on the student loans. An applicant
does not have to have paid all his delinquent debts to mitigate the security concern
under financial considerations guideline.  
Applicant relied on the written record and did not have a hearing. However, when
he responded to the FORM, he submitted a detailed explanation and provided
documentation of his efforts to satisfy his student loans. He resolved his federal tax
debt. He submitted sufficient information and supplemented the record with relevant
and material facts and proof of payments.  Applicant has mitigated the security
concerns under the financial considerations guideline.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
