 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----  )  ISCR Case No. 12-00800 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 14, 2011, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On March 27, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility – Division B (CAF-B) issued him a set of 
interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on April 24, 2013.2 On June 9, 
2014, the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility – Division A (CAF-A) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 ((SF 86), dated October 14, 2011). 
 
2
 GE 2 (Answers to Interrogatories, dated April 24, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guidelines E (Personal Conduct) and F (Financial Considerations), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 16, 2014. In an undated sworn statement, 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to 
proceed on August 29, 2014. The case was assigned to me on September 2, 2014. A 
Notice of Hearing was issued on September 2, 2014, and I convened the hearing, as 
scheduled, on September 19, 2014. 
 
 During the hearing, five Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 5) and three 
Applicant exhibits (AE A through AE C) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on September 29, 2014. I kept the 
record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took advantage of that 
opportunity. He submitted six documents which were marked as AE D through AE I and 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record closed on September 29, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 2.a. through 2.t.). He denied all of the 
allegations regarding personal conduct (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.). Applicant’s answers are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for which he has 
worked since June 2008.3 He also works five or six evenings per week at a home 
improvement store.4 Applicant graduated from high school in June 1994.5 He attended a 
university from September 1994 until June 1995. Because of academic probation and a 
pending one semester suspension, he was confronted with either paying for college by 
himself or joining the military, so he joined the U.S. Navy.6 He served on active duty in 
an enlisted capacity with the U.S. Navy from November 1995 until November 1999, and 
                                                          
3
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 8.  
 
4
 Tr. at 37; GE 2, supra note 2, at 12, 40-41. 
 
5
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated November 1, 2011), at 1. 
 
6
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 5, at 4. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
with the U.S. Army National Guard from November 2000 until November 2001.7 He 
received honorable discharges from both services.8 Applicant held an interim security 
clearance for one year, but recently lost it.9 Applicant married his first wife in June 1999, 
and divorced her in January 2005.10 He married his second wife in March 2010,11 and 
separated from her in August 2014.12 He has a son (born in 2000) and a daughter (born 
in 2004) with his first wife, and a daughter (born in 2008) with his second wife.13 
 
Military Service 
 
 During his four years of active duty, Applicant was awarded the National Defense 
Service Medal, the Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal, the Sea Service Deployment 
Ribbon, a Letter of Commendation, and a Meritorious Unit Commendation.14  
 
Financial Considerations 
Applicant was unemployed from July 2005 until November 2005. During that 
period he did not receive unemployment compensation, and lived off his savings and 
with financial assistance provided by his parents.15 He was also unemployed from 
January 2008 until June 2008, but during that period he did receive unemployment 
compensation and did not experience any financial hardship.16 It is unclear as to when 
Applicant started having problems with his finances, but there is evidence that following 
his 2005 divorce, he became delinquent on child support payments,17 and other 
accounts became delinquent as early as 2008. He periodically skipped child support 
payments, at one point falling about $6,855 in arrears, because he did not have enough 
money to make those payments, but he is now current with those payments.18 Applicant 
generally attributed his medical delinquencies to his youngest daughter’s having to 
spend seven months in a neonatal intensive care unit followed by one year on a 
                                                          
7
 AE D (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty (DD Form 214), dated November 26, 1999); 
GE 1, supra note 1, at 15.  
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 15-16. 
 
9
 Tr. at 58. But see GE 1, supra note 1, at 30. 
 
10
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 19; Tr. at 24. 
 
11
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 19. 
 
12
 Tr. at 60, 71. 
 
13
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 21-22. 
 
14
 AE D, supra note 7. 
 
15
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 5, at 2. 
 
16
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 5, at 1. 
 
17
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 5, at 3. 
 
18
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 5, at 3; AE H (Earnings Statement, dated March 7, 2014); 
AE I (Earnings Statement, dated August 22, 2014); GE 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit 
Report, dated October 20, 2011), at 9. 
 
4 
                                      
 
ventilator, and suggested that some of the medical accounts may have become 
delinquent because medical claims were not filed with the appropriate insurance 
carriers.19  
In April 2013, Applicant furnished a Personal Financial Statement that reflected a 
net family monthly income of $4,735.82 (including his wife’s net salary of $1,400), 
estimated total monthly expenses of $2,817, debt payments of $265, and $1,653.82 
available for discretionary spending or savings each month.20 During the hearing, 
Applicant acknowledged that he could no longer include his wife’s salary in his monthly 
income, and that there were some changes in his debt balance with some new 
expenses (including monthly payments of $150 to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
for unpaid 2012 income taxes)21 and one expired expense for a paid-off vehicle. Based 
on the new facts, he estimated only $.83 available for discretionary spending or savings 
each month.22 Rather than relying on speculation, Applicant stated he would furnish an 
updated Personal Financial Statement.23 He failed to do so. 
In November 2011, Applicant contended that, with the exception of various 
medical accounts, he was current with all of his accounts, and that he was able to meet 
his financial obligations.24 He also indicated that he had not sought any credit 
counseling or debt consolidation services.25 In May 2013, because of his perceived poor 
money management, Applicant engaged a financial counseling service. His goals were 
to resolve his debts, manage his finances, and save for emergencies. The program was 
anticipated to assist him to develop a monthly budget, reduce or eliminate certain 
expenses, determine debt repayment plan options, and establish a debt management 
plan forecast.26 Applicant’s action plan called for him to immediately pay one account 
(SOR ¶ 2.m.), obtain credit reports and dispute errors in those reports, pay other 
accounts, and possibly enroll in a debt solver program.27 As of April 2013, Applicant had 
not taken any action to address the one identified account.28 He indicated that he 
intended to address all of his delinquent accounts at a “debt consolidation appointment” 
in May 2013.29 Although Applicant discussed his delinquent accounts with an 
                                                          
19
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 4, at 5. 
 
20
 GE 2 (Personal Financial Statement, undated). 
 
21
 AE G (IRS Account Transcript, dated September 22, 2014). 
 
22
 Tr. at 60-63. 
 
23
 Tr. at 62-63. 
 
24
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 4, at 6. 
 
25
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 4, at 6. 
 
26
 AE C (Case Action Plan, undated); GE 2, supra note 2, at 45; Tr. at 63. 
 
27
 AE C, supra note 25, at 2. 
 
28
 GE 2, supra note 2, at 22. 
 
29
 GE 2, supra note 2, at 25. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in November 2011, 
he never subsequently asked his wife – the person who purportedly handled the family 
finances – if she was aware of those delinquent accounts.30 In September 2014, 
Applicant acknowledged he had not yet followed through on the remainder of the action 
plan.31 He had not identified the creditors, and did not decide whether or not to 
consolidate the debts or simply pay them off individually.32 
The SOR identified 20 delinquent debts totaling approximately $7,028 that had 
been placed for collection, as generally reflected by an October 2011 credit report,33 a 
March 2013 credit report,34 and a March 2014 credit report.35 All but one of the accounts 
listed in the SOR are for medical accounts which do not identify the actual creditor. 
Although he admitted he owed the debts, Applicant is unsure if any of the alleged debts 
are duplications.36 Those debts listed in the SOR and their respective current status, 
according to the credit reports, other evidence submitted by the Government and 
Applicant, and Applicant’s comments regarding same, are described below. 
(SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.l., and 2.n. through 2.t.): There are 19 delinquent medical 
accounts with varying amounts from $35 to $4,000 that were placed for collection. While 
Applicant indicated in April 2013 that he made payment arrangements with the 
creditors, he acknowledged that no payments had actually been made.37 He submitted 
no documentation to support his claim that payment arrangements had been made, and 
based on his subsequent testimony, it appears that no such arrangements were ever 
actually made. The accounts have not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 2.m. for $35): There is a parking ticket issued in 2010 that Applicant had 
forgotten about that was placed for collection.38 He indicated that it should have been 
submitted to his employer for payment, but he failed to do so. He later found it in his 
automobile in November 2011 and promised to pay it the same day as his OPM 
interview.39 As of April 2013, he had not done so.40 During the hearing, he admitted he 
still had not paid the ticket.41 The account has not been resolved. 
                                                          
30
 Tr. at 80-81. 
 
31
 Tr. at 69-74. 
 
32
 Tr. at 73-74. 
 
33
 GE 5, supra note 18. 
 
34
 GE 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated March 7, 2013). 
 
35
 GE 3 (Equifax Credit Report, dated March 26, 2014). 
 
36
 Tr. at 70. 
 
37
 GE 2, supra note 2, at 13-25. 
 
38
 GE 5, supra note 18, at 6. 
 
39
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 4, at 6. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
Personal Conduct 
 In December 1994, Applicant shared a dorm room while attending college. His 
roommate had four to five friends in the room when the campus police showed up and 
inquired about drugs. Applicant’s roommate pulled marijuana from behind a television. 
Applicant and his roommate were charged with possession of marijuana. Applicant was 
subsequently given a prayer for judgment and fined $60. The university imposed 
community service and placed him on a drug and alcohol probation.42  
 
 In December 1997, while on active duty with the U.S. Navy, Applicant was tried 
by Special Court Martial for methamphetamine use. He confessed to such use during 
the pre-trial investigation, but when a cooperating witness was unable to corroborate 
Applicant’s confession, the charges against Applicant were dismissed.43 Applicant’s 
memory of the events differs from the NCIS report in that he contends he never 
confessed to using methamphetamine and claimed he did not know his shipmates were 
doing so.44 In this instance, because of Applicant’s poor memory as to certain events, I 
conclude that the NCIS record of Applicant’s confession is more reliable than his 
subsequent denial of such confession. 
 
 On October 14, 2011, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he responded to a 
question pertaining to his police record. The question in Section 22 – Police Record 
asked if he had “EVER been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs?” 
Applicant answered “yes” to the question, and reported that in December 1995, his 
roommate in college was cited for possession of marijuana by the campus police in their 
dorm room. He added that since the room was for them both, they were both charged. 
He certified that the response was “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his 
knowledge and belief, but the response to that question was, in fact, both incomplete 
and false for Applicant had concealed his 1997 charge for methamphetamine use.  
  
 In that same SF 86, Applicant responded to certain questions pertaining to his 
financial record. One question in Section 26 – Financial Record (Delinquency Involving 
Enforcement) asked if, in the last seven years, he had been delinquent on alimony or 
child support payments. Applicant answered “no” to the question. He certified that the 
response was “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief, but 
the response to that question was, in fact, false for Applicant had, at one point, a child 
support arrearage of $6,855 before he established a monthly payroll deduction and 
purportedly eliminated the arrearage. Applicant subsequently explained he has a 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
40
 GE 2, supra note 2, at 22. 
 
41
 Tr. at 56. 
 
42
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 4, at 4. 
 
43
 GE 6 (Naval Criminal Investigative Service (NCIS) Report of Investigation, dated February 4, 1998); Tr. at 
49. 
 
44
 Tr. at 42-46. 
 
7 
                                      
 
“horrible memory” and was simply mistaken about the time period. He denied 
attempting to mislead anyone.45 
  
 Other questions in Section 26 – Financial Record (Delinquency Involving Routine 
Accounts) asked if, in the last seven years, he had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency; been over 120 days delinquent on any debt not previously entered, 
and if he was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt. Applicant answered “no” 
to all of those questions. He certified that the responses were “true, complete, and 
correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief, but the responses to those questions 
were, in fact, false for Applicant had concealed approximately seven of his collection 
accounts that were listed in his October 2011 credit report.  
  
 When Applicant was interviewed by the OPM investigator in November 2011, he 
denied ever using, selling, distributing, or manufacturing any illegal drugs, including 
marijuana.46 Applicant subsequently admitted using marijuana while in college.47 He 
had also confessed to using methamphetamine when he was interviewed during his 
NCIS pre-trial investigation. 
 
Work Performance and Character References 
 Applicant’s work performance ratings now reflect someone who consistently 
exceeds the normal expectations for his position.48 That rating is an improvement over 
his previous one which reflected someone whose performance is between consistently 
performing all duties of the position in a fully capable manner and one who consistently 
exceeds the normal expectations for his position.49 His employer’s Chief Security Officer 
has known Applicant since 2008 and she fully supports his application, without 
reservation, for a security clearance. She characterized him as an extremely hard 
worker, mission-focused, diligently professional, and unconditionally loyal to co-workers, 
friends, and family.50  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”51 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
                                                          
45
 Tr. at 53. 
 
46
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 4, at 4-5. 
 
47
 Tr. at 51. 
 
48
 AE F (Performance Review, dated March 21, 2014). 
 
49
 AE E (Performance Review, dated April 1, 2013). 
 
50
 AE A (Character Reference, dated September 15, 2014). 
 
51
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”52   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”53 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.54  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
                                                          
52
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
53
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
54
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”55 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”56 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise 
security concerns. Applicant encountered some financial difficulties following his divorce 
in 2005 when he fell behind in his child support payments. Other significant financial 
problems arose in 2008, following the birth of his youngest daughter, and those financial 
problems continue to the present. He was unable to continue making his routine 
monthly payments, and various accounts became delinquent and were placed for 
collection. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Also, under AG 
                                                          
55
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
56
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. Evidence 
that the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.57  
AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) minimally apply. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) do not apply. The 
nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties 
initially since about 2005, with additional financial difficulties appearing in 2008, make it 
difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” While there is 
evidence that some of his initial financial difficulties may have been caused by his 
unemployment, first divorce, and other unspecified financial hardships, without more 
detailed explanations, it is difficult to assess to what degree those financial hardships 
were beyond Applicant’s control. The financial difficulties which occurred after the birth 
of his youngest daughter might possibly have been beyond his control, but there is also 
evidence that he failed to insure that his medical claims were properly submitted to the 
appropriate insurance carriers. Other than the generalities of child support claims and 
medical claims, Applicant has not provided any specifics as to the causes of his 
financial difficulties.  
What he did furnish were comments that he was unable to continue making his 
monthly payments due to unspecified financial hardships; he forgot about submitting or 
paying one creditor; he could not identify the medical providers for his daughter; he did 
not discuss the delinquent accounts with his wife; and he could not decide whether or 
not to consolidate his delinquent accounts or pay them off individually.  
Applicant received guidance and assistance from a financial counseling service 
to resolve his debts, manage his finances, and save for emergencies. The program was 
anticipated to assist him to develop a monthly budget, reduce or eliminate certain 
expenses, determine debt repayment plan options, and establish a debt management 
plan forecast. Applicant’s action plan called for him to immediately pay one account, 
                                                          
57
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
obtain credit reports and dispute errors in those reports, pay other accounts, and 
possibly enroll in a debt solver program. As of April 2013, Applicant had not taken any 
action to address the one identified account, and in September 2014, he acknowledged 
he had not yet followed through on the remainder of the action plan. During the three 
years following his OPM interview, Applicant has taken no action to resolve even the 
smallest ($35) of his delinquent debts.  
Applicant contends that all of his newer accounts are current, and that he intends 
to resolve the remaining accounts, something he has repeatedly stated in the past. 
However, in the absence of a current personal financial statement or documentary 
evidence that he has taken some recent steps to make small payments or negotiate 
reasonable repayment plans or settlements, an assessment of his intentions and ability 
to take meaningful action remains difficult. There are clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are not under control. His actions under the circumstances 
confronting him, and lingering questions regarding his candor, do cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.58 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Also, deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to 
an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official 
government representative, may raise security concerns under AG ¶ 16(b). 
 As noted above, on October 14, 2011, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he 
responded to certain questions pertaining to his police and financial records. The 
                                                          
58
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
question in Section 22 – Police Record asked if he had “EVER been charged with an 
offense involving alcohol or drugs?” Applicant answered “yes” to the question, and 
reported that in December 1995, his roommate in college was cited for possession of 
marijuana by the campus police in their dorm room. He added that since the room was 
for them both, they were both charged. His response to that question was, in fact, both 
incomplete and false for Applicant had concealed his 1997 charge for 
methamphetamine use. 
  
 In that same SF 86, Applicant responded to certain questions pertaining to his 
financial record. One question in Section 26 – Financial Record (Delinquency Involving 
Enforcement) asked if, in the last seven years, he had been delinquent on alimony or 
child support payments. Applicant answered “no” to the question. The response to that 
question was, in fact, false for Applicant had, at one point, a child support arrearage of 
$6,855 before he established a monthly payroll deduction and purportedly eliminated 
the arrearage. Applicant subsequently explained he has a “horrible memory” and was 
simply mistaken about the time period. He denied attempting to mislead anyone. 
  
 Other questions in Section 26 – Financial Record (Delinquency Involving Routine 
Accounts) asked if, in the last seven years, he had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency; been over 120 days delinquent on any debt not previously entered; 
and if he was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt. Applicant answered “no” 
to all of those questions. His responses to those questions were, in fact, false for 
Applicant had concealed approximately seven of his collection accounts that were listed 
in his October 2011 credit report.  
 
 When Applicant was interviewed by the OPM investigator in November 2011, he 
denied ever using, selling, distributing, or manufacturing any illegal drugs, including 
marijuana. However, as noted above, Applicant subsequently admitted using marijuana 
while in college. He did not mention his confession regarding his use of 
methamphetamine during his Special Court Martial in 1997.  
 
 Applicant denied the false responses were deliberate or an attempt to falsify the 
material facts. I have considered Applicant’s background and professional career in 
analyzing his actions. Applicant is a talented and experienced individual, but his 
explanations, to be accepted, require that a substantial degree of unreasonableness be 
ignored. If Applicant had acknowledged the deliberate nature of his actions and 
expressed that it was foolish on his part to have falsified his responses and concealed 
the truth, his actions might have been considered aberrant behavior out of character for 
him. However, Applicant clings to his explanations.  His position is unreasonable. AG ¶¶ 
16(a) and 16(b) have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(a) may apply if the individual made 
prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before 
being confronted with the facts. If the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, 
or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
 
13 
                                      
 
or good judgment, AG ¶ 17(c) may apply. Also, AG ¶ 17(d) may apply if the individual 
has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or 
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that 
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.59       
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He served 
honorably with both the U.S. Navy and the U.S. Army National Guard. He has been with 
his current employer since June 2008, and is apparently well-respected by his employer. 
He has a part-time job to generate additional funds. He paid off his child support 
arrearage.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:60 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
                                                          
59
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
60
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
14 
                                      
 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s meaningful track record is not one of actual debt reduction through payment 
of debts. Applicant received guidance and assistance from a financial counseling 
service to resolve his debts, manage his finances, and save for emergencies. His action 
plan called for him to immediately pay one account, obtain credit reports and dispute 
errors in those reports, pay other accounts, and possibly enroll in a debt solver program. 
As of September 2014, he acknowledged he had not yet followed through on any 
provision of the action plan. In his answers to the interrogatories, Applicant claimed that 
he had made payment arrangements with his creditors, but it appears that his claim was 
untrue. During the three years following his OPM interview, Applicant has taken no 
action to resolve even the smallest ($35) of his delinquent debts. Applicant’s actual 
track record is one of stalling or simply failing to make payments or enter into 
reasonable settlement arrangements with creditors.  
When Applicant completed his SF 86 and was subsequently interviewed by the 
OPM investigator, he responded to various questions, but the responses to the 
questions were, in fact, false. He denied the responses were deliberate or an attempt to 
falsify the material facts. For Applicant’s explanations to be accepted, it would require 
that a substantial degree of unreasonableness be ignored. Accordingly, I have 
concluded that he deliberately falsified his responses in an attempt to conceal the truth 
about his police record and financial problems. Overall, the evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from his financial considerations and personal conduct issues. See AG 
¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
15 
                                      
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 2.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.g:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 2.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.k:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 2.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.m:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.o:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.p:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 2.q:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.r:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.s:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.t:    Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
