                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  12-11803           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.  
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On February 4, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 28, 2014, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on August 20, 2014, and was scheduled for hearing on October
23, 2014. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5).
Applicant relied on four witnesses (including himself) and 27 exhibits (AEs A-AA). The
transcript (Tr.) was received on November  3, 2014. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to withdraw the
allegations covered by subparagraph 1.i of the SOR.  For good cause shown, Department
Counsel’s motion was accepted. 
Prior to the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documentation of his student
loan payments relative to his accounts covered by subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g. For good
cause shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to supplement the record. The Government
was afforded seven days to respond. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with a personal
financial statement, correspondence from creditor 1.m, a distinguished service award
from his former police department employer, and payments on his student loan accounts.
Applicant’s post-hearing submissions were admitted as AEs BB-JJ.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) petitioned for Chapter 7 relief in
November 2011 and was discharged in March 2002; (b) incurred a delinquent federal tax
debt of $925; (c) incurred a delinquent state tax debt of $1,095; and (d) accumulated 10
delinquent consumer debts exceeding $38,000.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted some of the allegations and denied
others. He claimed his federal tax debt (subparagraph 1.b) and student loan debts
(subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g) have since been brought current, while other debts were paid
(subparagraph 1.i) He attributed many of his financial difficulties to his wife’s diagnosed
depression. 
Applicant claimed he has made concerted efforts to address his debts since he
discovered his past-due accounts. And he claimed he has dedicated himself to helping
his community and country and received awards from his local police department and
U.S. government agencies who recognized his hard work and contributions.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 47-year-old intelligence analyst for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 64) The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
3
Background
Applicant married in June 1995 and has three children from this marriage. (GE 1;
Tr. 19, 67) He earned a bachelors of science degree in January 1989 and acquired
graduate school credits between September 2007 and December 2008. Applicant
claimed no military service.  He has held security clearances with a previous employer.
(Tr. 65-66)  For over 20 years Applicant was employed by a major-city police department
and retired in 2011 with the rank of detective lieutenant. (GE 1; Tr. 65) 
Applicant’s wife of almost 30 years is currently employed on a full-time basis. (Tr.
20, 30) Previously, she was employed part-time by a law firm. (Tr. 31)
Applicant’s finances
Prior to 2002, Applicant’s wife managed their finances and did not keep up with
their bill payments. He attributed his wife’s payment lapses to her medical depression
condition. (GE 2; Tr. 21, 31-32, 69-69, and 77)  Asked about her circumstances in 2001,
she acknowledged her medical issues (primarily depression), her loss of employment,
and her failure to keep Applicant properly informed of her failure to pay their bills in a
timely way. (Tr. 67-69)  She took prescribed medications (mainly Prozac) for her
depression condition. 
After Applicant’s wife lost her job in 2001 (Tr. 21-22), both encountered sustained
difficulties in paying their bills. (Tr. 22) Unable to work out payment plans with their
creditors, they jointly petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. (GE 5; Tr. 211-22,
25) In their petition, they scheduled $150,000 in secured debts (including a $120,000 first
mortgage on their home), and $40,000 to $50,000 in unsecured debts. (Tr. 93-95) Their
debts were discharged in March 2002. (GEs 2 and 5 and AE A; Tr. 66). The first trust
mortgagee later foreclosed on its trust deed, which did not produce enough sale proceeds
to satisfy the second mortgagee’s secured interest. (Tr. 94-97)
For the first 10 years following their bankruptcy discharge, Applicant and his wife
were able to maintain their bills in current status with some input from Applicant. (Tr. 22-
23)  In 2011, Applicant’s wife experienced a major depressive episode. (Tr. 23, 72, and
79) Unable to focus on her financial responsibilities while in a depressive state of mind,
Applicant’s wife ceased paying their bills. (Tr. 23, 67-68, and 80) 
In 2013, Applicant became delinquent in his federal taxes ($925) and state taxes
($1,095) for the tax year of 2012. (GE 2; Tr. 36-37)  He has since satisfied his federal tax
debt and received a confirming letter from the IRS of his satisfying his tax debt. (AE B; Tr.
25, 36, and 70)  And in 2013, he entered into an installment agreement with his state’s
comptroller to pay off the delinquent state tax balance. He has since satisfied the $315
owing on his installment agreement with the state. (AE C; Tr. 25, 70) 
Applicant obtained two student Government-guaranteed loans in October 2007:
one for $12,000 and another for $8,500. (GEs 2-4) Terms of payment on these loans was
4
$667 a month on the $12,000 loan and $419 a month on the $8,500 loan. (GE 4) Both of
these accounts (creditors 1.f and 1.g) became delinquent and were assigned to the
Government in December 2012 in accordance with their terms of payment. In January
2014, Applicant entered into a repayment agreement with the collection agent for his
student loan creditors. (AEs E and F) Since January 2014, Applicant has maintained
these accounts in current status with agreed $500 monthly payments.  (AEs EE-JJ; Tr.
26, 41-42, 67-68, and 71)
Between 2007 and 2012, Applicant accumulated delinquent consumer loan debts
exceeding $15,000. (GEs 2-4) These debts are identified in Applicant’s credit reports as
follows: creditor 1.d ($329); creditor 1.e ($1,097); creditor 1.h ($177); creditor 1.i ($2,470);
creditor 1.j ($893); creditor 1.k ($536); creditor 1.l ($552); and creditor 1.m ($1,093). (GEs
2-4)  Applicant attributed his account delinquencies to his wife’s medical condition and her
failure to maintain the accounts in current status. (GE 2; Tr. 23-24, 34) 
Since learning of the delinquencies in these accounts in June 2013, or
thereabouts, he has made diligent efforts to pay them off. (GE 2; Tr. 24, 67-68) With a
more effective set of prescribed medications, Applicant’s wife is medically sound and able
to resume her payment responsibilities. (Tr. 22, 29-32, 38, 72 and 75)
Applicant documented his payment or successful resolution of his debts with
creditor 1.d (AE D); creditor 1.h (AE X); creditor 1.i (since withdrawn by Department
Counsel); and creditor 1.k (GE 3 and AEs P-Q, T, and Y). Neither Applicant nor his wife
could identify the remaining debts listed in the SOR (i.e., creditors 1.e, 1.j, 1.l, and 1.m),
and Applicant continues to dispute these listed debts. (AEs G, I-K, P-O, T, Y, and CC; Tr.
26-29, 39, 48-52, 70-71, and 73-74) These creditors have not responded to their
inquiries, and the debts no longer appear on Applicant’s updated credit reports. (AEs P-
Q, T, and Y; Tr. 65-66) 
Applicant has not received any financial counseling since he completed his
required on-line counseling course associated with his 2001 Chapter 7 bankruptcy
petition. (Tr. 76) He reported net monthly income of $11,564 for himself and his wife.
Compare AEs R and Z with BB. He reported monthly expenses of $7,088, debt payments
of $1,250, and a net monthly remainder of $3,226. (AE BB) Applicant and his wife
currently own their own home, and they are current in their mortgage payments. (AE BB;
Tr. 67)
Awards and endorsements
In recognition of his meritorious efforts as a member of his local police employer,
Applicant received numerous awards. (Aes N-O; Tr. 65-66) He is well-regarded by his
friends and colleagues who know him. (AE AA; Tr. 53-62) A friend and member of a U.S..
law enforcement agency who knows Applicant and is familiar with his career in law
enforcement credited Applicant with reliability and trustworthiness. His direct supervisor
who sees him daily characterizes him as a reliable and trustworthy public servant. (Tr. 61-
63)
5
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  They must be considered before
deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
6
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of delinquent debts,
attributable in part to historical reliance on his wife’s bill-paying responsibilities and her
ensuing bouts with depression that impaired her ability to manage their family finances.
Following their Chapter 7 discharge in 2002, Applicant and his wife maintained their bills
in current status for several years before falling behind again: this time with their federal
and state taxes, Applicant’s student loans, and a number of consumer accounts.
Applicant’s actions warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of
the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c)
“a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
7
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Following his discharge from Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2002, Applicant was able
to maintain his family’s finances in stable order for a number of years under the able
management of his wife. After his wife suffered another depressive episode in 2011,
however, she could no longer keep their debts current and allowed many of their debts
to become delinquent. Records reflect serial delinquencies in their federal and state
taxes, student loans, and various consumer accounts between 2007 and 2012.  
With proper medications and spousal assistance, Applicant’s wife regained her
health and has made steady progress in paying off their listed tax debts and most of
their listed consumer debts and arranging payment plans to pay off Applicant’s
delinquent student loans.  Applicant’s post-2012 efforts merit application of MC ¶ 20(b),
“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.”
Applicant’s only financial counseling consisted of the required on-line counseling
he received in connection with his Chapter 7 petition.  Without more elaboration of the
nature of the on-line counseling he completed, no more than partial application of MC ¶
20(c), “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,” is warranted
in these circumstances. By addressing his identified delinquent debts, Applicant has
established a promising track record for resolving his debts. MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,”  fully
applies to Applicant’s situation.  
Applicant’s documented tax, student loan, and consumer debt payment history
reflect satisfactory progress in accordance with the criteria established by the Appeal
Board for assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial condition with
responsible efforts considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3
(App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant’s unidentified and disputed debts listed in his credit
reports and SOR are not enough to deprive him of the mitigation benefits achieved from
his recent payment efforts.  So long as Applicant is able to establish a credible and
realistic plan, or plans, to resolve his financial problems, accompanied by significant
actions to implement his plan, he meets the Appeal’s Board requirements for stabilizing
his finances. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21 2008). See ISCR Case No.
05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan., 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App.
Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).    
8
By his documented successful disputes with listed creditors he could not identify,
Applicant demonstrated earnest efforts to address these remaining creditors as well.
His actions warrant the application as well of MC ¶ 20(e), “the individual has a
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.”  
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant presents with a distinguished law
enforcement career and meritorious record of civilian employment with his defense
contractor employer. He has impressive support from his friends, colleagues, and direct
supervisor who know him. While his history of debt accruals is considerable, with the
help of his wife, he has developed a solid track record of debt management and is
committed to restoring his finances to respectable levels consistent with holding a
security clearance. 
Applicant’s documented payment initiatives are significant and reflect a serious
commitment on his part to stabilize his finances.  Only those debts he has been unable
to identify has he not addressed to date. And these disputed debts have since been
deleted from his updated credit reports. Overall, Applicant’s corrective actions to date
are sufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the guideline governing his
finances. Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations covered
by Guideline F.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.h and 1.j-1.m:                  For Applicant
Subpara. 1.i:       Withdrawn
                        Conclusio  n  s    
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
9
                                        
  
10
