1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 13-01224
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
November 20, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on April 24, 2013.  On December 19, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant.  On May 20, 2014, DoD amended the SOR (ASOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guideline E for Applicant.  These actions were taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 3, 2014.  She failed to
acknowledge receipt of the ASOR, but was tendered a copy when her hearing was
initially convened on June 30, 2014.  She answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on
January 15, 2014, and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge.  The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request on January 28,
2
2014, and I received the case assignment on May 22, 2014.  DOHA issued a notice of
hearing on May 27, 2014, and I initially convened the hearing as scheduled on June 30,
2014.  However, it soon became obvious that Applicant was in need of a Spanish
interpreter; and as a result, her hearing was reconvened on September 18, 2014, with
an interpreter present.  The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 4, which were
received without objection.  Applicant testified on her own behalf, as did her husband,
and submitted Exhibit (AppX) A, which was received without objection.  DOHA received
the transcript of the hearing (TR) on September 24, 2014.  I granted Applicant’s request
to keep the record open until October 17, 2014, to submit additional matters.  She
submitted nothing further on her behalf.  The record closed on October 17, 2014.
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In her written Answer to the SOR, and in her verbal answer to the ASOR at her
reconvened hearing, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in Subparagraphs
1.a.~1.e., and 1.k.~1.m. of the SOR, with explanations.  She denied the factual
allegations in Subparagraphs 1.f.~1.j. of the SOR.  She also denied the factual
allegations in Subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b. of the ASOR.  She further provided
additional information to support her request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
Applicant’s husband attributes their current financial difficulties to a failed
“trucking company” that they “tried to own” in 2013.  (TR at page 59 lines 14~24.)
1.a.  Applicant admits she is indebted to the IRS as a result of a tax lien in the
amount of about $28,925.  (TR at page 32 lines 16~24.)  She avers, “I haven’t paid it.”
(Id.)  I find that this Federal lien is still outstanding.
1.b.  Applicant admits she is indebted to the IRS as a result of another tax lien in
the amount of about $6,359.  (TR at page 32 line 25 to page 33 line 16.)  When asked if
it was “stilled owed,” she answered, “Yes.”  (Id.)  I find that this Federal lien is also still
outstanding.
1.c.  Applicant admits she is indebted to a State taxing authority as a result of a
tax lien in the amount of about $2,686.  (TR at page 33 line 17 to page 34 line 2.)  When
asked if it was “stilled owed,” she answered, “Yes.”  (Id.)  I find that this State lien is still
outstanding.
1.d. and 1.e.  It is alleged that Applicant is indebted to Creditor D for two past-
due debts, the first one for $5,027, and the second one for $2,237.  She avers that she
is making monthly payments of $300 on the first debt, and has paid the second debt.
(TR at page 34 line 3 to page 39 line 7.)  Her averment is supported by documentation
3
that Applicant submitted with her Answer.  (Answer at pages 10~14.)  I find for Applicant
as to these two allegations.
1.f.  Applicant now admits she is indebted to Creditor F in the amount of about
$7,148.  (TR at page 39 line 10 to page 40 line 6.)  She avers, “that one is not paid off.”
(Id.)  I find that this past-due debt is still outstanding.
1.g.  Applicant now admits she is indebted to Creditor G in the amount of about
$3,666.  (TR at page 40 lines 7~14.)  She avers, “it’s not paid.”  (Id.)  I find that this
past-due debt is still outstanding.
1.h.  Applicant now admits she is indebted to Creditor H in the amount of about
$1,472.  (TR at page 40 lines 15~23.)  She avers, “it hasn’t been paid.”  (Id.)  I find that
this past-due debt is still outstanding.
1.i.  Applicant now admits she is indebted to Creditor I in the amount of about
$1,467.  (TR at page 40 line 24 to page 41 line 7.)  She avers, “same thing, not paid.”
(Id.)  I find that this past-due debt is still outstanding.
1.j.  It is alleged that Applicant is indebted to Creditor J for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $718.  She avers, “I don’t remember that one,” but offers nothing
further in this regard.  (TR at page 41 line 8 to page 42 line 3.)  As this debt does
appear on Applicant’s May 2013 Credit Report (CR), I find that this past-due debt is still
outstanding.  (GX 2 at page 11.)
1.k.  It is alleged that Applicant is indebted to Creditor K for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $526.  She avers, “it is paid,” but offers nothing further in this regard.
(TR at page 42 line 4 to page 43 line 2.)  As this debt also does appear on Applicant’s
May 2013 CR, I find that this past-due debt is still outstanding.  (GX 2 at page 12.)
1.l.  It is alleged that Applicant is indebted to Creditor L for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $258.  She avers, “it has been paid,” but offers nothing further in this
regard.  (TR at page 43 lines 5~22.)  As this debt does appear on Applicant’s May 2013
CR, I find that this past-due debt is still outstanding.  (GX 2 at page 12.)
1.m.  It is alleged that Applicant is indebted to Creditor M for a past-due debt in
the amount of about $258.  She avers, “that’s paid,” but offers nothing further in this
regard.  (TR at page 43 line 25 to page 44 line 16.)  As this debt does appear on
Applicant’s May 2013 CR, I find that this past-due debt is still outstanding.  (GX 2 at
page 12.)
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
2.a.  Applicant answered, “No,” to “Section 26 - Financial Record . . . Taxes,”
averring that she paid and/or filed her Federal and State taxes in the last seven years.
4
(TR at page 44 line 19 to page 48 line 9, and GX 1 at page 39.)  In light of her admitted
tax liens noted above in allegations 1.a.~1.c., I find this to be a wilful falsification.
2.b.  Applicant again answered, “No,” to “Section 26 - Financial Record . . .
Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts,” averring that she had no past-due debts, in
the last seven years.  (TR at page 48 line 10 to page 50 line 8, and GX 1 at pages
39~40.)  In light of her admitted past-due debts noted above in allegations 1.f.~1.i., I
also find this to be a wilful falsification.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
5
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Applicant has significant past due debts that
she has yet to address, to include Federal and State tax liens totaling about $38,000.
The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a
closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties.  Subparagraph 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@  Applicant has failed to submit documentation, apart from her
submissions in her Answer as to allegations 1.d. and 1.e., showing that she has made a
good-faith effort to address her significant debts.  I can find no other countervailing
Mitigating Condition that is applicable here.  Financial Considerations are found against
the Applicant.
6
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
Paragraph 15: “Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”
The following Disqualifying Condition under Subparagraph 16(a) applies.  It
provides that the “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire . . . or similar form used to conduct
investigations . . .” may be disqualifying.  I can find no countervailing Mitigating
Condition here, as the Applicant could have easily answered her e-QIP honestly, which
she certified as “true, complete, and correct.”  Personal Conduct is found against the
Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Her employer speaks most highly of
Applicant.  (AppX A).  However, the record evidence leaves me with questions or
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  For these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her
Financial Considerations and related Personal Conduct.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d. and 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.g.~1.m. Against Applicant
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
