 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 13-01274 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, and the Government’s File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Her request for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 30, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) citing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F 
(financial considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 In Applicant's Answer to 
the SOR, notarized on January 30, 2014, she admitted 24 of the 25 debts alleged in the 
SOR. She also requested a decision without a hearing. (Item 4)  
 
                                                 
1 Adjudication of the case is controlled by DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(January 1987), as amended (Regulation); DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
prepared a presentation of the Government’s case in a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) dated March 7, 2014. It contained the Government’s argument and documents 
to support its preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request for eligibility for a public 
trust position.2 Applicant received the FORM on March 27, 2014 and was given 30 
days to respond. She did not submit a response. The case was assigned to me on 
November 5, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 33 years old. Her application for a position of trust indicates that she 
is unmarried and has no children. She lives with a boyfriend, who is unemployed. She 
attended college from 1999 to 2003, and received a bachelor’s degree. In 2007, she 
obtained a teaching certificate. Since 2003, she has worked as a store manager, a 
customer service representative, a bartender, a restaurant worker, and at a group home 
for mentally and physically challenged individuals. During a period of unemployment 
from December 2004 to April 2005, she received unemployment compensation. She 
started her current employment in November 2012. Her position as a customer service 
representative requires public trust eligibility. (Items 5, 6) 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant has delinquent debts totaling approximately $97,000. 
The debts appear in Applicant's credit reports dated January and September 2013 and 
March 2014. In January 2013, an investigator of the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) conducted a subject interview (SI) with Applicant. During the review of her debts, 
Applicant stated her delinquencies stem from low-paying jobs and her resulting inability 
to pay her educational and medical expenses. (Items 6, 7, 8, 9) 
 
Applicant financed her education through student loans. They are listed in the 
SOR at allegations 1.o – 1.v, and total $92,740. It appears from the credit reports that 
Applicant owes approximately $62,000 to creditor A and approximately $30,000 to 
creditor B. During her January 2013 security interview, she explained that she could not 
afford the $750 monthly loan payment to creditor A, because of her low net monthly pay 
of about $1,200. She contacted the creditor and was told she could either pay that 
amount or her wages would be garnished. She agreed to a garnishment of $150 per 
month. She also noted she was informed a government program would be available to 
help her with paying the student loans. The file contains no other information about the 
program, or if any changes have occurred that would affect the garnishment. (Item 6) 
 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included ten documents (Items 1 - 10) proffered 
in support of the Government’s case. 
 
 
 
3 
Applicant's March 2014 credit report shows changes to her student loan 
accounts. The balances on four loans have increased since the SOR was issued 
(allegations 1.o, 1.p, 1.q, and 1.r). Two others have decreased: the loan at allegation 
1.u has decreased from $14,604 to $13,495; and the one at allegation 1.v decreased 
from $15,711 to $15,035. The loans at allegations 1.s and 1.t show a zero balance. The 
record contains no explanations; it may be that the garnishment has resulted in payoffs 
and reductions in these balances. (Items 6, 7, 9) 
 
Medical debts comprise the second largest group of delinquencies in the SOR. In 
approximately 2009, Applicant fell down stairs and suffered a spinal injury. As a result, 
she accrued medical bills between 2009 and 2010. The 15 SOR allegations relating to 
delinquent medical accounts (1.a, 1.c – 1.m, 1.w – 1.y) total $3,789. Seven medical 
debts are less than $100; the remaining medical debts range from $128 to $1,485. 
Applicant stated in her security interview that she was unable to pay the bills because 
she had no health insurance. In her Answer to the SOR, she provided a copy of an 
application she submitted in January 2014 for a financial assistance program sponsored 
by the hospital involved. In the application, she listed no household income. (Items 4, 6)  
 
 The SOR also includes two additional debts: allegation 1.b is a telephone 
account with a delinquent balance of $281, and allegation 1.n, a credit card account 
with a delinquent balance of $912. Applicant denies owing the credit card debt. She 
stated during her security interview that she had a payment plan for the account. 
Although she paid off the balance, it was sold to a collection agency. She attempted to 
remove the account from her credit report, without success. However, in her Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant stated, “I did not have a job to be able to pay it. I was told at 7 years 
it would come off my credit report but it was sold.” (Item 6, 7, 8, 9)   
 
Applicant has not had financial counseling. However, she stated during her 
security interview that her finances have improved, and her current position has 
approximately doubled her income. At that time, she planned to work toward resolving 
her past-due debts based on her increased income. She also stated she would contact 
each creditor to pay the debts or establish payment plans. However, several months 
later, in her October 2013 interrogatory response, she stated she was unable to set up a 
payment plan for her student loans because other financial issues arose including gas 
and electric company bills, water and sewage expenses, and unexpected car repairs. 
Applicant also noted that sometime between January and October 2013, she had 
emergency surgery to remove her appendix. (Item 6) 
 
In October 2013, Applicant completed a personal financial statement (PFS). She 
listed net monthly income of $1,780. With monthly expenses of $1,350, her monthly net 
remainder (MNR) was $430. She also noted that she had other non-recurring expenses 
that she did not include in the PFS. Applicant did not list payment on any of the SOR 
debts. (Item 6) 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
 Each decision regarding a public trust position must be a fair, commonsense 
determination based on all available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).3 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” 
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines. The presence or absence of a disqualifying or 
mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them because they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of 
access to sensitive information. In this case, the pleadings and the information 
presented by the parties require consideration of the adjudicative factors addressed 
under Guideline F.  
 
 A trustworthiness decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether it 
is clearly consistent with the interests of national security4 for an applicant to either 
receive or continue to have access to sensitive information. The Government bears the 
initial burden of producing admissible information on which it based the decision to deny 
or revoke access to sensitive information for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, 
it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a “right” to a sensitive position, an applicant bears a heavy burden 
of persuasion.5 A person who has access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the national interest as her 
or his own. The standard of “clearly consistent with the interests of national security” 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.6 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the trustworthiness concern pertaining to financial 
considerations: 
 
                                                 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
4 See DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, ¶ C2.1.1 and ¶ C6.1.1. 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
5 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The SOR lists 25 delinquent debts, totaling approximately $97,000. Applicant's 
debts comprise student loans and medical debts. Applicant provided no documentation 
showing efforts to pay or establish payment plans for any of the debts. The following 
disqualifying conditions apply under AG ¶19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 The financial considerations guideline also contains factors that can mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 20, 
especially the following:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s student loans have been delinquent since after she graduated in 
2003. Her medical debts have been past due since about 2009. The delinquencies are 
recent because most are still unpaid. Applicant's lack of efforts to pay these debts 
casts doubt on her judgment and reliability. AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be applied. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) applies where an individual experiences events over which she had 
 
 
6 
no control, and which affected her finances. Here, Applicant receives some mitigation 
because she suffered a spinal injury in 2009 that resulted in medical debts. She also 
had an emergency appendectomy in 2013, although the record contains no information 
on how this affected her finances. She also had low-paying jobs since she graduated 
college, and was unable to meet her student loan obligations. It appears that this 
situation did not change appreciably until she earned increased income from her 
current position, starting in November 2012. However, for full application of this 
mitigating condition, an applicant must act responsibly regarding the unforeseen 
circumstances. Here, although Applicant's income has doubled in the past two years, 
and she had a $400 monthly net remainder as of October 2013, there is no record 
evidence she has used these discretionary funds to deal with her delinquencies. 
Applicant receives partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
 As to AG ¶ 20(d), Applicant has not brought her delinquent debts under control. 
Her current debt load is more than $90,000. She has made no voluntary payments, 
and has no payment plans in place. Despite increased income, she has not paid small 
debts under $100. The only changes appear to be in several student loans. Given the 
limited information in the record, it appears these reductions result from the 
garnishment of her pay, which does not constitute a good-faith effort. AG ¶¶ 20(d) does 
not apply.  
 
 Applicant denied the debt at SOR allegation 1.n, which refers to a credit card 
account with a balance of $912. She disputes that she owes the debt because she paid 
it through a payment plan. However, contradictory information in her Answer to the 
SOR indicates she was unable to pay the debt, and was waiting for it to be dropped 
from her credit report based on the statute of limitations. She did not provide evidence 
about the reason for her dispute, or of her actions to resolve it. AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. an administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
7 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant’s history includes positive factors, such as her education and work 
experience. There is no evidence Applicant fails to timely pay her living expenses such 
as rent, utilities, or other monthly bills. Her debts are not related to gambling, or abuse 
of alcohol or drugs. There is no evidence Applicant lives beyond her means. 
 
 However, the negative factors are more substantial. Applicant has had two 
years since she began the process of applying for a public trust position in 2012. Her 
financial situation has improved, and she has had sufficient discretionary funds 
available to start resolving her debts. Yet the record shows no evidence that Applicant 
has made an effort to pay her delinquent debts or set up payment plans. 
 
 Doubts remain about Applicant's reliability and judgment based on her failure to 
take steps to meet her financial obligations. Overall, the evidence fails to satisfy the 
doubts raised about Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised by the financial 
considerations guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.y  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
sensitive information. Applicant’s request for eligibility for a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
