 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 13-01310 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 17 delinquent, collection, 
judgment, or charged-off accounts totaling $102,199. He failed to provide sufficient 
documentation of his progress resolving his financial problems. Financial considerations 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 13, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Item 3) On March 27, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) as revised by the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence on August 
30, 2006, which became effective on September 1, 2006.   
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On April 9, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived his 
right to a hearing. (Item 2) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated August 8, 2014, was provided to him on August 25, 2014.1 Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on November 3, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted responsibility for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a-1.n and 1.q.3 He denied knowledge of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.o ($435), and he paid the 
judgment in SOR ¶ 1.p ($1,776). He explained that he has retained an attorney for his 
“scheduled bankruptcy.” He planned to file for bankruptcy “in the later part of 2014.” The 
bankruptcy documentation was not included as part of his SOR response. Applicant’s 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old aviation life support equipment (ALSE) technician, who 
has worked for a defense contractor since September 2011.4 Previously, he has worked 
as a National Guard technician and emergency medical technician (EMT). He attended 
technical colleges and received certifications as an EMT. He served on active duty in 
the Navy from 1989 to 1996 and in the Army National Guard from 1996 to 2007. He 
received an honorable discharge. In 2000, he married, and his son was born that same 
year. In 1992, his stepdaughter was born.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s credit report and SOR allege 17 delinquent, collection, judgment, or 
charged-off accounts totaling $102,199. Six medical debts are for less than $100 each: 
¶ 1.h ($95); ¶ 1.i ($84); ¶ 1.j ($79); ¶ 1.k ($70); ¶ 1.l ($68); and ¶ 1.n ($52).  His three 
largest debts are described as follows: ¶ 1.q ($63,959) is a bank judgment entered in 
2001, which resulted from a foreclosure; ¶ 1.a ($25,439) is a judgment entered in 2009 
for the amount owed after the voluntary repossession of two vehicles; and ¶ 1.c 
($6,891) is a charged-off “vehicle buy back” debt. (Item 2)  
                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated August 13, 2014, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated August 25, 2014. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he 
had 30 days after his receipt to submit information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s SOR response. (Item 2)   
 
4Unless stated otherwise, Applicant’s August 13, 2013 SF 86 is the source for the facts in this 
paragraph. (Item 3) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant attributed his financial problems to underemployment or unemployment 
for about 10 months from 2007 to 2008. (Items 3-4) He did not receive the bills for some 
of the debts on his credit reports. (Items 3-4) There is no evidence of security violations, 
criminal conduct, use of illegal drugs, or alcohol abuse. He disclosed some financial 
problems on his August 13, 2013 SF 86. 
 
Applicant’s FORM repeated the admonition about the absence of corroborating 
documentation and other mitigating information and explained that Applicant had 30 
days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting 
forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. . . If 
you do not file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will be 
assigned to an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely on the evidence 
set forth in this [FORM].” (FORM at 7-8) Applicant did not respond to the FORM.               
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
   
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit report and SOR response. Applicant’s SOR alleges 17 delinquent, collection, 
judgment, or charged-off accounts totaling $102,199. The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;5 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
                                            
5The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 Applicant’s conduct in resolving his delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to all of his SOR debts. He did not provide 
sufficient information about his finances to establish his inability to make greater 
progress paying his creditors. His underemployment and unemployment damaged his 
family finances and are circumstances largely beyond his control; however, he did not 
act responsibly under the circumstances. He did not establish his income over the last 
three years or show what his spouse earned or whether she contributed to the family 
financial situation. He did not provide a family budget. He presented insufficient 
evidence about what he has done over the last two years to pay his SOR debts or his 
other debts.     
 
 Applicant did not provide any of the following documentation relating to the SOR 
creditors: (1) proof of payments such as checking account statements, photocopies of 
checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the 
creditor; (2) correspondence to or from the creditor to establish maintenance of contact 
with the creditor;6 (3) a credible debt dispute; (4) attempts to negotiate payment plans, 
such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve 
these SOR debts; (5) evidence of financial counseling; or (6) other evidence of progress 
or resolution of his SOR debts. In his SOR response, he denied knowledge of the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.o ($435), and he said he paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.p ($1,776). I credit 
Applicant with mitigating the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.p.  
 
 The possibility that his debts will be discharged through bankruptcy is too 
speculative to establish his financial responsibility. He did not establish that he had filed 
for bankruptcy, and even if he had, not every person who files for bankruptcy receives a 
discharge of their unsecured, nonpriority debts. His failure to prove that he has made 
more substantial steps to resolve his debts shows a lack of judgment and responsibility 
                                            
6 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
that weighs against approval of his security clearance. There is insufficient evidence 
that he was unable to make greater progress resolving his delinquent debts, or that his 
financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. 
Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish that financial consideration concerns 
are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. He is a 44-
year-old ALSE technician, who has worked for a defense contractor since September 
2011. He has also worked as a National Guard technician and EMT. He attended 
technical colleges and received certifications as an EMT. He honorably served on active 
duty in the Navy from 1989 to 1996, and in the Army National Guard from 1996 to 2007. 
Underemployment and unemployment are circumstances beyond his control that 
contributed to his financial problems. There is no evidence of security violations, 
criminal conduct, use of illegal drugs, or alcohol abuse. He disclosed some of his 
financial problems on his August 13, 2013 SF 86.  
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. His SOR alleges 
17 delinquent, collection, judgment, or charged-off accounts totaling $102,199. A 
$63,959 bank judgment was entered in 2001, and a $25,439 judgment was entered in 
2009. Six delinquent medical debts were for less than $100 each. He failed to provide 
sufficient documentation of progress to resolve his financial problems. His failure to 
provide more corroborating documentation shows lack of financial responsibility and 
judgment and raises unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More information about 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
inability to pay debts or documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate security 
concerns. 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary to 
justify the award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards resolving 
his past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he 
may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance 
worthiness. Based on the facts before me and the adjudicative guidelines that I am 
required to apply, I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.o and 1.p:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
