1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00948
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on December 30, 2013. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 5, 2014, detailing security concerns
under Guideline J, criminal conduct; Guideline H, drug involvement; Guideline G,
alcohol consumption; and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(AG), implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
Tr. 9-10.1
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient2
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
2
Applicant received the SOR on June 23, 2014, and he answered it on June 30,
2014. He requested a hearing before an administrative judge with the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on
August 21, 2014, and I received the case assignment on August 28, 2014. DOHA
issued a Notice of Hearing on September 8, 2014, and I convened the hearing as
scheduled on October 2, 2014. The Government offered exhibits (GE) marked as GE 1
through GE 5, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified. He did not submit any exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript
(Tr.) on October 15, 2014. I held the record open until October 23, 2014, for Applicant to
submit additional matters. Applicant timely submitted exhibits (AE) A - D, which were
received and admitted without objection. The record closed on October 23, 2014.
Procedural Rulings
Motions
At the beginning of the hearing, Department Counsel motioned to Amend
allegation 4.d of the SOR to conform with the evidence. Department Counsel requested
to change the last sentence of allegation 4.d from “You responded ‘No,’ whereas in
truth, you deliberately failed to list that you had used marijuana on multiple occasions
over a period of many years, as sets forth above in Subparagraphs 2.c and 2.d” to “You
responded ‘No,’ whereas, in truth, you deliberately failed to list that information as set
forth above in Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d.” Applicant did not object to the requested
amendment. The Motion to Amend the SOR is granted, and the SOR is amended as
requested.1
During the course of the hearing, Department Counsel motioned to withdraw
SOR allegation 1.a based on Applicant’s testimony that on March 12, 2013 he appeared
at the police station to have his fingerprints taken. Applicant did not object. The motion
was granted. SOR allegation 1.a is withdrawn from the record. (Tr. 30)
       
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b,
2.a, 2.c, 2.d, and 3.b of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of
fact. He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 2.b, 3.a, 4.d, and 4.e of the
SOR.   He neither admitted nor denied the allegations in ¶¶ 4.a-4.c of the SOR. He also2
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
GE 1; Tr. 20-23.3
GE 1; Tr. 20-22.4
GE 3 - GE 5; Tr. 30-33. 5
3
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the
following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 60 years old, works as a systems engineer. He is a 1099
employee for a DOD contractor. Applicant has been working for this DOD contractor
since 2010 and as a 1099 employee for other government contractors since 2006. From
2003 until 2006, he worked for a DOD contractor. From 1997 until 2003, he worked as
an independent contractor in telecommunications. Applicant enlisted in the United
States Navy after high school graduation and served in the Navy on a submarine for
three years. After he left the Navy, he worked as a federal employee and in private
industry.3
Applicant graduated from a state university with a bachelor’s degree in
mechanical engineering in December 1985. He received a master’s degree in computer
science and systems engineering from another state university in March 1997. Applicant
and his first wife married in 1979 and divorced in 1983. Applicant married his current
wife in September 1984. They have two sons, ages 29 and 26. His sons are grown, live
separately from him, and are not dependent on him for support.4
Alcohol Consumption and Criminal Conduct
Applicant completed a SF-86 (security clearance application) in August 1989. On
his SF-86, he listed an arrest for driving under the influence (DUI) in April 1976. He
indicated that the court fined him $150. The Federal Bureau of Investigation’s (FBI)
criminal records report identifies a DUI arrest in March 1977. When the investigator
confronted him with this DUI information, Applicant denied both arrests. In his response
to the SOR, Applicant indicated that to the best of his recollection, the 1977 charge was
for reckless driving and not for a DUI. He denied receiving a ticket of any type, including
a DUI, in 1976. At the hearing, Applicant indicated that he has very little memory about
being arrested for DUI in the 1970s. After much consideration, he believed that he may
have been arrested for DUI and convicted of reckless driving in 1977. He again denied
the 1976 arrest. The record contains conflicting information about Applicant’s arrests for
DUI in the 1970s. The information in his SF-86 and the FBI report each reflect one DUI
arrest in the 1970s. Given he has little memory of these events which occurred almost
40 years ago and his adamant denial of an arrest in 1976, I find he was arrested once
for DUI in the 1970s. It is not unreasonable for Applicant to have incorrectly stated the
date of his arrest in his SF-86 as individuals often confuse dates year of a past event.5
The police report is not in the record nor are any alcohol-related test results for this date.6
GE 1; GE 3; Tr. 24-29, 55-58.7
GE 3; AE C; AE D; Tr. 45, 59-60.8
AE B; AE C; Tr. 44, 61.9
4
When he met with the Office Personnel Management (OPM) investigator,
Applicant told the investigator that he generally consumed about three or four glasses of
wine a day at home. He also expressed a concern that he may have had a problem with
alcohol. On the evening of January 12, 2013, Applicant and his wife argued. He left the
family home and drove to a nearby hotel where he spent the night. He took a sleeping
medication, Ambien. He then consumed a large bottle of wine before going to sleep. He
woke up the next day in the late morning and decided to drive to the home of a friend.
When he left the hotel, the receptionist observed his walking and called the police to
report him driving while drunk. He arrived at his friend’s home. His friend also noticed
that he was not in a condition to drive and drove him back to the hotel. When Applicant
walked into the hotel lobby, the police arrested him and charged him with DUI after he
failed the field sobriety test. Applicant believes his breathalyzer test result was around
2.0, but he is not sure.  Applicant pled guilty to misdemeanor DUI in July 2013. The6
court sentenced him to 12 weeks of alcohol education, 26 weeks of group therapy,
revoked his driver’s license for nine months, fined him $689, and placed him on
probation until either the end of 2014 or early 2015.7
Following his conviction, Applicant enrolled in a program at a local alcohol
counseling center in August 2013. The counseling center records reflect that he
received Level II education for 12 weeks and Level II Non-Intensive Outpatient services
for 26 weeks. Upon his completion of this program, the counseling program did not
recommend further follow-up treatment. The program conducted random alcohol
urinalysis testing during his treatment. The first urine analysis test occurred on August
24, 2013, and the last test occurred on April 23, 2014. The counseling center performed
19 random urinalysis tests in this time period. All his tests showed no alcohol
consumption. Applicant last consumed alcohol on January 13, 2013. He does not plan
to consume alcohol in the future. He told the OPM investigator that he “did not miss the
alcohol”.8
The counseling center released Applicant from its program on May 20, 2014
without any recommendations for further treatment. Through his lawyer, Applicant
applied for an early release from probation. The court issued an order releasing him
from probation on June 25, 2014. Applicant does not participate in any alcohol
counseling or support programs.9
Tr. 62.10
GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 37-38, 63-64.11
During this time, he used tylenol or aspirin for pain or he lived with the pain. Tr. 76.12
Response to SOR; GE 2; AE A; AE D; Tr. 38-39, 43-44, 65-70.13
5
Drug Involvement
Applicant first smoked marijuana in the 1970s while in the Navy. He believed he
was 20 years old when he first used marijuana. He did not use marijuana when he was
on duty on a submarine.10
From 1975 until 2014, Applicant used marijuana sporadically. He provided
confusing statements about the frequency of his marijuana use. In his response to the
marijuana interrogatories, he indicated that he used marijuana one to two times a year
over the last ten years. When he met with the OPM investigator, he advised that he had
used marijuana through the years about once a year, if someone had marijuana, and
that after his discharge from the Navy, he smoked marijuana five to ten times, if
someone had marijuana. At the hearing, he stated that he did not use marijuana
between 1975 and 1980 and that he did not believe he used marijuana in the 1980s. He
may have used marijuana one or two times a year between 1990 and 1998. He denied
any drug use between 2003 and 2009. He advised that he did not use marijuana when
he worked on a government contract.11
In 2005, Applicant underwent surgery for diverticulitis. He experienced
complications following his surgery, which required a second surgery. After his second
surgery, Applicant experienced periodic and severe pain, which has not been controlled
by pain medication. When the prescription pain medication failed, Applicant sought and
received a one-year prescription for medical marijuana in February 2013. He purchased
the marijuana starting in February 2013. He used the marijuana for medical purposes
on as needed basis until August 24, 2013. On this date, he underwent an urinalysis test
for alcohol. Although he tested negative for alcohol consumption, he tested positive for
marijuana use. Because he was using the marijuana for medical reasons, he did not
think his use was a problem. The testing center advised him that his positive test for
marijuana would be a problem with the court. He ceased using the marijuana for pain
relief until he completed his urinalysis testing.  Since the SOR was issued in June12
2014, he has used marijuana to relieve his pain, but he was not sure how often. He last
used marijuana two weeks before the hearing. He indicated at the hearing that he would
use marijuana as needed for pain in the future and that he still had some marijuana in
his possession from when he purchased it with his medical prescription.13
Applicant has held a security clearance periodically over the years. He
acknowledged that he held a security clearance from 2003 until 2006 while working for
another DOD contractor and from 1981 until 1986 while a civilian employee of the Navy.
He also completed a security clearance application in 1989. From 2006 until 2010, he
Response to SOR; GE 4; Tr. 39-43. His current Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) documentation14
is not in the record.
GE 1 - GE 5.15
6
held a security clearance through the Transportation Safety Administration. He did not
believe he had active clearance when he began his current job, and he was not sure his
security clearance was active at the time of the hearing.14
The record lacks any evidence that Applicant has been arrested, charged, or
convicted of any criminal offense related to drugs. In his response to the interrogatories
concerning marijuana, he answered “no” to the question asking about such arrests. At
the hearing, he denied any arrests for drugs and stated that he believed he had been
arrested for reckless driving in 1977.15
Personal Conduct
When Applicant completed his e-QIP on December 30, 2013, he answered “no”
to the following questions about his drug use under:
Section 22 - Police Record (EVER)
Have you EVER been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs?
Section 23 - Illegal use of Drugs or Drug Activity:
Illegal Use of Drugs or Controlled Substances - In the last seven (7) years
have you illegally used any drugs or controlled substance? Use of a drug
or controlled substance includes injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing,
experimenting with or otherwise consuming any drug or controlled
substance.
Illegal Drug Activity - In the last seven years, have you been involved in
the illegal purchase, manufacture, cultivation, trafficking, production,
transfer, shipping, receiving, handling or sale of any drug or controlled
substance? and
While Possessing a Security Clearance - Have you EVER illegally used or
otherwise been involved with a drug or controlled substance while
possessing a security clearance other than previously listed?
Concerning his answers to the questions in Section 23, Applicant stated in his
response to the SOR that he did not consider his purchase of medical marijuana illegal
since he had a prescription for it, and medical marijuana is legal under state law. He
Response to SOR.16
GE 3.17
Tr. 46-49.18
GE 2; Tr. 70.19
7
also indicated that he never used marijuana while working for the U.S. government on a
U.S. government contract.16
When Applicant met with the OPM investigator on January 29, 2014, he provided
information to the investigator about his medical marijuana use prior to July 2013. He
also indicated that he last used the marijuana for medical reasons in July 2013. He then
told the OPM investigator that he had used marijuana through the years, even when he
was in the Navy. He advised that he used it once a year with friends if someone had the
marijuana. The interview summary does not indicate that the OPM investigator
confronted him about his marijuana use.17
At the hearing, Applicant explained his “no” responses to these questions. He
does not consider himself a marijuana user because he smoked marijuana infrequently
and because he did not use marijuana while working on a project.  He acknowledged
that his answers to these questions were wrong and that when he was answering the
questions, he mistakenly did not consider whether his clearance was active or not.18
Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant acknowledged that he incorrectly
answered question 14 in the marijuana interrogatories when he answered “no” to the
interrogatory inquiry about having any marijuana in his possession. During his testimony
at the hearing, Applicant had acknowledged using marijuana since April 2014. This
marijuana had been purchased previously. Applicant’s other answers on this document
are clear and direct and are not contradicted by other evidence.19
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
8
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
9
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation.
Applicant has been arrested and charged with DUI on two occasions. In 1977, he
was convicted of reckless driving, not DUI. In 2013, he pled guilty to DUI and was
sentenced, fined, and placed on probation. A security concern is established by SOR
allegations 1.b  and 1.c.
At the time DOHA issued the SOR, Applicant was on probation. In an order dated
June 25, 2014, the court granted his request for early release from probation. That part
of SOR allegation 1.b, which alleges that Applicant is currently on probation, is not
established.
The Criminal Conduct guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 32(a) through ¶
32(d), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
Applicant successfully completed his court sentence related to his DUI arrest and
conviction. Since this time, he has abstained from using alcohol, and he has indicated
an intent not to consume alcohol in the future. There is little likelihood that he will be
arrested for an alcohol-related offense in the future. Applicant mitigated the security
concerns about his criminal conduct under Guideline J.
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
10
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
AG ¶ 25 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use;
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and,
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.
Applicant used marijuana sporadically over many years. In 2013, he acquired a
prescription for medical marijuana. With the prescription, he purchased marijuana in a
state licensed facility and used the marijuana for the relief of abdominal pain. In August
2013, he tested positive for marijuana while being tested for alcohol consumption.
Applicant has held a security clearance periodically over the years, and his use of
marijuana may have been during a time when he held a security clearance. He
indicated that he would continue to use marijuana in the future. The Government has
established a security concern under AG ¶¶ 25(a)-25(c), 25(g), and 25(h).
The drug involvement guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns under AG ¶ 26(a) through ¶ 26(d), which are as follows:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
ES 2014-00674, Memorandum from the Director of National Intelligence regarding Adherence to Federal20
Laws Prohibiting Marijuana Use (October 25, 2014); February 13, 2013 Memorandum from the Office of the
Assistant Secretary of Defense on Prohibition on the Use of Marijuana by Military Service Members and
Department of Defense Civilian Employees; Department of Defense Instruction No. 1010.09 DOD Civilian
Employee Drug-Free W orkplace program (June 22, 2012). 
11
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation;
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended;
and,
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program,
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional.
I have reviewed the above mitigating conditions and conclude that none of these
mitigating conditions apply. At the hearing, Applicant clearly stated that he intended to
use marijuana in the future for medical purposes, namely to treat his continued pain
from his 2005 surgery. Marijuana for medical purposes is allowed in his state of
residence. However, under federal law, marijuana, even that used for medical purposes,
is illegal and remains a security concern.  Applicant stopped using marijuana between20
August 2013 and at least the end of April 2014 after learning that the use of marijuana,
for any reason, could be viewed unfavorably by the court in his DUI case. Once he
completed the requirements of his DUI sentence, Applicant made a decision to again
use marijuana for treatment of his pain. He used marijuana for medical purposes just
two weeks before the hearing, a reflection of his intent to continue the use of marijuana.
Applicant is not involved with known drug users or in an environment where drug use is
common. Rather, Applicant’s use of marijuana is personal and is not motivated by
others, but by his desire to reduce continued pain. He completed a drug education and
group therapy program as part of his DUI sentence. Since completing this program, he
has not abstained from the use of marijuana. He has not mitigated the security concerns
raised under Guideline H.
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption,
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability
and trustworthiness.”
12
AG ¶ 22 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent.
Applicant has been arrested and charged with DUI on at least two occasions, the
most recent in 2013. Applicant acknowledged consuming three to four glasses of wine
on a daily basis prior to his arrest in January 2013. The record does not contain any
evidence that his daily consumption led to the point of intoxication or impaired judgment
on a regular basis. His DUI arrest reflects his judgment was impaired on at least one
occasion. Applicant expressed to the OPM investigator that he was concerned about his
alcohol consumption. A security concern has been established under AG ¶¶ 22(a) and
22(c).
The alcohol consumption guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 23(a) through ¶
23(d), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment; and
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).
Applicant stopped consuming alcohol immediately after his arrest in January
2013. As part of his court sentence, he participated in an alcohol education and
treatment program, which conducted random urinalysis testing over eight months.
Applicant’s test results showed no alcohol use. He told the OPM investigator that “he did
not miss alcohol” and had stopped consuming alcohol after his arrest. Applicant knew
alcohol caused him a problem in 2013, and he decided not to continue his use of it. It
has been almost two years since his last use of alcohol. He has mitigated the security
concerns raised about his alcohol consumption in the past under AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b).
13
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications,
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative; and
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal,
professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another country,
engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that
country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or
other group.
The Government alleges three incidents of falsification by Applicant when he
completed his 2013 e-QIP (SOR ¶¶ 4.b-4.d) and, one incident of falsification when he
met with the security clearance investigator in January 2014 (SOR ¶ 4.e). For AG ¶ 16(a)
to apply, Applicant’s omissions must be deliberate. The Government established that
Applicant omitted material facts from his 2013 security clearance application when he
answered “no” to questions asking about his illegal drug use, purchase and possession
of illegal drugs, and his DUI arrests. During his 2014 personal subject interview, he also
denied that he had been arrested for DUI in 1977 and 1976. This information is material
to the evaluation of Applicant’s trustworthiness and honesty. Applicant denied
intentionally falsifying his answers on his e-QIP and providing false information in his
2014 personal subject interview in his response. 
See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov.17, 2004)(explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-2313321
at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).
14
When the allegation of falsification is controverted, the Government has the
burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an
applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge
must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the
omission occurred.21
Applicant is a well-educated man, who fully understood that marijuana was an
illegal drug. He knew at the time he completed his e-QIP that he had used marijuana
recreationally and as medical treatment for post-surgical pain. Having held a security
clearance many times over the last 40 years, he understood that he had an obligation to
provide accurate information about his marijuana use to the Government. He did not. His
statements that because he was not a regular user of marijuana, he did not think he had
to provide this information or that he had a medical marijuana license are inconsistent.
He had a duty to be forthright and candid in his e-QIP answers about his marijuana use,
and he was not. AG ¶ 16(a) applies to SOR allegations 4.b and 4.c.
SOR allegation 4.d, as amended, asserts that Applicant intentionally falsified his
answer to the question asking if he had ever been charged with an offense related to
alcohol or drugs when he failed to list his 1976 and 1977 DUI arrests. SOR allegation 4.e
relates to Applicant’s nearly 40-year-old arrest for DUI in 1977. Applicant has little
memory of being arrested for a DUI in the 1970s. He strongly denied any arrests in 1976,
and upon further consideration and reflection, he believes he may have been arrested for
a DUI in 1977, which was reduced to a reckless driving charge. Given the length of time
between 1977 and December 2013, when he completed his e-QIP, and January 2014,
when he met with the OPM investigator, Applicant could easily have forgotten about a
long ago incident. When presented with the information, he still had no memory and
denied that he was arrested in 1976 or 1977. Since I have concluded that he was
arrested only once in the 1970s for DUI, his denial of an arrest in 1976 is reasonable. His
failure to remember any arrest in 1977 is not evidence of intentional conduct. SOR
allegations 4.d and 4.e are found in favor of Applicant.
Applicant’s marijuana use, his alcohol consumption, and his DUI arrests create a
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. A security concern is established
under AG ¶ 16(e).
The personal conduct guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 17(a) through ¶
17(g), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
15
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
After reviewing his SOR response, his personal subject interview statements, and
his testimony, I find that Applicant has provided confusing and conflicting information
about his past marijuana use and the reasons for his failure to clearly acknowledge the
extent of his use during the security clearance process. He has not mitigated the security
concerns about his intentional falsification of his e-QIP. 
Likewise, since he continues to use marijuana, he has not mitigated any security
concerns about his vulnerability to coercion or pressure. He is credited with changing his
alcohol consumption habits and acknowledging his problems with alcohol. AG ¶¶ 17(d)
and (e) have some applicability.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
16
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility for
a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct, but on
a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a nexus
exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has
worked for the federal government or as a contractor to the federal government for many
years without any evidence of compromise of classified information. During this time, he
used marijuana sporadically, including medical marijuana. He also consumed alcohol, at
times to excess. His excessive use of alcohol has ceased, but he continues to use
marijuana to manage his post-surgical pain. Applicant provided inconsistent information
about his marijuana use over the years, and he acknowledged that his answers on his e-
QIP were wrong. His failure to provide clear and consistent information about his many
years of use of marijuana during this process raises questions about his reliability and
trustworthiness as does his stated intent to continue to use marijuana, an illegal drug
under federal law. He has changed his alcohol use, but not his marijuana use. His attitude
towards marijuana has not changed, nor does he intend to change this behavior, which
raises concerns about his trustworthiness and reliability.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his alcohol consumption and
criminal conduct under Guidelines G and J, but he has not mitigate the security concerns
arising from his drug involvement and personal conduct under Guidelines H and E.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Withdrawn
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
17
Paragraph 3, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 4, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 4.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 4.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 4.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 4.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 4.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
