 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-01578 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86). On June 
3, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).  The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue a security clearance for 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On June 19, 2014 and on July 10, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. On 
October 9, 2014, Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On 
October 17, 2014, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On October 20, 2014, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the 
hearing for November 3, 2014. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the 
hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which 
were received into evidence without objection. Applicant did not call any witnesses, 
testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were received into 
evidence without objection.  
 
 I held the record open until November 14, 2014 to afford Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted AE F, which 
was received into evidence without objection. On November 12, 2014, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted all of the allegations with explanations. 
Applicant’s answers and explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old crane mechanic, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since September 2013. He seeks a security clearance, which is a 
requirement of his continued employment. (GE 1, Tr. 13-14, 19-20.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1972. From 2006 to 2011, he 
took on-line heavy equipment courses. (GE 1, Tr. 13, 21-22.) Applicant married in 
March 1974. He has two adult sons, ages 39 and 32. Applicant’s wife was employed 
as a registered nurse; however, she is now “totally disabled.” (GE 1, Tr. 22-23, 42.) He 
served in the U.S. Air Force from November 1973 to January 1974 and was medically 
discharged as an airman basic (pay grade E-1) under honorable conditions. (GE 1, Tr. 
13, 23-24.)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR contains two separate allegations – a debt owed to the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for $7,441 for unpaid 2011 taxes and failing to file his 
2012 federal income tax return. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.)  
 
The facts of this case are relatively straightforward. Applicant and his wife 
undertook the complete care and costs associated with raising their three minor 
 
3 
 
 
grandchildren in 2011. The children’s parents, Applicant’s youngest son and ex-
daughter-in-law, were unable or unwilling to care for the children due to substance 
abuse issues or as a result of being incarcerated. Having provided complete support 
for the children during 2011, Applicant and his wife claimed them as dependents when 
they filed their federal income tax return in May 2012, and received a $7,441 refund. 
Unbeknown to Applicant, his son and father of the children, claimed the children as 
dependents when he filed his 2011 federal income tax return. The IRS subsequently 
disallowed the children as dependents for Applicant and sought recoupment of his 
refund. Applicant immediately contacted the IRS seeking reconsideration. Following 
direction from the IRS, Applicant provided documentation substantiating his 100% 
support of the children. (Tr. 11-12, 25-33, 42-45, GE 2, AE E.) 
 
Frustrated with his attempt to resolve his grandchildren exemption claim with 
the IRS, Applicant retained the services of a Certified Public Accountant (CPA) in 
September 2013. Through his CPA, Applicant resubmitted the previous 
documentation he submitted to the IRS substantiating his support of his grandchildren. 
Applicant provided two letters from the IRS dated September 11, 2014 and October 
14, 2014 as well as two letters from his CPA dated June 19, 2014 and October 31, 
2014 corroborating Applicant’s assertions. His CPA stated that they are awaiting the 
IRS response. Furthermore and based on the advice of his CPA, Applicant did not file 
his 2012 federal income tax return. He is awaiting resolution of his 2011 pending 
exemption dispute. He has had sufficient deductions withheld from his pay to cover 
any potential tax liabilities. (Tr. 12-13, 1, 33-50, GE 2, AE A, AE B, AE E, AE F.) 
Applicant provided documentation he has the funds to pay any tax arrearage owed for 
2011 should the IRS rule against him. (Tr. 41, GE 2, AE D, AE F.) As of the hearing 
date, Applicant’s dispute with the IRS was pending. (Tr. 48.) 
 
Applicant’s house is paid off, his property taxes are current, he is current on his 
monthly bills, and he lives within his means. Contrary to the IRS, Applicant’s state tax 
authority allowed him to claim his grandchildren as dependents and he has no tax 
issues with them. (Tr. 44-46, 53.) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 
4 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides three potential financial considerations disqualifying 
conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, 
“(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations;” and “(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.” Applicant’s tax problems were 
established by the evidence presented warranting further inquiry.   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because his 
tax arrearage issues with the IRS are current and ongoing. His debt is a “continuing 
course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-
11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 
16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because the 
 
6 
 
 
debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and his behavior does 
not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is pertinent inasmuch as Applicant could not have anticipated that 
he and his wife would suddenly find themselves caregivers for their three 
grandchildren. Having provided 100% support for his grandchildren, Applicant filed his 
2011 federal income tax return claiming them as dependents in good faith. When the 
IRS disallowed his grandchildren as dependents, Applicant immediately contacted the 
IRS, provided requested documentation, and retained the services of a CPA.1  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not relevant. Applicant produced sufficient documentation to 
warrant full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).2 Applicant has provided documentation that 
he is in the process of resolving of his SOR allegations.  AG ¶ 20(e) is fully applicable 
for the reasons discussed, supra. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 
2
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s service with his defense contractor employer weighs in his favor. He 
is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. He is current on his day-
to-day expenses, lives within his means, and his SOR allegations have been 
addressed. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person 
analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Applicant’s IRS difficulties stem from his good-faith belief that he was legally 
entitled to claim his three grandchildren as dependents on his 2011 federal income tax 
return. His CPA agrees with him and is assisting him to resolve his dispute with the 
IRS. All requested documentation by the IRS has been submitted -- once by the 
Applicant before he retained his CPA and once after. Applicant is following the advice 
of his CPA and has the funds to pay the IRS should they disallow his exemption. 
These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s years of financial 
responsibility before falling into debt, the circumstances that led to his financial 
difficulties, the steps he has taken to resolve his financial situation, his potential for 
future service as a defense contractor, the mature and responsible manner in which 
he dealt with his situation, the responsibility he has shown to his grandchildren, and 
his testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I 
conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
