 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01788 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Catie E. Young, Esq. 
 
 
November 6, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s mother, brother, mother-in-law, husband’s two brothers, two sisters, and 
their families are citizens and residents of the People’s Republic of China (China). 
Security concerns raised under Foreign Influence with respect to Applicant’s mother and 
brother were not mitigated. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant submitted her electronic Security Clearance Application (e-QIP) on 
November 5, 2013. On June 27, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under the guideline for 
Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the Statement of Reasons on July 21, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on September 2, 2014. A notice of 
hearing was issued to Applicant on September 4, 2014, scheduling a hearing for 
October 14, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 2, which were admitted without objection. The Government also 
presented a letter sent to Applicant dated August 28, 2014, marked Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I, to document that it forwarded copies of its exhibits to Applicant. Applicant 
testified on her own behalf. She presented Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through I, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was left open for receipt of additional 
documentation. On October 15, 2014, Applicant submitted AE J through M. Department 
Counsel had no objections to AE J through AE M, and they were admitted. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 24, 2014.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Request to take Administrative Notice 
 
 The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
China. Department Counsel provided a 12-page summary of the facts, with citations to 
20 Government documents pertaining to China, marked HE II. I take administrative 
notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters 
of general knowledge, and not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the 
Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 50 years old. She was born in the People’s Republic of China. She 
attended school there and earned a bachelor’s degree at a public university in Beijing. 
She paid no tuition for her education, because it was provided by China. She was 
employed by a university in China from 1986 to 1989. Applicant married in 1987. 
Applicant’s spouse moved to the United States that same year to study at a university. 
Applicant remained in China to work until January 1990, when she joined her husband 
in the United States. Applicant and her husband were both naturalized as United States 
citizens on April 16, 2002. Applicant has two daughters, ages 22 and 18. She has been 
employed by a government contractor since October 2013 and seeks a security 
clearance in connection with her employment. Applicant testified that she previously 
applied for and received a security clearance in connection with her employment in 
2005. (GE 1; GE 2; AE A; AE B; AE I; AE J; Tr. 36-43, 46, 48-52.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because her 
mother, brother, mother-in-law, husband’s two brothers, and husband’s two sisters and 
their families are citizens and residents of China. Applicant admitted all allegations in 
SOR subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d. (Answer.) 
 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of China. She is 80 years old. She 
worked as a nurse in a state-run hospital. She retired in 1987. Applicant has a loving 
 
3 
 
relationship with her and speaks to her on a weekly basis by phone for approximately 
30 minutes each call. Applicant does not regularly send her mother financial support, 
but indicated that she sent approximately $1,000 in 2003; $1,000 in 2004, and an 
undisclosed amount after her father passed away in 2006. Applicant’s mother was a 
member of the Communist party, but Applicant is unsure of her current status. 
Applicant’s father is deceased, but formerly worked as a lawyer for the Chinese 
Government. He was a member of the Communist party and worked in a memorial for 
one of China’s former leaders. Applicant’s mother is supported by her retirement funds 
she receives from the Chinese government. Applicant’s mother is aware of her field of 
work, but Applicant has never discussed her employment or her security clearance with 
her mother. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 24-28, 67-77, 85.) 
 
Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of China. He is 51 years old. He 
works in a private plastic manufacturing company. He is married and has one son, age 
24. Applicant speaks to her brother approximately five times per year by phone. She 
speaks with her brother’s wife less than five times per year. She has no contact with her 
nephew. No one in her brother’s family works for the Chinese government. They are not 
aware of her employment or security clearance status. (GE1; GE 2; Tr. 23-24, 28-35, 
80-81.) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law, husband’s two brothers, and husband’s two sisters 
and their families are citizens and residents of China. Applicant’s father-in-law is 
deceased. Her in-laws are all farmers and have no connections to the Chinese 
government. Applicant does not speak with them by phone. She sees them when she 
travels to China. They speak a different dialect of Chinese from Applicant and she is 
unable to communicate with them easily. Applicant’s husband speaks to his parents 
every two weeks. He has sent them money, totalling approximately $3,000, on a few 
occasions. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 56- 62, 81.) 
 
Applicant travels to China to see her mother and in-laws approximately every two 
years. She is planning a trip to China this fall. Her husband and children have 
accompanied her on some, but not all of her trips to China. She has always complied 
with travel reporting requirements. She testified that she would report any contact by a 
foreign national. (Tr. 52-56, 70.) 
 
Applicant has lived in her current hometown since 1994. She purchased a home 
there in 1995 and has equity in her home. She has two bank accounts with a balance of 
approximately $10,884, and a retirement savings account in the United States valued at 
$229,271. She has no assets in China and does not stand to inherit anything in China. 
Her oldest daughter is employed in the United States. Her younger daughter attends a 
U.S. college. She has no extended relatives in the United States. She testified that she 
has no loyalty to China. (GE 2; AE K; AE L; AE M; Tr. 62-66, 68, 87.) 
 
Applicant’s friend, colleague, and husband each wrote letters of support on her 
behalf. They attest to her commitment, honesty, reliability, and expertise on the job and 
in her personal life. They believe she is trustworthy. She was selected as employee of 
the month by one employer. Her 2006 performance review rated her as “good to 
 
4 
 
excellent.” She has achieved certificates for completing a number of professional 
education classes. (AE C; AE D; AE E; AE F; AE G; AE H.) 
 
China 
 
 China has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist 
party. China’s People’s Liberation Army (PLA), which is the consolidated military 
organization for China’s land, sea, strategic missiles, and air forces, is pursuing long-
term and comprehensive modernization of its military forces. 
 
 China utilizes a large, well-organized network of enterprises, defense factories, 
research institutes, and computer networks to facilitate the collection of sensitive 
information and export-controlled technology. The U.S. Department of Defense’s Annual 
Report to Congress on Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s 
Republic of China 2012 identified China as one of the world’s most active collectors and 
persistent perpetrators of economic espionage. China uses state-sponsored 
industrial/technical espionage to increase the level of technologies and expertise 
available to support military research, development, and acquisition. The National 
Counterintelligence Executive (NCE) found that China’s intelligence services, as well as 
private companies and other entities, frequently seek to exploit Chinese citizens or 
persons with family ties to China who can use their insider access to corporate networks 
to steal secrets using removable media devices or e-mail. 
 
The Department of Justice has filed an increasing number of cases and obtained 
convictions in espionage or illegal technology transfers involving China. There have 
been at least 26 major cases since 2006 which have been linked to China’s illegal 
acquisition of various technologies involving guidance and control, energy, aerospace, 
nuclear, innovative materials, and computer-aided manufacturing and design.  
 
China engages in violations of human rights. Repression and coercion against 
organizations and individuals involved in rights advocacy is routine. There is severe 
official repression of the freedoms of speech, religion, association, and harsh 
restrictions on the movement of certain ethnic groups. Security personnel may at times 
place foreign visitors under surveillance. Visitors are expected to register with the police 
within 24 hours of arrival in China. (HE II.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
 
5 
 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
 
6 
 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The following conditions could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 7 in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of their 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. 
 
 AG ¶ 7(a) requires the presence of family members (or business or professional 
associates, friends, or other persons) who are citizens and/or residents of a foreign 
nation, for which there is substantial evidence of a heightened risk. The heightened risk 
required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
Heightened risk denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government or substantial assets in a foreign nation. 
China is a country that actively collects industrial information, engages in industrial 
espionage, and commits human rights abuses. Therefore a heightened risk is present. 
Applicant’s mother, brother, mother-in-law, husband’s two brothers, two sisters, and 
their families are all citizens and residents of China. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
security concerns under AG ¶ 7(a).  
 
  Applicant’s husband, with whom she shares a residence, has an emotional 
connection to his family in China, as demonstrated by his calls to them every two weeks 
and by sending them money occasionally. Such relationships could potentially create a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion on Applicant 
due to her bonds to her husband and China’s history of efforts to commit industrial 
espionage. AG ¶ 7(d) therefore applies. 
 
  AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these people are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
 
7 
 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant is an apparently loyal U.S. citizen with no allegiance to the government 
of China. However, she is in a difficult position because her mother, whom she loves, is 
a citizen of China, and may still be a member of the Communist party. Her mother is 
supported by retirement funds she receives from the Chinese government. Applicant 
keeps in close contact with her mother and occasionally sends her monetary gifts. 
Although her communications with her brother and his wife are less frequent, occurring 
approximately five times per year, they represent a familial bond to him, which does not 
reduce the likelihood that their ties could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation. Her frequent trips to China further indicate her close ties to her family there. 
Although Applicant has longstanding ties to the United States, including a home, 
retirement savings, and long-time friendships, and she has fully met her reporting 
requirements concerning her foreign contacts and travel, the concerns raised by her 
close contact with her mother and brother are not mitigated. The protection of the 
national security is the paramount consideration and any doubt must be resolved in 
favor of national security. I am unable to find any of the mitigating conditions to be fully 
applicable to mitigate security concerns alleged under SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies because of Applicant’s long-standing loyalties in the 
United States. AG ¶ 8(c) applies to her infrequent contact with her in-laws. Despite the 
presence of some mitigation, it is insufficient to overcome the significant security 
concerns generated by Applicant’s family in China. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has strong ties to China through her mother and brother, whom she 
loves. Her mother is supported by retirement pay from the Chinese government. China 
actively collects industrial information, engages in industrial espionage, and commits 
human rights abuses. While Applicant has a reputation for being honest and 
trustworthy, and is well respected by those that know her personally and professionally, 
the security concerns remain undiminished. Applicant has not demonstrated that the 
potential for conflicts of interest, pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress are mitigated 
by the record evidence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   Against APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
