 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00865 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations and foreign influence security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 26, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline B, foreign influence. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 19, 2014, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on September 25, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 26, 2014, setting the hearing 
for October 7, 2014. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 14, which were 
 
2 
 
admitted into evidence without objection. Administrative notice-related documents 
offered by the Government were marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Department 
Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as HE II. Applicant testified and offered exhibits 
(AE) A through L. The exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection with the 
exception of AE I, which was not admitted and made moot by my ruling on the motion to 
amend the SOR (see below). Applicant’s two exhibit lists were marked as HE III and IV. 
The record was held open and Applicant submitted additional evidence. Applicant 
offered one exhibit, which was marked as AE M, and administrative notice documents, 
which were marked as HE VI (Applicant’s post-hearing exhibit list (HE V) listed the 
administrative notice documents as an Applicant exhibit, but I remarked it as HE VI). 
Department Counsel posed no objection, so the exhibit was admitted and I took 
administrative notice of the Applicant-submitted documents. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on October 17, 2014.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to re-letter SOR ¶ 1.n as SOR ¶ 
1.j to correct an obvious mis-lettering of the allegations. Applicant had no objection and 
the motion was granted. Additionally, both sides requested that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts concerning the country of the Ukraine. I have taken administrative 
notice of facts about the Ukraine as were stated in HE I and HE VI. Those specific facts 
are detailed later in this decision.1   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old and has worked as an information assurance manager 
for a defense contractor since July 2013. No formal education information for him is 
available in the record. He is married and his wife is a citizen of the Ukraine, where they 
were married in 2008. He has a child from an earlier relationship and he and his wife 
are expecting a child. He served in the Air Force for three years and was discharged 
with a general discharge under honorable conditions. He deployed as a civilian 
contractor to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom at various times in 2003, 2004, 
and 2006-2008. He performed duties in combat areas. He has held a security clearance 
since 1999.2  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in August 
2013, and was indebted on nine accounts. The debts were listed in his bankruptcy 
schedules and on credit reports from June 2013, March 2014, and April 2014. Applicant 
admitted all the debts, except for SOR ¶ 1.f. His admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact.3  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 11-12; HE I, VI. 
 
2 Tr. at 34-37, 69; GE 1. 
 
3 GE 6, 11-13; Answer. 
 
 
3 
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant’s wife is a citizen of the Ukraine and that his 
mother-in-law and two sisters-in-law are all citizens and residents of the Ukraine. 
Applicant admitted these allegations.4 
 
 Applicant was making a good salary from his contractor work and deployed 
status. He used the extra money to invest in real estate holdings with a childhood friend 
(SC). They formed a company and began acquiring run-down residential properties, 
which they rehabilitated and then rented. They began the business in 2008 and 
purchased six properties. At some point, another investor (CG) became part of the 
company. Later, both SC and CG wanted to divest themselves of the company and 
demanded that Applicant buy out their interests. In 2011, Applicant reached a 
settlement with both SC and CG. Before he could make payments under the settlement, 
he was laid off from his contractor position in December 2012. The layoff came because 
of the government furlough that impacted his contractor-employer. He was unable to 
pay the settlement amounts to SC and CG and became delinquent on his other financial 
obligations, including his residential mortgage. He remained unemployed until July 2013 
when he was hired for his current position.5   
 
 Applicant sought the advice of a bankruptcy attorney who advised him that once 
he became employed and received a regular paycheck, he could file a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy petition. This type of bankruptcy is commonly referred to as a wage earner 
plan. It enables individuals with regular income to develop a plan to repay all or part of 
their debts.6 Applicant filed the Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in August 2013. The 
bankruptcy plan included provisions that Applicant was to pay $1,850 per month starting 
in July 2014 and continuing until August 2016. Additionally, the properties that 
Applicant, SC, and CG owned would be sold by the trustee to satisfy the interests and 
judgments held by SC and CG (the SOR debts listed in ¶¶ 1.b – 1.e). All the remaining 
SOR debts were incorporated into the plan (SOR ¶¶ 1.f – 1.j). The plan was approved in 
August 2014. Applicant has paid over $11,000 into the plan and is current on his 
monthly payments. He is also current on his pending obligations and his current gross 
income is approximately $130,000. He received financial counselling as part of the 
bankruptcy process.7  
 
 Applicant‘s wife was born in the Ukraine and she is currently a citizen of that 
country. She moved to the United States in 2009 following her marriage to Applicant. 
She has not returned to the Ukraine since coming to this country. She has applied for 
U.S. citizenship and is awaiting the completion of her application request. Her mother 
and two sisters are citizens and residents of the Ukraine. Applicant has not had contact 
with these in-laws since his wedding. They do not speak English. Applicant’s wife had 
weekly contact with her mother and sometimes her sisters, but that contact has ceased 
                                                          
4 Answer. 
 
5 Tr. at 37-39; Answer. 
 
6 See: http://www.uscourts.gov/FederalCourts/Bankruptcy/BankruptcyBasics/Chapter13.aspx 
 
7 Tr. at 40-41, 44-48, 51-52; GE 6, 9, 10; AE M. 
 
 
4 
 
due to Applicant telling his wife that she should restrict her contact with her relatives. 
Applicant does not provide any financial assistance to his in-laws. Neither his mother-in-
law nor the sisters-in-law have any government affiliation.8   
 
 Applicant presented character letters from coworkers and friends who indicated 
that he was trustworthy and loyal. He also presented job performance appraisals which 
showed that he was meeting performance expectations.9 
 
Ukraine 
 
The Ukraine has existed as an independent state for just over 20 years. During 
that time, it has moved to transition to a democratic society. It is ruled by a 
presidential-parliamentary form of government. In 2008, the United States signed the 
U.S.-Ukraine Charter on Strategic Partnership, which highlights the importance of the 
bilateral relationship and outlines enhanced cooperation in the areas of defense, 
security, economics and trade, energy, security, democracy, and cultural 
exchanges. In 2009, the U.S. Vice President spoke highly of the relationship between 
the United States and the Ukraine. 
 
A cornerstone for the continuing partnership between the United States and 
the Ukraine has been the Freedom Support Act, under which the Ukraine has 
received from the United States more than $4.1 billion since its independence. 
Ukraine has contributed troops and military personnel to the missions in Iraq and 
Afghanistan. Despite these facts, there has been some criticism of the Ukraine’s 
2010 electoral process. In addition, the Director of National Intelligence recently 
expressed concern that the Ukraine could drift toward authoritarianism. At present, 
however, there is no evidence the Ukraine’s government targets U.S. citizens for 
classified or protected information, or is associated with any risk of terrorism. 
 
 In March 2014, Russian forces moved into the Crimean peninsula in western 
Ukraine, and annexed the region. Ukraine and the United States do not recognize the 
annexation. The U.S. General Assembly affirmed Ukraine’s territorial integrity in March 
2014 and deemed the March 16 referendum on Crimean annexation illegitimate. Russia 
has positioned military forces on the border of eastern Ukraine and requires non-
Russian citizens to obtain a Russian visa to enter Crimea. Armed militants have 
threatened, detained, or kidnapped some journalists and international observers in 
eastern Ukraine for hours or days. In May 2014, the State Department issued a warning 
to U.S. citizens to defer all non-essential travel to Ukraine, and to avoid all travel—
essential or non-essential—to the Crimean peninsula. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 58-62. 
 
9 AE A, F-G. 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant had multiple delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant were recent. He filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy and has been making payments under the approved bankruptcy plan. These 
efforts to repair his financial position make it reasonable to conclude that these types of 
debts will not recur, nor do they cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
Applicant’s finances suffered an upheaval when his business associates 
demanded divestiture from their real estate enterprise and shortly thereafter Applicant 
was laid off from his job due to the government furlough. He sought the advice of a 
bankruptcy attorney and once he obtained full-time employment in his career field in 
2013, he was able to file for bankruptcy protection under Chapter 13 and propose a 
repayment plan that was ultimately accepted by the court. His business relationship 
breakup and unemployment were conditions beyond his control and once he was able 
to do so, he acted responsibly by filing for Chapter 13 bankruptcy and making payments 
under the court-approved plan. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 There are clear indications that all the debts are being resolved through the 
Chapter 13 plan. He received financial counselling and made good-faith efforts to 
resolve all the debts listed on the SOR. He supplied documentary evidence showing the 
payments made under the approved bankruptcy plan. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) apply. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
 
8 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
creates a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s wife is a citizen of the Ukraine, but is in the process of gaining U.S. 
citizenship. Applicant’s mother-in-law and two sisters-in-law are citizens and residents 
of the Ukraine. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
 
9 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
Applicant married his Ukrainian wife in 2008. Since that time she has relocated to 
the United States and has not returned to the Ukraine. She is in the process of gaining 
U.S. citizenship. He has virtually no contact with his Ukrainian in-laws. His wife also has 
distanced herself from her Ukrainian relatives at her husband’s request. They do not 
provide financial support to these relatives. The in-laws do not have any affiliations with 
the Ukrainian government. There was no evidence to suggest that any of his Ukrainian 
in-laws are influenced by the politics of the Ukraine. I find that Applicant has deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States having served alongside 
our military in combat at various times. It is unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interest of a relative and the United States. It 
is clear that even in the unlikely event such a situation would arise he would choose in 
favor of the interests of the United States. Therefore, I find AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) 
apply. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of 
the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
I found Applicant to be honest and candid about the circumstances that led to his 
debts. He has served his country in harm’s way. His character references described him 
as a man of honesty and loyalty. He has honored his bankruptcy payment plan. I found 
 
10 
 
nothing to indicate a likelihood that similar circumstances would recur. I am convinced 
that he will not be placed into a position to choose between the interests of his foreign 
relatives and the United States. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations and the foreign influence 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT   
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT   
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:   For Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
