1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00451
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina Marine,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On March 21, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under  Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
and Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 28, 2014. A notice of
hearing was issued on September 12, 2014, scheduling the hearing for October 23,
2014.  Government Exhibits (GX) 1-4 were admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A- H, which were admitted
without objection. I held the record open for additional submissions until November 7,
2014. Applicant timely submitted four documents, which were admitted as AX I-L,
without objection. The transcript was received on November 3, 2014.  Based on a
2
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Department Counsel requested that I amend the SOR by adding an allegation,
as SOR ¶ 1.p, that Applicant is indebted to the Federal Government for unpaid taxes for
the year 2013 in the approximate amount of $10,000. As of the date of the SOR, it
remains unpaid. I granted the motion to amend. (Tr. 49)
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the majority of the SOR allegations
under Guideline F. She “admitted and denied” the allegation under Guideline E, and
provided explanations. I am treating this as a denial.
Applicant is 36 years old. She graduated from high school in 1997, obtained her
undergraduate degree in 2002, and her master’s degree in 2007. Applicant married in
2004. She has three children. Applicant completed her first security clearance
application in August 2013.  She has been employed with her current employer since
September 2010. (GX 1)
The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts, including unpaid federal taxes for 2010,
2011, 2012, and 2013. The other delinquent debts are collection accounts totaling
approximately $41,760. 
Applicant’s financial difficulties began in June 2009, when her husband lost his
job. He was unemployed for about four months. (Tr.44) Approximately one year later in
July 2010. Applicant was laid off from her job. Applicant’s two children attended private
schools, and she did not want to disrupt their schooling, so they remained in their
respective schools. The annual tuition  for each child was approximately $10,000.
Another large expense was daycare. Applicant was concerned with maintaining her
family. (Tr. 37)
During this time period with reduced income, Applicant did not pay her federal
taxes. She has unpaid taxes for the years 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. Applicant
provided for her family as best she could. However, she began to use credit cards for
expenses. In 2014, Applicant opened seven new credit cards to charge clothing,
furniture and other items. She purchased a new vehicle in 2013. (Tr. 54)
As to SOR allegation 1. a. this debt is paid. In a 2011 installment agreement with
the IRS, Applicant paid $902 for the unpaid taxes for tax year 2010. (AX C)
Allegations 1.b, 1c, and 1.p relate to the unpaid taxes for years 2011, 2012, and
2013. Applicant entered into an installment agreement with the IRS. She submitted
documentation that she has made monthly payments of $450 current to October 2014.
3
(AX F and J) The payments are automatically deducted from her bank account each
month.
Applicant submitted a 2014 payment history from a firm who is in the process of
settling  a number of her delinquent accounts. (AX A) She stated that the debts alleged
in SOR 1.d, g, i, j, k. l, m, and n have been settled with the credit companies. (TR. 18,
AX A) The history shows a recurring $309 fee to the company, but does not indicate
what payment or settlement was made to the account alleged in the SOR. (TR. 33)
Applicant submitted the same payment history post hearing and marked various
accounts that supposedly relate to the settlement of the SOR delinquent debts. (AX K)
Applicant stated that the names do not correspond to the SOR accounts as the
accounts were sold to various collection agencies. (AX L) There is no indication that the
accounts have been fully settled.
As to SOR 1.f, Applicant submitted documentation that the account is paid in full
for $563. (AX B)
The delinquent account alleged in SOR 1.h is unpaid, but Applicant stated that
she would settle the account after the hearing. (Tr. 20) She did not provide any support
for this assertion. 
Applicant admitted that the account alleged in SOR 1.e is unresolved. She
learned the debt was charged off and she states that she thought that meant it was
zeroed out. (Tr. 20) She paid taxes on it but did not pay the debt. She has not
contacted the creditor. She also noted that the statute of limitation is five years on this
debt and she had to determine whether it would make sense to take care of it. (Tr. 34)
Applicant currently earns $141,000. Her husband also works and earns about
$105,000.  She has about $15,000 in her 401(k) account.  She follows a budget.  There
is nothing in the record to reflect any financial counseling. She did not provide the
amount of her net monthly remainder.
Personal Conduct
Sometime in 2010, Applicant volunteered to hold the position of treasurer of her
daughter’s Girl Scout troop. She admits that the time was quite stressful due to the
reduced income that she and her husband  had and the delinquent debts they were
acquiring. She noted that buying groceries was difficult. (Tr. 22) She decided to
“borrow” money from the Girl Scout fund so that she could pay for personal expenses.
She wrote checks to herself to cover various personal expenses. Applicant stressed
that she would replace the money in the account, but she could not always replace the
full amount. She emphasized that no one was going to get hurt, and that by putting the
money back she was causing no harm. (Tr. 22)
Applicant continued to “borrow”  money from the Girl Scout fund for about one
year. She emphasized that the money was always in the account when the troop
needed money. Applicant explained that due to laziness she did not deposit sufficient
4
income at the end of the year to cover the checks that she had written. She felt
compelled to falsify the financial documents. The account lapsed when there was a
negative balance due to fees and interest charges. The bank closed the account.
When the troop decided to disband, Applicant had to turn the checking account
over to the next troop. (Tr. 23) At that time she disclosed that she had used the troop
money for personal use and had written checks. Also, at that time Applicant owed
money on an outstanding check.  When the issue reached the administrative level of
the Girl Scouts, it was decided that charges of fraud would not be filed if Applicant
would confirm in writing her wrongdoings and agree to never participate in any official
role with the Girl Scouts. Applicant also had to resign from her position as President of
the Parents’ Association at her daughter’s school. The principal had learned about the
situation with the Girl Scout accounts and advised Applicant to relinquish her duties.
(Tr. 26)
Applicant realizes that she made a bad decision. She knows that what she did
was wrong. She is sorry and believes that it will not happen again. (Tr. 27) In 2013, she
removed her children from private school. (Tr. 36) She believes she has paid the
consequences for the behavior. 
Applicant did not disclose the information concerning the theft and the fraudulent
documents on her security clearance application. She also did not disclose anything
when speaking to the investigator during her first subject interview. (GX 2) Applicant
reasoned that the security clearance application is fairly black and white and that
because there was no prosecution, she saw no need to list it or disclose it. (TR. 61) Her
reasoning was also based on the premise that she did not think it was appropriate. She
is a human being and people make mistakes. (Tr. 64) During a second interview in
December 2013, Applicant was confronted with the information concerning the
fraudulent financial reporting behavior and the theft from the Girl Scout account. (GX 2)
She admitted that the behavior went on for about a year. Applicant has not reported this
adverse information to her current employer because she does not believe they need to
know. (Tr. 76) She maintains she made a mistake and has been adequately punished.
Applicant’s character references do not know about the Girl Scout incident.
Applicant submitted several letters from her former employer concerning her
stellar achievements. She was awarded the Exception Achievement Award in Customer
Service for 2013. She is praised for her outstanding talents. (AX E, H) 
Applicant’s current employer presented her with the 2013 President’s Award.
She is acknowledged by her employer for her accepting and surviving a challenging
assignment. She is commended for her dedication, hard work, and outstanding
contributions.  (AX D)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
5
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
 Id.      6
6
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but when combined with all available information supports
a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that a person may not
properly safeguard protected information.
In this case AG ¶ 16(d) applies. Applicant admits that she falsified financial
statements and wrote  personal checks from the Girl Scout fund account. At the time,
she was the treasurer of the troop. She continued this behavior for almost a year. When
she neglected to keep the required amount of money in the account, the bank closed
the account. Applicant did not disclose her behavior until she had to transfer materials
to the next troop leader. She was not prosecuted because she acknowledged her
behavior and agreed to resign. Applicant believes she made a mistake and has
suffered enough humiliation. She did not disclose the incident during her first subject
interview with OPM. It was not until she was confronted that she acknowledged the
behavior. At the hearing, she stated she did not think that it was relevant and that she
7
was not asked directly so she never disclosed it. Applicant has not told her employer
about the fraudulent actions. 
Applicant’s explanations do not persuade me that she is reliable, trustworthy, or
has met her burden to mitigate the personal conduct concerns. After considering the
mitigating factors, Applicant has not mitigated the personal conduct security concerns
under Guideline E. She has not acknowledged that it was relevant to her security
trustworthiness. I find this leaves me with doubts about her eligibility for a security
clearance. Any doubts must be resolved in favor of the Government.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant admitted that she did not pay her taxes for the years in question. Her
credit report confirms her delinquent debts. She admitted that she wrote personal
checks to herself from the Girl Scout fund when she was the treasurer. Consequently,
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations) apply. FC DC AG ¶ 19(d) (deceptive or illegal financial practices such as
embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account
fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of trust)
applies. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against
him and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant’s unpaid taxes
continued until 2013. She has an agreement to pay them. However, she chose not to
resolve a debt based on the fact that it might be removed from her credit report due to
length of time.  Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC)
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
applies in part. Applicant and her husband experienced unemployment and reduced
8
income which caused the financial difficulty in 2009. She worked with the IRS and
retained a company to settle her debts, which is laudable. However, she chose to take
money from the Girl Scout fund to supplement her lack of income. I cannot find that she
acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has some application. Applicant as noted above
took steps to arrange payments with the IRS and to settle some debts.  She has not
addressed all the debts, but is in the process. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are  clear indications
that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control) applies in part.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 36 years old. She is an educated woman This is her first application for a
security clearance. She has been with her current employer since 2010. She has great
skills and has received recognition by her employers. 
Applicant and her husband became unemployed and entered into financial
difficulties. Their priority was to provide for their children, including the $20,000 tuition
for two children. Applicant believed it was justified to “borrow” money from the Girl
Scout fund for a period of a year so that she could maintain her family expenses. She
admits falsifying financial documents for about a year. She knows she made a mistake
but does not believe that she needed to reveal this information to security investigators
or her current employer. I find this troubling.
9
Applicant has initiated good-faith efforts to pay her taxes and settle her other
delinquent debts. She provided sufficient information concerning the payment plan with
the IRS. The information concerning the settlements is not clear as to the debts referred
to in this case. She also chose not to address a debt based on the fact that it might be
removed from her credit report with time. 
Applicant did not persuade me that she refuted or mitigated the Government’s
case concerning the personal conduct and financial considerations security concerns.
Any doubts must be resolved in the Government’s favor. For all these reasons,
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under personal conduct and financial
considerations.  Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline : AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.g-1.o Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline : AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
