 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-00649 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Applicant has mitigated the Guideline F 
concerns and refuted the Guideline E allegations. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 4, 2013. 
On April 22, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F and E. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 30, 2014, and answered it on May 22, 2014. 
She did not request a hearing before an administrative judge. On June 18, 2014, 
Department Counsel requested a hearing. (Hearing Exhibit (HX) I.) Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
was ready to proceed on August 14, 2014, and the case was assigned to me on August 
19, 2014. Department Counsel’s pre-hearing letter to Applicant, providing copies of 
evidence to be submitted at the hearing, is attached to the record as HX II. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 20, 2014, 
scheduling the hearing for September 10, 2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through F, which were 
admitted without objection. I kept the record open until September 26, 2014, to enable 
Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. She timely submitted AX G 
through J, which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments 
regarding AX G through J are attached to the record as HX III. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on September 25, 2014. 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.a to conform to the evidence by 
alleging that a judgment was entered against Applicant in November 2007, instead of 
April 2009 as originally alleged. Applicant had no objection to the amendment, and the 
motion to amend was granted. (Tr. 17-18.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e-1.i, 1.k, 1.l, 1.n, 
1.o, and 1.q-1.x. She denied ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.j, 1.m, 1.p, 2.a, and 2.b. Her admissions in 
her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old production planner and scheduler for a defense 
contractor. She has worked for her current employer since April 1997. She has held a 
security clearance since 2011. (Tr. 11.) 
 
 Applicant’s performance appraisals use a four-point scale: 1 (below 
expectations), 2 (meets expectations), 3 (exceeds expectations), and 4 (far exceeds 
expectations). She was rated as meeting expectations in 2011 and 2012 and exceeding 
expectations in 2013. (AX D, E, and F.) 
 
Applicant did not complete high school, but she received her general educational 
development (GED) certificate in 1990. She earned an associate’s degree in April 1997 
and a bachelor’s degree in November 2007. 
 
 Applicant married in September 1990, separated in August 2003, and divorced in 
March 2005. She has two children, now ages 27 and 23. The two children lived with her 
during the separation and after the divorce. The divorce decree required her ex-
husband to pay child support of $450 per month. Their daughter was 18 years old and 
their son was 14 years old at the time of the divorce. (AX H.) The child support 
payments stopped in 2008, but their son continued to live with Applicant. (GX 6 at 4.) 
 
3 
 
 The SOR alleges 24 delinquent debts. The evidence concerning these debts is 
summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a, judgment for unpaid rent, entered in November 2007 ($1,350). 
Applicant rented an apartment for one year, agreeing to pay rent of $1,350 per month. 
In a July 2010 personal subject interview (PSI),1 she told the investigator she moved out 
of the apartment before the end of the lease term because her landlady made repeated 
no-notice visits and harassed her about nonexistent issues. When the landlady sued for 
the rent for the remaining term of the lease, Applicant contacted the landlady’s attorney, 
but she had not resolved the debt at the time of the PSI. (GX 6 at 1.)  
 
In a second PSI in December 2013, Applicant told the investigator that, after she 
moved in, the landlady informed her that she was required to pay an additional $250 per 
month because she had a dog. Applicant immediately moved out to avoid the additional 
fee. In this PSI, she stated that she contacted the owner’s lawyer, and they agreed to 
settle the dispute for $600. (GX 3 at 2.) In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that 
the debt was settled for $1,350.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she was uncomfortable with her landlady’s 
frequent and unexpected visits and decided to move out of the apartment after about 
three months. After the judgment was filed, she visited the landlady’s lawyer, who 
agreed to settle the matter for $600. Applicant has no documentation of a $600 payment 
to the lawyer. She testified that she thought the issue was resolved until she was 
confronted with the unsatisfied judgment by a security investigator. (Tr. 38-39.) The debt 
is not resolved.2 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b, debt to credit union, referred for collection in September 2009 
($275). In the December 2013 PSI, Applicant told the investigator that she was not 
aware of this debt until he confronted her with her credit report. (GX 2 at 7; GX 3 at 3.) 
She admitted the debt in her answer to the SOR and promised to contact the original 
creditor. She determined that the debt was a joint debt with her ex-husband, and she 
intends to pay it by the end of 2014. (AX G at 2.) 
 
                                                          
1 There are three PSI summaries in the record. GX 3 is a summary of a PSI in December 2013 and GX 6 
consists of summaries of two PSIs in July 2010 and September 2010. GX 3 and GX 6 were not 
authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. I explained the authentication requirement to Applicant, 
and she waived it. (Tr. 27-29.) 
 
2 The same creditor obtained a judgment against Applicant for $4,364 in April 2009 (the date originally 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant had leased an apartment in the same building for her daughter, who was 
attending college, with the understanding that her daughter and a roommate would pay the rent. The 
roommate moved out and Applicant’s daughter could not afford to pay the rent. The creditor obtained a 
judgment against Applicant, which was collected by garnishment of her pay. This judgment was satisfied 
in July 2011. (Tr. 62-68; GX 2 at 4.) The confusion about two judgments filed by the same creditor that 
caused the drafting error in SOR ¶ 1.a may account for Applicant’s conflicting descriptions of the events 
surrounding the judgment filed against her in November 2007. 
 
4 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d, delinquent utility bills, referred for collection in 
December 2010 ($78) and in September 2008 ($50). In the December 2013 PSI, 
Applicant told the investigator she was unaware of these debts until confronted with 
them, because she always paid her electric bill on time. (GX 2 at 8; GX 3 at 3.) In her 
response to the SOR, she denied this debt, stating she has an account with the same 
utility company and could not have opened a new account without closing out and 
paying the account for her previous residence. At the hearing, she testified that she 
contacted the utility company and was informed that her account is not delinquent. (Tr. 
80-83.) I found Applicant’s testimony regarding this debt plausible and credible. Thus, I 
conclude that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is resolved.  
 
Applicant’s credit reports do not establish the $50 utility debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.d. Both credit reports reflect that the collection account alleged in the SOR 
(#2082671237) is for a medical debt, not a utility bill. (GX 2 at 8; GX 5 at 21.) The 
medical debt is not alleged in the SOR. SOR ¶ 1.d is resolved for Applicant. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.h, delinquent student loans totaling $16,305, and SOR ¶¶ 1.q-
1.x, delinquent student loans totaling $44,904. Applicant began a loan rehabilitation 
program in September 2013, requiring her to pay $100 per month for 12 months. She 
completed the program in August 2014, and her student loans are now in forbearance 
for one year. During the forbearance period, she is required to pay only the interest on 
the loans. She intends to consolidate all her student loans at a more favorable interest 
rate. (Answer to SOR; AX A; Tr. 83-91.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i, cell phone bill, referred for collection in November 2012 ($944). 
Applicant admitted this debt in her answer to the SOR. She is negotiating with the 
creditor, who is willing to settle for less than the full amount. However, the debt is not 
yet resolved. (AX G at 3.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j, cell phone bill, referred for collection in November 2012 ($939). 
Applicant denied this debt in her answer to the SOR. She stated that she obtained a cell 
phone with a 30-day return agreement about seven years ago. She decided that it was 
too expensive and returned the cell phone within 30 days. In her December 2013 PSI, 
she stated that she obtained a cell phone under an introductory program in which the 
first 60 days were free, and she returned the cell phone before the 60-day trial period 
ended. (GX 3 at 3.) Applicant’s June 2010 CBR indicates that the account number 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j is the same account number as another account with a different 
cell phone service provider, but she has not contacted the creditor reflected on the June 
2010 CBR. The cell phone service reflected on the June 2010 CBR was used by 
Applicant’s ex-husband. (GX 5 at 14; Tr. 91-94.) Applicant has filed a dispute with the 
credit reporting agencies. The debt is not resolved. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.l, medical bills referred for collection in October ($37) and 
November 2013 ($27). Applicant admitted these debts in her answer to the SOR. They 
are not resolved. 
 
 
5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m, cell phone bill referred for collection in August 2013 ($161). 
Applicant denied this debt in her answer to the SOR. She has disputed the debt with the 
credit reporting agencies. It is not resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.n, medical bill, referred for collection in October 2013 ($125). 
Applicant admitted this debt in her answer to the SOR. It is not resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.o, checking account debt, referred for collection in August 2013 
($91). Applicant admitted this debt in her answer to the SOR. She opened this account 
for her son in 2008-2009. The debt is for her son’s dishonored check. (AX G at 2.) It is 
not resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.p, medical debt, referred for collection in April 2009 ($312). 
Applicant denied this debt in her answer to the SOR. It is not resolved. 
 
 When Applicant submitted her SCA in October 2013, she answered “No” to all 
the questions about financial problems. (GX 1 at 26-27.) However, in the space for 
additional comments, she disclosed that she had delinquent student loans in a 
rehabilitation program. She also disclosed that she was making monthly $50 payments 
to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to satisfy a tax debt, which has since been paid. 
(GX 1 at 29.) In her December 2013 PSI, she told the investigator that she did not list 
any delinquent debts because she had made payment agreements for the debts she 
knew about. She voluntarily disclosed three satisfied judgments reflected on her CBR 
but not alleged in the SOR. She told the investigator that she was unaware of the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.i-1.p until he confronted her with her CBR. (GX 3 
at 3.).  
 
In her answer to the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant denied intentionally 
falsifying her SCA. (Tr. 100-01.) She pointed out that she had answered the financial 
questions correctly in a previous SCA submitted in 2010. In her previous SCA, she 
disclosed failing to pay taxes when due, having her wages garnished, and having been 
more than 180 days delinquent on debts, including her student loans. In the section for 
additional comments, she stated that she and her ex-husband were still sorting out who 
was responsible for joint debts incurred during the marriage. (GX 4.) On her current 
SCA, she disclosed her delinquent student loans and IRS debt. (GX 1 at 29.)  
 
 Applicant maintains a detailed budget. Her monthly net income is about $3,009 
and her expenses are about $2,376, leaving a net monthly remainder of $633. Her 
income projection includes at least 14 hours of overtime each week. Without overtime, 
her monthly income would be $2,571, leaving a net monthly remainder of $195. Her 
expenses include repayment of the 401k loan, interest on student loans, contributions to 
her 401k account, and $50 in savings. She drives a 15-year-old car that is debt free. 
(AX J.) 
 
 Applicant plans to pay the delinquent loans alleged in the SOR, starting with the 
smallest debts and working up to the larger debts. She intends to pay off the following 
 
6 
 
debts by the end of $2014: SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($78), 1.d ($50), 1.k ($37), 1.l ($27), and 1.n 
($125). She intends to pay the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($275) by mid-2015. She is 
negotiating with the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.i, who has offered to settle the account for less 
than the full amount. Her plan does not include the unsatisfied judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
(AX G.) As of the date the record closed, she had not tried to obtain a copy of the 
judgment or check the court records to determine if the judgment was satisfied or 
otherwise resolved. This creditor was aggressive in collecting the two previous 
judgments, but the record reflects no effort by the creditor to enforce the judgment in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. The absence of enforcement action suggests that the creditor may consider 
the matter closed. I am satisfied that Applicant will pay the amount due, if any, on the 
debt underlying the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
7 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions in her answer to the SOR, her testimony at the hearing, 
her responses during the PSIs, and the information in her CBRs establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
8 
 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s debts are numerous and not yet 
resolved. Additional student loans are not likely to recur, but the other delinquent debts 
were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Applicant’s marital breakup, her daughter’s inability to 
pay her rent, her son’s dishonored check, and Applicant’s various medical bills were 
circumstances beyond her control. Her response to some of the delinquent debts was 
delayed because she was not aware of the full extent of her financial problems related 
to joint accounts and marital debts until a security investigator confronted her with her 
CBR. However, she has a plan for resolving all her delinquent debts and has taken 
substantial steps to implement the plan. 
 
Much of Applicant’s plan for regaining financial stability consists of promises to 
resolve debts within the next year. A promise to pay a delinquent debt in the future is 
not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner. ISCR Case No. 
07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008). However, Applicant has already established a 
track record of financial responsibility by satisfying three judgments not alleged in the 
SOR, resolving a federal tax debt not alleged in the SOR, and completing a 
rehabilitation plan for her student loans. 
 
 
9 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not fully established, because Applicant has not sought or received 
financial counseling. However, there are “clear indications” that her financial problems 
are being resolved. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. The fact that Applicant has not addressed every debt 
alleged in the SOR does not preclude application of this mitigating condition. A security 
clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish resolution of every debt alleged 
in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. The adjudicative guidelines do not require that 
an individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor do they 
require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 
2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant resolved several debts not alleged in the SOR, 
rehabilitated her student loans, and devised a credible and reasonable plan to resolve 
her remaining debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.m, which she has 
formally disputed with the credit reporting agencies. She has denied several other 
debts, but she has not yet filed formal disputes with the credit reporting agencies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . .”  When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the 
Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 
03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s level of education and business 
experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information 
on a security clearance application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant’s explanation for answering “No” to all the financial questions on her 
most recent SCA was plausible and credible. She disclosed her delinquent debts in her 
 
10 
 
previous SCA, was candid and open during three PSI’s, and disclosed her delinquent 
student loans and a federal tax debt on her most recent SCA. I am satisfied that she did 
not intend to conceal material and relevant information. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 
16(a) is not established. No other disqualifying conditions under this guideline are 
established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has been a trustworthy and dependable employee for 15 years and has 
held a security clearance for almost four years. She was candid, sincere, and credible at 
the hearing. She has protected her children, sometimes to her financial detriment. She 
has endured a marital breakup and the financial chaos that followed it, and she is well 
on her way to restoring her financial stability.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to decide close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations and refuted the 
allegations that she falsified her SCA. Accordingly, I conclude she has carried her 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue her 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
11 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.x:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
