 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01300 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 11, 2014. Department Counsel requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 18, 
2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on September 26, 2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 16, 2014. 
 
2 
 
 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 27, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR. His admissions are incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He graduated from college in 2004. He is not married 
and has no children. He has worked for his present employer, a federal contractor, 
since May 2013.1  
 
 After graduating from college, Applicant worked from 2005 to 2008 for a 
technology business. In April 2008, he decided to open his own business with a family 
member. The business was successful for about six to eight months, but then the 
downturn in the economy affected it. He could no longer afford the rent payments so he 
moved the business to a more affordable location. Applicant had three credit cards. One 
was a personal credit card and the two others were business credit cards that he 
personally guaranteed. He also used his personal credit card for business. He 
understood he was personally responsible for the payments. None of the credit cards 
included his partner’s name. He was making minimal payments on the cards until he 
stopped paying them completely at the end of 2010.2  
 
 Applicant confirmed that he has not made any attempt to pay the credit cards 
because he was unable to do so. In 2010, he contacted the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a 
($18,066) to negotiate a settlement, but he was unsuccessful. He has had no further 
contact with the creditor. The creditor is the same for SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($11,748) and 1.c 
($14,954). He has not contacted this creditor.3 
 
 Applicant worked in his family’s business from January 2011 until May 2013. 
There were periods when he was not compensated. He lived with his parents and did 
part-time work in the technology field. He currently earns approximately $80,000 
annually. He continues to live at home rent-free. He estimated he has about $25,000 in 
savings. He owns a condominium that he purchased for $69,900 in 2008 with the help 
of his father. Applicant contributed about $10,000 to the purchase price and his father 
gave him the rest. Applicant is the sole owner of the property and has no obligation to 
                                                          
1 Tr. 18-20. 
 
2 Tr. 21-24, 32, 40-45. 
 
3 Tr. 24-26, 30-31, 36; GE 3 and 4.  
 
 
3 
 
 
repay his father. The condominium is rented. Applicant receives about $8,000 in profit 
annually from the rental. The value of the property is approximately $85,000.4  
 
 Applicant stated he does not intend to repay the debts alleged in the SOR 
because does not believe paying them will help his situation. He stated he does not 
want to pay the debts.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
4 Tr. 26-27, 31, 36-40. 
 
5 Tr. 28-31; 45-46. 
 
4 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has three delinquent credit card debts totaling more than $44,760 that 
he is unwilling to pay. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debts which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant admitted he owes all three credit card debts. Although he attributed the 
debts to a failed business venture, he also used one card for personal expenses. 
Applicant has the resources to repay his delinquent debts, but refuses to do so. He 
understood that he personally guaranteed the credit cards. I find none of the above 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant is 32 years old. He is a college graduate. He started a business in 2008 
that failed in 2010. He used credit cards for personal use and to pay business 
expenses. He has a well-paying job, rental income, and substantial savings. He does 
not intend to repay the debts he owes. He has chosen to walk away from his financial 
obligations. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
       
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
