 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-00906 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his 
numerous delinquent debts and failure to file federal and state income tax returns for 
several years. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 9, 2013. On May 
29, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 6, 2014; answered it on June 19, 2014; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed on August 14, 2014, and the case was assigned to me on August 19, 2014. 
 
2 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
August 20, 2014, scheduling the hearing for September 10, 2014. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A and B, 
which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s letter providing Applicant 
with copies of all documents she intended to submit at the hearing is attached to the 
record as Hearing Exhibit I. I kept the record open until September 26, 2014, to enable 
Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He did not submit any additional 
evidence or request additional time to obtain it.1 DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
September 25, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations except SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.k, and 1.r. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old welder employed by a defense contractor since June 
2013. He attended high school from September 2003 to June 2005 but did not receive a 
diploma. He dropped out of high school because his mother was in prison and he 
needed to support himself. He has never known his father. (GX 3 at 2.) He received a 
general educational development (GED) certificate in October 2005. He attended a 
community college from August 2006 to January 2008. He did not receive a degree, but 
he earned enough credits to obtain certification as a welder. 
 
 Applicant worked as a line cook from April 2005 to March 2008. He also worked 
as a welder for a defense contractor from August 2007 to September 2011. He was 
disciplined for missing work in May 2010 and fired in September 2011 for providing 
misleading information. He worked as a welder for other employers from September 
2011 until he began his current job. He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 In a personal subject interview (PSI) in October 20132 and at the hearing, 
Applicant testified that his firing for providing misleading information occurred because 
his supervisor did not charge him for vacation time when he came to work late, but he 
did not notice the overpayments because they were minimal. He believes he was fired 
                                                          
1 Applicant asked for three weeks to obtain and submit additional evidence. I informed him that I would 
hold the record open for 15 days, but that I would extend the deadline if he needed more time. (Tr. 84-
85.) On October 6, 2014, and again on October 14, 2014, Department Counsel reminded him of the 
deadline. (HX II.) He did not submit any additional evidence or request additional time to obtain it.  
 
2 The summary of the PSI was not authenticated as required by the Directive ¶ E3.1.20. I explained the 
authentication requirement to Applicant, and he affirmatively waived it. (Tr. 21.) 
 
 
3 
 
because he did not report his supervisor’s misconduct. (Tr. 77-79.) Applicant’s firing is 
not alleged in the SOR.3  
 
 Before Applicant was fired, he was being trained to be a supervisor and was 
earning about $23 per hour. He found another job shortly thereafter, earning about $17 
an hour. His current pay is about $21 per hour. (Tr. 73-75.) 
 
 Applicant has never married. He has lived with a cohabitant since April 2012. He 
has three children, ages seven, five, and one, and he pays $608 per month in child 
support for the seven-year-old child. (GX 1 at 22-23; GX 3 at 2-3; Tr. 30.) His cohabitant 
is not employed outside the home. (Tr. 67.) 
 
 The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.r) totaling about $23,158. 
All the delinquent debts are reflected on his credit bureau reports (CBRs). (GX 2; GX 4.) 
In his response to the SOR, he promised to contact his creditors and make payment 
arrangements for the debts.  
 
The evidence concerning the debts alleged in the SOR is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a, unsatisfied judgment entered in August 2012 for unpaid rent 
($799). Applicant rented an apartment in his name for his mother when she was 
released from prison. His mother worked for a short time, lost her job, and left the 
apartment without paying the rent. The judgment is unsatisfied. (Tr. 33-34.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b, unsatisfied judgment entered in August 2012 ($314). In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant denied this debt, stating he did not know what it was. He 
testified that he called the courthouse but could not obtain any information about the 
judgment by telephone. He has not tried to obtain a copy of the judgment. (Tr. 39-40.) 
The debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c, deficiency from auto repossession in December 2011 ($7,335). 
Applicant was stopped by the police for using a cell phone while driving. Because he 
had no insurance, his vehicle was impounded. He could not afford to buy insurance or 
pay the impoundment fees, and the vehicle was repossessed. (Tr. 40-42.) The debt is 
not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d, delinquent credit card account referred for collection in 
November 2007 ($1,387). Applicant opened this credit card account for his mother, and 
he was held responsible when she did not pay the amount due. Applicant’s April 2014 
CBR reflects that the account is disputed. The debt is not resolved. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 
43-44.) 
                                                          
3 Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide 
whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, 
or changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; 
or as part of a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have 
considered the evidence that Applicant was fired for these limited purposes. 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e, credit union loan, referred for collection in June 2008 ($5,803). 
Applicant testified that he borrowed $5,000 to buy a car. After he made monthly 
payments for more than the required $155 for about two years, the lender sent him the 
car title. He testified that he believed that his debt was satisfied when he received the 
title, but he admitted at the hearing that he did not keep track of the balance owed on 
the loan. (Tr. 46-48.) This debt is not resolved. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f, and 1.g, delinquent credit union accounts referred for collection 
in May and June 2012 ($1,707 and $1,199). These debts arose when Applicant 
overdrew his checking accounts. (GX 3 at 6.) They are not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h, delinquent electric bill referred for collection in January 2013 
($711). Applicant incurred this debt for the apartment he rented for his mother. He 
testified that he has a payment arrangement to repay this debt at the rate of $85 per 
month. He testified that the $90 debit on his September 2014 bank statement (AX A) is 
for this debt. He also testified that the payment plan is not in writing, but that he receives 
a written reminder every month. He promised that he would produce a copy of the 
monthly reminder within five to seven days after the hearing. (Tr. 35-37.) He did not 
submit any additional evidence. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i, cell phone account referred for collection in December 2012 
($462). Applicant admitted that this debt is not resolved. (Tr. 55-56.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, 1.o, 1.p, medical debts referred for collection in May 
2009 ($333); January 2012 ($197); March 2010 ($108); and two debts for $25, 
referred for collection in March and June 2012. Applicant incurred these debts when 
he and his children required medical care. He had no medical insurance. He testified 
that he had payment plans for these debts but that he had no documentation for his 
payment plans. (Tr. 57-58.) He testified that the $108 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m was 
satisfied by the $123 debit reflected on his September 2014 bank statement. (AX A; Tr. 
58.) He testified that the two $25 debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.p were paid, but 
that he had no documentation of payment. (Tr. 60.) I conclude that the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.m is resolved, but the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 1.l, 1.o, and 1.p are not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k, cell phone account referred for collection in December 2011 
($299). Applicant testified that he contacted the collection agency and was told that the 
debt was paid. He stated that he could obtain documentation that the debt was paid. 
(Tr. 52-54.) However, he did not submit any evidence of payment. The debt is not 
resolved.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.n, delinquent credit union account referred for collection in March 
2012 ($105). This debt was for an overdraft on a checking account. (Tr. 59.) At the 
hearing, Applicant presented evidence that his checking account was debited in 
September 2014 for a $130 payment to the collection agency for this debt. (AX A.) This 
debt is resolved. 
 
 
5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.q, delinquent cell phone account, referred for collection in 
February 2014 ($1,143). Applicant admitted that this debt is not resolved. (Tr. 60.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.r, collection account for $1,206, original creditor not identified, 
with last activity in August 2008. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied this 
debt. At the hearing, he testified that he thought this debt might be related to the credit 
union debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g. (Tr. 50.) It is not resolved. 
 
 Applicant did not file federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2009 
through 2012. His failures to file tax returns are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.s and 1.t. During 
his October 2013 PSI, he told the investigator that he could not afford to pay his taxes 
because his pay was being garnished for child support and other debts. At the hearing, 
he submitted a copy of his request for tax transcripts that he submitted in November 
2013. (AX B.) He did not present any evidence of progress in resolving his delinquent 
federal and state taxes. As of the date of the hearing, he had not filed any of the 
required returns. (Tr. 61.) 
 
During his October 2013 PSI, Applicant told the investigator that he was working 
with a tax professional and a debt consolidation agency. (GX 3 at 4.) However, he 
submitted no evidence at the hearing to show that he sought or obtained assistance 
with his delinquent income taxes or received financial counseling.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
6 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
 
7 
 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and his CBRs establish the following disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(g): failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns 
as required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, 
ongoing, and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. The financial irresponsibility of his mother was a 
circumstance beyond his control. However, he did not act responsibly. Even though he 
has been employed almost continuously since August 2007, he has not taken any 
meaningful steps to resolve the debts attributable to his mother. He claims that his loss 
 
8 
 
of employment was unjustified. Even if it was unjustified, he did not act responsibly 
because he took no meaningful action to resolve his delinquent debts until he paid two 
small debts in September 2014. The repossession of his automobile was due to his 
decision to drive without insurance.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Although Applicant told a security investigator that 
he intended to consult with a tax professional and a debt consolidation agency, there is 
no evidence that he did so. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not fully established. Applicant presented evidence that he paid the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.m and 1.n. He claimed that he made payments on the car 
loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, and paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.o, and 1.p, but 
he presented no documentary evidence to support his claims. He claimed that he had a 
payment agreement for the utility bill in SOR ¶ 1.h, but he presented evidence of only 
one payment and no evidence of an agreement. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d is listed on the CBR as 
disputed, but the record does not reflect the basis for the dispute or its resolution.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant grew up without experiencing a stable family life. Nevertheless, he was 
able to obtain his GED certificate and enough college credits for certification as a 
welder. He had a well-paying job with a defense contractor and was on track to become 
a supervisor until he was fired. He found another job almost immediately but at a lower 
 
9 
 
pay rate. Although he has been employed almost continuously for seven years, he has 
not paid attention to his financial obligations. He was candid and sincere at the hearing, 
but he appears to be unable to translate his good intentions into actions. Throughout the 
security clearance process, he has been confronted with his financial record, promised 
to take meaningful action, and has not followed through on his promises.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m-1.n:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o-1.t:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
