 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01489 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 November 6, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Based on a review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns raised under the guideline for Financial Considerations. His request 
for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 16, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 12, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 2, 
 
2 
 
2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on September 5, 2014, scheduling the hearing for October 16, 2014. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered hearing exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) 
A, which was admitted without objection. Applicant testified. The record was left open 
for Applicant to submit additional exhibits. On October 30, 2014, 2014, Applicant 
presented two additional exhibits marked AE B and AE C. Department Counsel had no 
objections to AE B or AE C and they were admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on October 27, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer since May 2012. He served in the Army for 10 years and achieved the 
rank of sergeant first class, E-7. He was honorably discharged in 2006. He is divorced 
and has one teenage son. He possesses a bachelor’s degree awarded in 2011. (GE 1.)  
 
 As stated in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be in debt to seven creditors in 
the approximate amount of $28,625. Applicant admitted all of the debts listed in the 
SOR subparagraphs, with explanations. His debts are found in the credit reports 
entered into evidence. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 2; GE 4; GE 5.) 
 
 Applicant married his wife in 1997, at age 20. They were together for the duration 
of his military service. In 2006, Applicant and his wife agreed that he would separate 
from the Army and pursue his education. He had previously supported his wife while 
she went to school and she planned to work so that now he too could attend college. He 
enrolled at a local college. He found that he had difficulties focusing and paying 
attention, and was required to take remedial classes before he could begin courses in 
his chosen major. Further, in mid-2006, Applicant and his wife separated. A divorce 
decree was entered on December 26, 2006. (GE 1; Tr. 18-25, 33-39.) 
 
 In the divorce decree, Applicant was assigned all of the marital debt and required 
to pay child support. However, he was attending school and unemployed at that time. 
He relied on credit cards to pay expenses like his car payment for a while, until he 
realized in 2008 that he simply could not afford to maintain the minimum payments 
required. He stopped making payments on his credit cards and vehicle loans. His 
vehicle and his ex-wife’s vehicle were repossessed. (Tr. 22-27.) 
 
 After Applicant graduated in 2011, he obtained a job, but did not earn enough to 
make payments on his debt. When he was hired by a government contractor in May 
2012, he began looking into his options for how to resolve his delinquencies. In March 
2014, he met with an attorney who reviewed his finances and suggested Applicant file 
bankruptcy. Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in June 2014, including $107,590 in 
liabilities. The bankruptcy list of creditors included each of the delinquent debts in the 
SOR. All of Applicant’s SOR listed debts were discharged by the United States 
Bankruptcy Court on October 7, 2014. (GE 7; AE A; AE B; Tr. 23-25, 36-45.) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant completed financial counseling as required by the Bankruptcy Judge. 
He testified that he completed a series of financial courses on-line. In those courses, he 
learned how to better budget his funds and was better able to understand how he got 
into debt. He no longer spends beyond his means. He is current on his child support 
obligations. He no longer holds any credit cards. He drives an older vehicle that he 
purchased with cash. He has $3,000 left at the end of the month, now that his debts 
have been discharged in bankruptcy, and he is saving his monthly net remainder. He 
lives simply and intends to remain solvent in the future. (Tr. 48-52.) 
 
Applicant’s DD-214 reflects that he was awarded the Meritorious Service Medal; 
two Army Commendation Medals; four Army Achievement awards; three Good Conduct 
Awards; the National Defense Service medal; the Kosovo Campaign medal; and the 
Iraq Campaign medal, among his many decorations and awards. He was deployed to 
both Kosovo and Iraq during his service. (AE C.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in 2007 when was unable to 
satisfy his bills while unemployed. He stopped making payments on his debts in 2008, 
when he could not make ends meet. He has a history of debt that he was unable to 
resolve for a seven-year period. The evidence raises security concerns under both of 
these conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate 
those concerns.  
 
  Three Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
Applicant's delinquencies resulted from a combination of unique circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur. Applicant left a highly successful period of service in the Army, 
and relied on his wife to support him while he attended school. However, his wife filed 
for divorce shortly thereafter. He was unexpectedly saddled with both the marital debt 
and child support payments.  Applicant was unemployed for a number of years while he 
completed his education. Applicant now has a well-paying, full-time job. He has a 
significant monthly net remainder. It is unlikely he will be in a similar situation in the 
future. His current judgment and trustworthiness are not in question. AG ¶ 20(a) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) focuses on delinquencies that result from events that an applicant 
could not control. Here, several events affected Applicant’s ability to maintain financial 
solvency, including his divorce and his unemployment, which made it difficult for 
Applicant to live within his means. Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
He worked hard to finish his degree so that he could obtain a job and address his debts. 
When he found himself in a better financial situation, with a higher paying job, he 
consulted an attorney who advised him he should file Chapter 7 bankruptcy. He 
followed that advice. He completed financial counseling during his bankruptcy 
proceedings and testified about the knowledge he gained during that course. He now 
lives frugally and saves his substantial monthly surplus. He discharged his debt legally 
through bankruptcy. Under the circumstances, Applicant acted responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies.  
 
Applicant sought financial guidance and counseling about how to handle the 
debts from his attorney. He followed his attorney’s advice and filed a Chapter 7 petition. 
Applicant's debts are under control, as all of his delinquent debts were discharged in 
October 2014. Moreover, Applicant is employed, and has a substantial monthly 
remainder. Applicant brought his financial situation under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 1 
                                                          
1 Applicant's bankruptcy discharge does not fall under AG ¶ 20(d), as the Appeal Board has held that “[a]n 
applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].” It more accurately falls 
under AG ¶ 20(c), showing that the financial problems are either resolved or under control. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant served 
honorably in the Army for 10 years. He deployed to both Kosovo and Iraq. He has 
received a number of awards and recognition for his service. While he experienced 
financial problems after he left the Army to attend school, brought on mostly by an 
unexpected divorce, Applicant has resolved his delinquent debt through bankruptcy. He 
now lives frugally. He does not have any credit cards. No new debts have been 
incurred. He has sufficient income to insure that there is little likelihood of recurrence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. I 
conclude the whole-person analysis for Applicant. 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
