 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-01378 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has significant connections to family members, who are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. He served honorably as a linguist in a dangerous 
environment, and he has substantial connections to the United States. Foreign influence 
security concerns are mitigated; however, Applicant has not made any progress 
resolving 15 delinquent debts listed in his statement of reasons (SOR), totaling $37,176. 
Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86). 
(GE 1) On June 23, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) as revised by the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence on August 
30, 2006, which became effective on September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security 
concerns under Guidelines B (foreign influence) and F (financial considerations). The 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On July 17, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR and said he was “willing to 
cooperate if the government decides to give [him] a hearing.” (HE 3) Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed on October 23, 2014. On October 27, 2014, the case 
was assigned to me to conduct a hearing and determine whether or not it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate a security clearance to 
Applicant. On November 5, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a hearing notice, scheduling Applicant’s hearing for November 10, 2014. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled using video teleconference. Department 
Counsel offered six exhibits into evidence, which were admitted without objection. (Tr. 
26-27; GE 1-6) Applicant did not offer any exhibits into evidence. (Tr. 15) Applicant and 
two witnesses made statements on Applicant’s behalf. On November 12, 2014, 
Applicant provided eight exhibits, which were admitted without objection. (AE A-H) The 
transcript was received on November 18, 2014.   
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel moved to withdraw the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.f, 2.g, 2.h, 
and 2.j. (Tr. 17-20) There was no objection, and I granted the motion. (Tr. 17-21) 
Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of his 
hearing. (Tr. 21-23)   
 
Department Counsel offered six exhibits for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by his connections to Afghanistan. (Tr. 26-27; 
Ex. I-VI) Applicant did not object to me taking administrative notice of the proffered 
documents, and Department Counsel’s request is granted. (Tr. 27) I have also taken 
administrative notice of the U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, 
Nov. 28, 2011 and the Afghanistan-related comments of President Obama’s May 28, 
2014 speech to the U.S. Corps of Cadets at West Point, New York because they 
contain information about Afghanistan’s relationship with the United States, and they 
emphasize the U.S. diplomatic and military goals in Afghanistan.1     
                                            
1Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative 
proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 
at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod 
v. Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice). 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, and he provided explanations and 
mitigating information. (HE 3) His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old linguist, who was employed by a government 
contractor from November 2010 to November 2011 as a linguist in Afghanistan. (Tr. 9, 
30, 43, 66; GE 1) The contractor also employed him as a linguist in Afghanistan from 
January to May 2014. (Tr. 46) He was sent back to the United States from Afghanistan 
in May 2014, because his security clearance was not approved. (Tr. 46, 66) He was 
employed at a restaurant from October 2012 to January 2014 as a waiter or bartender. 
(Tr. 46-47) 
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan. (Tr. 9, 43) In 1982, he came to the United 
States, when he was nine years old. (Tr. 43) In 1991, he graduated from high school in 
the United States. (Tr. 9) He was married from 1996 to 1999. (Tr. 44) He does not have 
any children. (Tr. 45) In 1999, he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 44) He has not 
attended college. (Tr. 9) He has never served in the U.S. military. (Tr. 9) He served as a 
linguist for a total of 16 months in Afghanistan with the U.S. Army. (Tr. 9-10, 66)  
Applicant does not have any property in the United States. (Tr. 63) 
 
Applicant’s Connections to Afghanistan 
 
Applicant’s mother, two brothers, three sisters, three brothers-in-law, and two 
sisters-in-law are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. (Tr. 56-62; SOR response to 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a to 2.e) He communicates with his mother and one of his siblings in 
Afghanistan about once a month and with his other relatives living in Afghanistan less 
frequently. (GE 2) His father was a citizen of the United States when he passed away. 
(Tr. 57) None of his family living in Afghanistan has any connection to the Afghan 
Government or military. (Tr. 57-62) He provided about $18,000 over the last 17 years to 
his family in Afghanistan. (Tr. 62-63; SOR response to SOR ¶ 2.i) He is close to his 
family in Afghanistan, and he provided funds for their medical needs and for travel. (Tr. 
63-64) In the last three years, he provided about $1,000 for his mother’s medical 
treatment. (Tr. 69)     
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant made payments to his creditors from 2002 to 2006. (Tr. 50, 55) His 
annual income in 2010 to 2011, when he worked as a linguist in Afghanistan, was about 
$90,000. (Tr. 48) After he returned to the United States from Afghanistan, he decided to 
live off of his savings and he did not look for work for about a year. (Tr. 49, 66-67) When 
                                            
2The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
he was working as a linguist, he was generous with his friends, and he spent his money 
somewhat frivolously or lavishly. (Tr. 51; GE 2)  
 
Applicant contacted a debt-consolidation or debt-resolution company, and they 
wanted $19,000 to resolve $26,000 of debt. (Tr. 49-50) He offered $15,000 to $17,000 
and negotiations started; however, he did not follow-up on resolving his debts. (Tr. 50)  
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for, but has not made any progress resolving his 
15 delinquent SOR debts totaling $37,176. (Tr. 52; SOR response) Three delinquent 
SOR debts were for less than $200 each: ¶ 1.b ($90); ¶ 1.i ($110); and ¶ 1.n ($36). He 
said he paid one non-SOR debt, but he did not make any payments to address any of 
the SOR debts for at least the previous three years. (Tr. 53-54, 56) He received about 
$3,800 monthly for the five months he worked as a linguist in 2014. (Tr. 69) He 
regretted his poor financial choices and promised to address his debts, if he receives a 
security clearance. (Tr. 50-51, 63-65) 
 
Character Evidence 
  
In 2011, Applicant received an outstanding rating from his employer for his work 
in Afghanistan as a linguist. (AE A) In 2011, Applicant received letters of 
recommendation from two Army first lieutenants and a captain lauding his hard work, 
dedication, initiative, and contributions to mission accomplishment. (AE B-D) He 
received two certificates of appreciation for his service in Afghanistan and a certificate 
from his employer for “wounds received in action” during his Afghanistan service. (AE E, 
F, H) He provided a certificate for completing his pre-deployment training in 2010. (AE 
G) 
 
Applicant’s live-in girlfriend described him as very honest, trustworthy, 
responsible, reliable, generous, and a “genuinely good man.” (Tr. 31-32) He is 
dedicated to his family and provides financial support to them. (Tr. 32) He is loyal to the 
United States. (Tr. 32) Applicant is currently living on unemployment compensation. (Tr. 
34) Applicant would like to have a security clearance so he can work in role play, as a 
cultural advisor, or as a linguist. (Tr. 38-40) 
 
Applicant’s nephew is a linguist, who has served in Afghanistan and holds a 
security clearance. (Tr. 36-37) He believes Applicant will be a valuable asset to the U.S. 
Government, and he lauded Applicant’s honesty and reliability. (Tr. 37-39)  
    
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is approximately the size of 
Texas (249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran 
borders it on the west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country 
which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people with about 3,000,000 Afghans living outside Afghanistan.  
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically elected 
president. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the 
Soviet Union in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew from Afghanistan, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan and 
religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of 
the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies.   
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists 
including al-Qaeda, the “Haqqani Network,” Lakshar-e-Tayyiba (LET), and the Taliban 
continue to assert power and intimidation within the country. Safety and security are key 
issues because these terrorist organizations target United States and Afghan interests 
by suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, car-jacking, assaults, and hostage 
taking. During 2012, insider or “green on blue” attacks by Taliban infiltrators or terrorists 
disguised as allied soldiers caused many deaths. At this time, the risk of terrorist 
activities remains extremely high. The country’s human rights record remains poor, 
corruption is widespread, and violence is rampant. According to recent reports from the 
U.S. Department of State, insurgents continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of 
Americans and other Western nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of 
Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence.  
 
The United States-Afghan relationship is summarized as follows: 
 
After the fall of the Taliban, the U.S. supported the emergence of a broad-
based government, representative of all Afghans, and actively encouraged 
a [United Nations] role in the national reconciliation process in 
Afghanistan. The U.S. has made a long-term commitment to help 
Afghanistan rebuild itself after years of war. The U.S. and others in the 
international community currently provide resources and expertise to 
Afghanistan in a variety of areas, including humanitarian relief and 
assistance, capacity-building, security needs, counter-narcotic programs, 
and infrastructure projects. 
 
During his December 1, 2009 speech at West Point, President Barack 
Obama laid down the core of U.S. goals in Afghanistan: to disrupt, 
dismantle, and defeat al-Qaeda and its safe havens in Pakistan, and to 
prevent their return to Afghanistan. . . . [T]he United States plans to 
remain politically, diplomatically, and economically engaged in 
Afghanistan for the long term.  
 
U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, Nov. 28, 2011, at 13. In 2012 
and 2013, the United States had more combat troops deployed to Afghanistan than to 
any other foreign country. On May 28, 2014, President Obama emphasized the 
importance of Afghanistan to our national security in a speech to the U.S. Corps of 
Cadets at West Point, New York: 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
We are winding down our war in Afghanistan.  Al Qaeda’s leadership on 
the border region between Pakistan and Afghanistan has been decimated, 
and Osama bin Laden is no more.  .  .  .  We need partners to fight 
terrorists alongside us.  And empowering partners is a large part of what 
we have done and what we are currently doing in Afghanistan. . . .   
Together with our allies, America struck huge blows against al Qaeda core 
and pushed back against an insurgency that threatened to overrun the 
country.  But sustaining this progress depends on the ability of Afghans to 
do the job. And that’s why we trained hundreds of thousands of Afghan 
soldiers and police.  Earlier this spring, those Afghan forces secured an 
election in which Afghans voted for the first democratic transfer of power 
in their history. And at the end of this year, a new Afghan President will be 
in office and America’s combat mission will be over. 
 
On May 2, 2012, the United States and Afghanistan signed the Enduring 
Strategic Partnership Agreement. This agreement demonstrates the United States’ 
long-term commitment to strengthen Afghanistan’s sovereignty and stability, in support 
of the goal of suppression of terrorism. The United States’ extraordinary commitment to 
Afghanistan is balanced against the inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in 
Afghanistan to its citizens and residents of Afghanistan and Afghan Government 
problems developing and complying with the rule of law. The United States and Afghan 
Governments are in the final process of establishing an agreement that will govern their 
relationships, cooperation, training, and support in the ongoing war against terrorism. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit report and SOR response. The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling $37,176. 
Many of the debts have been delinquent more than five years. The Government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;3 and 
 
                                            
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 Applicant’s conduct in resolving his delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions. He did not provide sufficient information about 
his finances to establish his inability to make greater progress paying his creditors. His 
underemployment and unemployment damaged his finances and are circumstances 
largely beyond his control; however, he did not act responsibly under the 
circumstances. When he had employment as a linguist, he did not establish payment 
plans or address his delinquent SOR debts. He presented insufficient evidence about 
what he has done to pay his SOR debts or his other debts.     
 
 Applicant did not provide any of the following documentation relating to the SOR 
debts: (1) proof of payments such as checking account statements, photocopies of 
checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the 
creditor; (2) correspondence to or from the creditor to establish maintenance of contact 
with the creditor;4 (3) a credible debt dispute; (4) attempts to negotiate payment plans, 
such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve 
these SOR debts; (5) evidence of financial counseling; or (6) other evidence of progress 
or resolution of his SOR debts.   
 
 Applicant’s failure to prove that he has made more substantial steps to resolve 
his debts shows a lack of judgment and responsibility that weighs against approval of 
                                            
4 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
his security clearance. There is insufficient evidence that he was unable to make 
greater progress resolving his delinquent debts, or that his financial problems are being 
resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, 
he failed to establish that any financial consideration mitigating conditions are 
established. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s mother, two brothers, three sisters, three brothers-in-law, and two 
sisters-in-law are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. He communicates with his 
mother and one of his siblings about once a month. He provided about $18,000 over the 
last 17 years to his family in Afghanistan. He is close to his family in Afghanistan, and 
he provided funds for their medical and travel. In the last three years, he provided about 
$1,000 for his mother’s medical treatment.   
 
There are widely-documented safety issues for residents of Afghanistan because 
of terrorists and insurgents. Applicant has voluntarily shared in those dangers, and he is 
willing to do so in the future. Hundreds of Afghan linguists, supporting U.S. forces, have 
family living in Afghanistan. Thousands of U.S. and coalition armed forces and civilian 
contractors serving in Afghanistan are targets of terrorists or the Taliban, along with 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Afghan civilians who support the Afghan Government and cooperate with coalition 
forces.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in 
Afghanistan, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely-accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged is counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Afghanistan with the United 
States, places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant 
to demonstrate that his relationships with his family members living in Afghanistan do 
not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might 
be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family 
member living in Afghanistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Afghanistan has an enormous 
problem with terrorism. Applicant’s familial relationship with family in Afghanistan 
creates a potential conflict of interest because Applicant may make decisions to protect 
his family in Afghanistan. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of 
Applicant’s contacts with family in Afghanistan and has raised the issue of potential 
foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further 
inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8 lists one condition that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns.  
AG ¶ 18(b) states, “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so 
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest.”  
 
A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant immigrated to the United States in 
1982, when he was nine years old, and in 1999, he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. 
He served as a linguist for a total of 16 months in Afghanistan with the U.S. Army, and 
he was wounded during his service in Afghanistan. Applicant’s years of support to the 
U.S. Army in Afghanistan as a linguist, including the dangers that service entailed, 
weigh towards mitigating foreign influence security concerns. Applicant is willing to 
return to Afghanistan to assist U.S. Armed Forces in a dangerous combat environment. 
He has offered to continue to risk his life to support the United States’ goals in 
Afghanistan. He has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with family living in Afghanistan. 
There is no evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Afghan Government, or 
those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his family in 
Afghanistan to coerce Applicant for classified or sensitive information.5 As such, there is 
a reduced possibility that Applicant or his family living in Afghanistan would be 
specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or exploitation. On the other hand, 
Applicant and his family living in Afghanistan, like every other resident living in 
Afghanistan, are at risk from terrorists and the Taliban whenever they are in that 
country. 
 
While the Government does not have any burden to prove the presence that 
Applicant or his family has been targeted by terrorists, if such record evidence were 
present, Applicant would have a heavier evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence 
security concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ huge investment of 
manpower and money in Afghanistan, and Applicant has supported U.S. goals and 
objectives in Afghanistan. Applicant and his family in Afghanistan are potential targets of 
terrorists and the Taliban, and Applicant’s potential access to classified information 
could theoretically add risk to them from lawless elements in Afghanistan.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to family in Afghanistan are significant; however, 
his connections to the United States are strong. His employment in support of the U.S. 
Government, performance of linguist duties in a combat zone, and 32 years of living in 
the United States are important factors weighing towards mitigation of security 
concerns. His connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully 
overcome the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B. Foreign influence 
concerns under Guideline B are mitigated. 
                                            
5There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
   
Applicant presented some important evidence weighing towards approval of his 
access to classified information. Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1982, 
when he was nine years old. In 1999, he became a U.S. citizen and took an oath of 
allegiance to the United States. Applicant provided three letters from Army officers, 
establishing his dedication, loyalty, responsibility, contributions to mission 
accomplishment, and trustworthiness supporting the U.S. Army as a linguist in combat 
operations in Afghanistan. He was injured while serving in Afghanistan, and he is willing 
to continue to risk his life as part of his duties on behalf of the U.S. combat forces in 
Afghanistan. All these circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will 
recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or 
insurgent group to coerce or exploit him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 5, 2008). Applicant does not own property in Afghanistan.  
 
Applicant’s live-in girlfriend and nephew praise Applicant’s honesty, 
trustworthiness, responsibility, reliability, generosity, loyalty and dedication to his family. 
They believe he can contribute valuable service to the United States and support 
approval of a security clearance for him.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Afghanistan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.6 Afghanistan is a dangerous place because of 
violence from the Taliban and terrorists. The Taliban and terrorists continue to threaten 
the Afghan Government, the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed Forces, and 
                                            
6 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
those who cooperate and assist the United States. The Afghan Government does not 
fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many instances. The United 
States and Afghan Governments are allies in the war on terrorism. The United States is 
committed to the establishment of a free and independent Afghan Government. 
Afghanistan and the United States have close relationships in diplomacy and trade.      
 
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial than the evidence supporting approval of his security clearance. Applicant 
has a history of financial problems. Some of his debts have been delinquent for more 
than five years. When he was working as a linguist, he had the funds available to pay 
some or all of his debts. Instead, he gave money to his friends and spent carelessly and 
imprudently. The SOR alleges and he admits responsibility for 15 delinquent debts 
totaling $37,176. Three delinquent SOR debts were for less than $200 each. He failed 
to provide sufficient documentation of progress to resolve his financial problems. His 
failure to provide more corroborating documentation as outlined in the Financial 
Considerations section, supra, shows lack of financial responsibility and judgment and 
raises unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More information about inability to pay 
debts or documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns. 
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary to 
justify the award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards resolving 
his past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he 
may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance 
worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign influence concerns 
are mitigated; however, financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.f to 2.h:    Withdrawn 
 Subparagraph 2.i:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.j:     Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
