1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14- 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 29, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 6, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On August 22, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR. On September 23, 2014, 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On September 29, 2014, the case was 
assigned to me. On October 16, 2014, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the 
hearing for November 5, 2014. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
2 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were received into evidence without 
objection. On November 17, 2014, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. with 
explanations. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old principal radio frequency engineer, who has been 
employed by a defense contractor since June 2008. He seeks a security clearance to 
enhance his position within his company. Applicant held a security clearance from 1997 
to 1999 during previous employment. (GE 1, Tr. 19-21.) 
 
 Applicant was awarded a bachelor of science degree in electrical engineering in 
December 1995. He completed several graduate level classes towards a master’s 
degree, but did not complete the program. (GE 1, Tr. 21-23.) He served in the U.S. 
Marine Corps from December 1983 to February 1984, and received an entry level 
separation. (GE 1, Tr. 25.) 
 
 Applicant was married from September 1996 to November 2011, and that 
marriage ended by divorce. Applicant has a 13-year-old daughter from that marriage 
and pays his former wife $1,200 in child support and $2,800 in spousal support monthly, 
for a total of $4,000 per month. His spousal support will decrease to $1,000 per month 
in November 2015. Child and spousal support will end when his daughter turns 18 years 
old or graduates from high school, whichever occurs later. His former wife works full-
time at a child care facility. Applicant also has two daughters, ages 28 and 23, from two 
previous relationships. Applicant remarried in March 2012 and has two stepdaughters, 
ages 13 and 9. His wife works as an instructional assistant for a local elementary 
school. (GE 1, 23-25, 38-41.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges three debts totalling $23,547 – SOR ¶ 1.a – a collection 
account for a home improvement loan for $20,196; SOR ¶ 1.b – a collection account 
owed to a previous landlord for $2,380; and SOR ¶ 1.c. a collection account owed to a 
cable company for $971. 
 
Applicant took out a home improvement loan in 2005 to make upgrades and 
improvements to his former home. He was unable to recoup his improvement 
investments when the home short sold in August 2010. Applicant has taken the position 
that he will not settle the debt until the creditor produces a “paper trail so I can see that 
they have their documentation” with a breakdown of costs. Applicant stated that his last 
3 
 
communication with the creditor was on the telephone in March 2014. DEBT NOT 
RESOLVED. (GE 2, GE 3, Tr. 25-32, 42-47, 64-66.) 
 
Applicant’s debt with his former landlord stems from purported damages and 
clean-up costs incurred when he vacated his apartment in August 2009. Applicant 
stated that he left his apartment in good condition and his landlord disagreed. The 
original amount owed was $700, but increased to the current amount of $2,380 after his 
account was turned over to collections. Applicant stated that his last communication 
with the creditor was on the telephone in June 2013. DEBT NOT RESOLVED. (GE 2, 
Tr. 32-35, 47-58.) 
 
Applicant’s debt with his former cable company stems from his failure to return 
cable equipment in 2008 when he vacated his home. He stated that the cable company 
was supposed to send him a box with a preaddressed label to return the equipment, but 
never did. The original amount owed was $300, but increased to the current amount of 
$971. Applicant stated that his last communication with the creditor was on the 
telephone “at least a year” ago. DEBT NOT RESOLVED. (GE 2, Tr. 35-38, 58-64.) 
 
During Applicant’s Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview 
(OPM PSI) in December 2013, he stated these financial issues are not characteristic of 
him and it embarrasses him to be in this position. He stated that he would resolve these 
debts even if it meant that he had to pay the debts in full in order to clear up his credit 
report. (GE 2.) In his August 2014 SOR answer, he stated that he was still trying to 
resolve his debts and stated these debts “are due to disputes, not irresponsibility.” (SOR 
answer.) 
 
Applicant provided no documentation to demonstrate efforts to resolve his long,  
ongoing debts with these three creditors. Applicant’s annual gross salary is $125,000 
per year and his wife’s annual gross salary is $20,1601, for a total combined annual 
gross salary of $145,160. ( Tr. 67.)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted two favorable performance appraisals covering the 
timeframe of 2012 to 2014 as well documentation reflecting a 2013 salary increase and 
a 2014 bonus. He also submitted three favorable personal reference letters. The 
authors of these letters collectively speak very highly of Applicant and recommend him 
for a security clearance. ( AE B – AE H.)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
                                                          
1
Applicant’s wife’s salary is based on his testimony in which he stated that her gross income was 
$420 per week. (Tr. 67.) 
4 
 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that apply and raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-
12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, e-QIP, OPM interview, and SOR response.  
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions are fully established. Applicant’s three 
delinquent debts have been ongoing for several years. Despite having been put on 
notice of the Government’s concerns regarding his finances, he has done little to 
address those concerns. Although he has good intentions and claims that he wants to 
resolve his debts, which he characterizes as disputes, he has done little to do so. 
Applicant’s promises to regain financial responsibility ring hollow in light of his having 
stated that he would address his debts during his December 2013 OPM PSI and in his 
August 2014 SOR answer. Furthermore, Applicant failed or was unable to provide any 
documentation at his hearing of efforts to resolve his SOR debts. In short, Applicant 
provided insufficient evidence to mitigate his debts.2  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further comments are 
warranted. 
Applicant’s employment as a Government contractor weighs in his favor. He is a 
law-abiding citizen and contributes to the national defense. Apart from his SOR debts, 
there is no evidence to suggest that he is not current on his day-to-day expenses. 
                                                          
2
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
7 
 
A security clearance adjudication is aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. June 21, 2010.) An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to 
establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish 
a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. 
There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts 
simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid 
first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).   
 
However, Applicant’s failure to address his debts in any meaningful manner since 
they were brought to his attention as early as 2013 precludes a favorable decision. 
Given his background, his failure to recognize the importance of regaining an 
acceptable level of financial responsibility is disappointing. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole-person, I conclude he has not mitigated financial considerations 
security concerns. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
