 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01620 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 November 19, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has 
reestablished financial solvency and is repaying delinquent debts caused by her post-
service unemployment and divorce. Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under 
the guideline for Financial Considerations. Her request for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 2, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 17, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 13, 
2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on September 4, 2014, scheduling the hearing for October 15, 2014. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered hearing exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) 
A through I, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified. The record was 
left open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits. On November 4, 2014, Applicant 
presented three additional exhibits marked AE J through AE L. Department Counsel 
had no objections to AE J through AE L and they were admitted. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 24, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been 
employed in the same job as a Government contractor since December 2011, although 
her employer has changed during that time due to a change in contracts. She is also a 
current member of the Navy Reserve, holding the rank of E-6. From December 1998 to 
October 2002, Applicant was in the Army. She was on active duty in the Navy from 
October 2002 to November 2010. She successfully held a security clearance without 
any violations from approximately 1998 to present. She is married to her second 
husband, who is on active duty in the Navy. She has no children. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 24-
35.) 
 
 Applicant was married to her ex-husband from 2003 to 2011. In 2009, she began 
experiencing marital problems. Her ex-husband requested that she leave the Navy and  
move to their hometown in another state, where he moved ahead of her in an initial 
separation. She received an honorable discharge in 2010 and moved to rejoin him, but 
they were unable to reconcile. She was left with all of the marital debt in their divorce, 
which was finalized in 2011. Although her ex-husband promised to help her pay their 
debts, he never followed through with his promise. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 24-39.) 
 
 After Applicant left the Navy, she was unemployed from November 2010 to June 
2011, while she looked for work. She then began working for a bank, but only made 
enough to provide for her basic needs. She did not have money to repay the marital 
debt. (GE 1; GE 3; Tr. 39.) 
 
 As alleged in the SOR, Applicant was in debt on 14 delinquent accounts in the 
approximate amount of $120,174. Applicant admitted all of the debts listed in the SOR 
subparagraphs, with explanations. Her debts are found in the credit reports entered into 
evidence. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 7.) 
 
 Applicant wanted to resolve her debt, so she sought counseling from her brother 
who is a financial counselor. He referred her to a debt consolidation company (DCC). 
She contracted with the DCC to help her repay her delinquent accounts in February 
2012. She testified that she pays the DCC $290 per month to help her settle her debts. 
 
3 
 
She has successfully made her monthly payments to the DCC for more than two years. 
She listed eight delinquent accounts with the DCC and, so far, four of those accounts 
have been fully resolved. However, only seven of her SOR-listed debts appear to be 
listed with the DCC, including: the $4,856 debt listed in ¶ 1.a; the $2,157 debt listed in ¶ 
1.b; the $445 debt listed in ¶ 1.d; the $811 debt listed in ¶ 1.e; the $984 debt listed in ¶ 
1.f; the $5,535 debt listed in ¶ 1.g; and the $2,157 debt listed in ¶ 1.j. She is making 
monthly payments through the DCC to resolve the debt in ¶ 1.a. She has fully resolved 
the debts in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.j through payments. The DCC is working to negotiate 
payments with the creditors identified in ¶¶1.e, 1.f, and 1.g. Applicant intends to 
continue working with DCC until all of her delinquencies are resolved. (GE 3; AE A; AE 
B; AE C; AE D; AE E;  AE J; Tr. 41-48, 52-54.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent second mortgage in the approximate 
amount of $84,354, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant purchased a home in October 
2006 for $327,000 with her ex-husband. The loan was a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage. 
Her monthly payments totaled $2,900. Applicant was able to afford the payments on the 
home until early 2010, when she no longer could due to her pre-divorce separation. She 
consulted a realtor at that time and was advised to stop making payments on the 
mortgage to facilitate a short sale. The value of the home had declined and it could not 
be sold for the amount Applicant owed on the mortgage. She was told that there would 
be no remaining balance after the short sale, which was finalized in October 2010. She 
has attempted to contact the creditor to follow up on this debt, but they are no longer in 
business. Applicant’s October 12, 2014 credit report reflects this “account paid/zero 
balance; Account paid for less than full balance.” This debt is resolved. (GE 7; Tr. 61-
65, 67-70.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted to a city government for an unresolved parking ticket in 
the amount of $109, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. She resolved this debt on June 13, 2014, 
as documented in a receipt from this creditor. (AE F; Tr. 49.) 
 
Applicant testified that the delinquent debt identified in SOR ¶ 1.i, in the amount 
of $269, was also enrolled with the DCC. However, it does not appear to be listed on 
Applicant’s documentation from the DCC. This debt is still listed as a delinquency on 
Applicant’s October 12, 2014 credit report. It is unresolved. (GE 7; Tr. 49-51.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on four student loans, as alleged in SOR ¶¶1.k through 1.n, 
in the total amount of $18,497. Applicant took student loans to complete her education. 
After graduation in 2008, she received a 12-month deferment. When the deferment 
ended, she paid on her loans for approximately six months. However, she stopped 
making payments because she could not afford it. As a result, her wages were 
garnished for $239 per month. Applicant was recently able to place her student loans in 
a rehabilitation program. She has been current on her rehabilitation program payments 
of $226 per month since she enrolled in the program in June 2014. After she makes 
nine months of payments, her loans will no longer be considered to be in default. (GE 7; 
AE G; Tr. 56-60.) 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant has incurred no new delinquent debt since beginning her current 
employment. She now earns enough to make ends meet and slowly repay her 
delinquencies. (Tr. 39-41, 65.) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor gave Applicant his “highest recommendation for a security 
clearance.” He noted that she is honest, mature, and professional. She handles 
sensitive information professionally and appropriately. (AE H.) Applicant’s reviews 
reflect she works “above standards” in all criteria. (AE I.) She has been awarded three 
Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medals during her service. (AE K.) She also 
received a citation for outstanding performance from a rear admiral. (AE L.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
5 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in 2010 when she was unable 
to satisfy her bills due to unemployment and her pending divorce. She has a history of 
debt that she was unable to resolve for a four-year period. The evidence raises security 
concerns under both of these conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
  Four Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant's delinquencies resulted from a combination of unique circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur. Applicant left a highly successful period of service in the Navy, 
to move with her husband. She ended up divorced and unemployed. She was 
unexpectedly saddled with the marital debt. She now has a well-paying, full-time job. 
She has been responsibly addressing her debts, as funds would allow, since February 
2012. Her delinquencies are being resolved in good faith. She is now remarried and her 
family has a double income. It is unlikely she will be in a similar situation in the future. 
Her current judgment and trustworthiness are not in question. AG ¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 
20(d) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) focuses on delinquencies that result from events that an applicant 
could not control. Here, several events affected Applicant’s ability to maintain financial 
solvency, including her divorce and her unemployment, which made it difficult for 
Applicant to live within her means. Applicant acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. She began addressing her debts shortly after obtaining a better-paying 
job in 2012. While she has not addressed or resolved all of her delinquencies, she has 
been working toward that goal for several years and intends to fully resolve her debts as 
her funds allow. She has resolved five debts identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.h, and 
1.j. She is making payments on ¶¶ 1.a, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.n. The DCC is negotiating on 
her behalf with the creditors involved in ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g, and she intends to resolve 
them through their services. Only one small debt, ¶ 1.i remains unaddressed at this 
time, and Applicant mistakenly thought that it was included in her DCC. Under the 
circumstances, Applicant acted responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant served 
honorably on active duty in the Army and Navy for 12 years. She is now serving in the 
Navy Reserve. She has received citations and recognition for her service. While she 
experienced financial problems after she left the Navy, brought on mostly by an 
unexpected divorce and unemployment, Applicant is working to resolve her delinquent 
debts. She lives within her means. No new debts have been incurred. She has sufficient 
income to insure that there is little likelihood of recurrence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. I 
conclude the whole-person analysis for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.n:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
