 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00592 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 13, 2014. The Government requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 18, 
2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on September 26, 2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 16, 2014. 
 
2 
 
 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through F, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until 
October 27, 2014, to allow Applicant time to submit additional documents. He submitted 
AE G and H, which were admitted into evidence without objection.1 DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 27, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. I have incorporated the 
admissions into my findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He served in the Navy from 1977 to 1981 and was 
honorably discharged. He was a career law enforcement officer and retired after 24 
years of service. He was married from 1981 to 1983, and from 2006 to 2010. Both 
marriages ended in divorce. He does not have any children.2  
 
 During Applicant’s second marriage he accumulated debts. When he retired from 
his law enforcement job in 2010 he took a lump-sum pension so he could pay his debts. 
He used the bulk of his pension to pay his debts. He was going through a divorce 
around the same time, and gave his wife $15,000 to help her pay two credit cards and 
so she could rent a place to live. He does not have any financial obligations to his ex-
wife. He attributed the remaining three delinquent debts, listed in the SOR, to financial 
difficulty when he was going through his divorce.3  
 
 Applicant moved in January 2011 to another state. He lived with a friend. He 
obtained a job, but the pay was minimal. In March 2011 he got another job that he held 
until May 2014, when he left for a better-paying job. After moving he needed time to 
build up his finances and save money in an emergency account.4 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($1,227) was settled and paid in October 2014. The debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.c ($9,701) is for past-due mortgage payments. Applicant got behind in 
payments and made a payment of $5,942 from his pension to the mortgagor in June 
2010. He attempted to short sell the property, but was unsuccessful. The house was 
eventually foreclosed and sold. There is no deficiency and the account shows a zero 
balance.5 
 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s Memorandum. 
 
2 Tr. 46. 
 
3 Tr. 21-25, 47-58. 
 
4 Tr. 25-31. 
 
5 Tr. 31-35, 39-40, 58-63; AE B, C; Answer to SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant negotiated a payment plan for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($6,432). He 
made an initial $400 good-faith payment and paid the first monthly payment of $80. He 
intends to continue making the $80 monthly payments until the debt is satisfied.6 
 
 Applicant has no new delinquent debts. He cared for his mother after his father 
died in 1996. His helped her with medical bills that were not covered by Medicare. He 
estimated he spent about $30,000 for her care over the years. He helped his father, 
who suffered with Alzheimer’s disease before he died. When his mother died in 2009, 
he paid approximately $5,000 to $6,000 of her bills.7  
 
 Applicant provided a voluminous amount of character evidence that included 
educational achievements, citations, certificates of completion and training, certificates 
of appreciation, and service awards and commendations. He also provided proof of 
various licenses he holds.8   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
                                                          
6 Tr. 36-37, 40-45; AE D, G, H. 
 
7 Tr. 68-75. 
 
8 Tr. 38; AE E and F. 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had three delinquent debts that he was unable to pay for a period. I find 
there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant was retiring during the time he was going through a divorce. He 
accumulated numerous debts during his second marriage. He chose to have his 
pension paid in a lump sum so he could pay the majority of his debts. The remaining 
debts are those alleged in the SOR. His house was foreclosed and there is a zero 
balance on the debt. He settled and paid one debt, and has a payment plan on the 
other. The circumstances that caused Applicant’s financial difficulties are unlikely to 
recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment. 
His divorce was beyond his control. By taking a lump-sum pension he acted responsibly 
to pay his debts and help his wife start a new life. He made a good-faith effort to repay 
creditors and resolve debts. He has no other delinquent debts. There are clear 
indications his financial problems are behind him and under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 
20(c) and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
6 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 55 years old. He served honorably in the Navy and then he was a 
career law enforcement officer. He made a decision to receive his pension in a lump 
sum so he could pay his debts. His home was foreclosed, but there is a zero balance 
owed. One of the SOR debts is paid and the other he is paying through a payment plan. 
Applicant provided a great deal of character evidence that reflects an honest and 
trustworthy person with a long history of exercising good judgment. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
       
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
