 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00474 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 In Applicant’s undated answer to the SOR, she elected to have her case decided 
on the written record. On June 24, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was provided to Applicant 
on August 13, 2014, and it was received on August 18, 2014. Applicant was afforded an 
 
2 
 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not submit any additional information. The case was assigned to me on 
November 3, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR except ¶¶ 1.b and 1.ff. She 
disputes the amount alleged in SOR ¶ 1.x and states the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.m; 
¶¶ 1.q and 1.r; and ¶¶ 1.w and 1.ee are duplicates debts. These admissions are 
considered findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. She is a college graduate. She was married from 1997 
to 2008. She has three children ages 23, 20, and 16. She has been employed with a 
federal contractor since 2009. 
  
 The SOR alleges 33 delinquent debts totaling more than $182,000. Applicant 
admitted she owed all the debts, except the debts in SOR ¶ 1.b ($534) and 1.ff ($777). 
She indicated in her answer that she partially paid the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.f ($3,320), 
but did not provide any proof. She admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m ($7,425), but 
believes it is a duplicate with ¶ 1.d ($3,933). She did not provide proof they are the 
same debt. She admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.q ($587), but believes it is a duplicate 
with ¶ 1.r ($584). The debts are to the same creditor, but have different account 
numbers. She indicated she had paid $90 toward the debts. She did not provide proof of 
payment or that they are the same debt. She admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.w ($22,045), 
but believes it is a duplicate with ¶ 1.ee ($14,178). She did not provide proof they are 
the same debt. She admitted she owes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.x ($1,573), but disputes the 
amount owed. She did not provide any proof of what she believes she owes. 
 
 Of the 33 debts alleged, seven are judgments (¶¶ 1.a ($3,300), 1.b ($534), 1.c 
($250), 1.d ($3,933), 1.e ($164), 1.f ($3,320), 1.g ($648)). Four are federal tax liens (¶¶ 
1.h ($15,224), 1.i ($921), 1.j ($737), and 1.k ($737)). Two debts are vehicle 
repossessions (¶¶ 1.l ($10,487) and 1.t ($461)). The remaining alleged debts are 
accounts for credit cards, utilities, telecommunications, medical and various other 
consumer debts. SOR ¶ 1.dd ($41,494) is a federal student loan debt. Applicant stated 
the loan was deferred, but did not provide any proof.1  
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2011 on a warrant for an unpaid dental bill. She posted 
bail, appeared in court, and established a payment plan to satisfy the debt (SOR ¶ 
1.hh). She did not provide proof of the payment plan or her compliance. She stated the 
debt was paid, but did not provide proof. 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to her 2008 divorce, her husband’s 
failure to pay their children’s medical bills, and her failed business. She opened a 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 5, 6, 7. 
 
3 
 
 
daycare center in 2005 that closed in 2009. She failed to pay sufficient federal 
employee taxes during that period, and as a result owed more than $17,000 to the 
Internal Revenue Service. As part of the business, she obtained a loan that she 
defaulted on and a company vehicle that was repossessed.2 In 2011, Applicant signed a 
lease for a retail space with the intention of opening another daycare center. It is 
unknown why she was unable to open the daycare center. The lessor wanted her to pay 
the full term of her lease, even though she never moved into the space. The account 
was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.v ($46,232)).3 
 
 Applicant listed in her security clearance application that she had periods of 
unemployment from September 2008 to August 2009 and September 2006 to August 
2007. It is unclear why she believed she was unemployed while she was running her 
daycare business from 2005 to 2009.4 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant did not provide any explanation, 
documentation, or evidence for actions she has taken to resolve her financial 
problems.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
                                                          
2 Items 4, 9. 
 
3 Items 5, 6, 7. 
 
4 Item 4. 
 
5 Item 3. 
 
4 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant has 33 delinquent debts totaling more than $182,000. She admitted 
almost all of the debts. She was arrested for failing to pay a debt and stated she 
arranged a payment plan. Her debts accumulated over several years, and she has not 
resolved them. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply to these facts. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated she made payment arrangements for 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.hh. She did not provide any documents to support her statement. 
She failed to provide sufficient proof or evidence regarding any of the delinquent debts 
she believed she paid, disputed, or believed were duplicates. She did not provide 
sufficient evidence that she has resolved any of the delinquent debts. The debts are 
recent and unpaid. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s debts are still owed. 
Under the circumstances, I cannot find future financial problems are unlikely to recur 
and that it does not cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
There is some indication that Applicant’s divorce in 2008 and failed business in 2009 
contributed to her financial problems. However, without more specific information about 
her finances during this period, I am unable to conclude her financial problems were 
beyond her control. She did not provide information as to what actions she is taking to 
resolve her financial problems. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 
6 
 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. There are no 
clear indications that her financial problem is being resolved or is under control. There is 
insufficient evidence she made a good-faith effort to repay her overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve her debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant stated she 
made payment arrangements to pay the debt in SOR ¶ 1.hh, and she had paid or 
disputed amounts on other debts. She failed to provide documentation to substantiate 
her dispute or evidence of actions to resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 40 years old. She has been employed by the same employer since 
2009. She owes approximately $182,000 for unpaid judgments, tax liens, and other 
consumer debts. She did not provide sufficient mitigating evidence to conclude the 
security concerns regarding her finances are resolved. Applicant failed to meet her 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.hh:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
