 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-01167 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 6, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be continued or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 21, 2014, and on June 8, 2014 elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM), dated June 20, 2014, was provided to him by letter 
dated June 24, 2014. Applicant received the FORM on June 28, 2014. He was afforded 
a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not submit any information within the allotted period of 30 days 
after receipt of copy of the FORM. The case was assigned to me on November 3, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 35 year-old general clerk, who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since May 2012. He seeks a security clearance in conjunction with his 
current employment. (Item 5.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1997. He served in the U.S. Navy 
as an enlisted member from August 1997 to May 2007. From May 2008 to the present, 
he has attended several institutions of higher learning, but does not have a degree. 
Applicant was awarded a legal administrative assistant certificate in December 2009. 
Applicant married in November 2003, and has two minor children. The FORM contains 
no further information regarding his military service. (Item 5, Item 8.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 There is substantial evidence to support the SOR allegations that Applicant has 
a history of financial problems. In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted to having 15 
delinquent debts totaling $25,913. The debts consist of the following: (1) two judgments 
filed in April 2008 in the amount of $1,370, and in January 2006 in the amount of $605, 
respectively; (2) seven collections accounts in the amounts of $982, $863, $121, $45, 
$52, $67, and $5,585; (3) four charged-off accounts in the amounts of $807, $3,355, 
$2,772, and $5,375; and (4) two past-due accounts in the amounts of $450 and $3,464. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.o, SOR response.)  
 
Along with his admissions, the delinquent accounts are established by credit 
reports from May 2012 and January 2014 as well as his February 2014 Response to 
DOHA Interrogatories. (Items 6 – 8.) Applicant stated that “he has no reason for not 
paying his debts,” that his inaction was “not malicious,” but he “just did not pay” the 
debts. (Item 8.) As of June 2012, he stated that he did not have the money to pay his 
debts. (Item 8.) Applicant’s February 2014 personal financial statement lists a monthly 
net remainder of $737, with no payments towards his delinquent debts. (Item 8.) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
When these shortcomings were pointed out to Applicant in Department Counsel’s 
FORM, he failed to submit any documentation that addressed the Government’s 
concerns. The 15 delinquent accounts remain unaddressed, as Applicant has not 
provided any documentation showing that they are paid, settled, in a payment plan, 
cancelled, forgiven, or otherwise resolved. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”1 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
                                                          
1
 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less 
than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 
1994). 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).2 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
                                                          
 
2 “
The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports.  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,3 I conclude none of the five 
financial considerations mitigating conditions above are applicable or partially applicable 
to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern. The available information shows 
that Applicant has taken little affirmative action to resolve his delinquent debts. 
 
With that said, a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts or 
enforcing tax laws.4 Rather the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness consistent with the security guidelines in the Directive. In 
evaluating F cases, the Appeal Board has established the following standard: 
 
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
                                                          
3
  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
4
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has 
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant 
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating 
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is not requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR.5 
 
Based on the available evidence, Applicant has not taken enough significant 
actions to mitigate the security concern under Guideline F. In light of the circumstances 
here, the record evidence presents uncertainty, and that uncertainty equates to doubt 
about Applicant’s fitness for access to classified information. 
 
After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating 
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,6 I conclude Applicant did not present 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the Guideline F security concern. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
5
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 
 
6
 AG ¶ 2(a) (1)-(9). 
 
