 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00952 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations, but failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under 
Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 On May 27, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 30, 2014. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
3, 2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 22, 2014, by video-
teleconference. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through I, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
record was held open until October 29, 2014, to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documents, which she did. They were marked as AE J and K and admitted into 
evidence without objection.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 3, 
2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.k of the SOR. She denied ¶ 2.a of 
the SOR. I have incorporated her admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 45 years old. She graduated from high school in 1987. She was 
married from 1987 to 1989 and has a grown daughter from the marriage. She was again 
married from 1990 to 1997, and a third marriage in 2005 ended in divorce shortly 
thereafter.2  
 
Applicant has been employed by an airline as a flight attendant since 1998. She 
has been on a leave of absence to work with a defense contractor since October 2013. 
She enlisted in the Army Reserve in 2002. She deployed to Iraq in 2004-2005 for a 12-
month period and again in 2007-2008 for another 12-month period. She holds the rank 
of sergeant (E-5).3 
 
Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 1998. She went through a divorce and 
was having financial difficulties. She was working three jobs. She chose to file Chapter 
13 instead of Chapter 7 because she acknowledged the debts were her responsibility. 
She complied with the monthly payment plan, paying more than $11,000 over four 
years. In October 2002 her debts were discharged.4 
 
 In 2002, Applicant was arrested and charged with theft of service by check. She 
was unaware, until she was stopped for a minor traffic infraction, that there was a 
warrant for her arrest for a 1997 check she wrote with nonsufficient funds in her 
                                                          
1 Hearing exhibit I is Department Counsel’s memorandum. 
 
2 Tr. 38. 
 
3 Tr. 32-33, 97, 103-105. 
 
4 Tr. 34-40; AE D. 
 
 
3 
 
 
account. The check was for $33. She stated she never received notice from the bank 
about the check. She paid the fine and the matter was resolved.5 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($6,242) was a credit card debt. Applicant gave her then 
fiancé a power of attorney while she was deployed. Although he was authorized to use 
the card, she learned three months before she returned from her deployment that he 
was misusing it. She contacted her bank and the credit card company and had him 
removed from the account. She stated she contacted the creditor to make payment 
arrangements, but the account had already been charged-off. She was issued an IRS 
form 1099c, cancellation of debt, which she included with her 2013 federal income tax 
return.6  
 
In 2011, Applicant was in a car accident that was not her fault. She suffered 
injuries that required surgery, and she was unable to work for approximately a year. She 
had difficulty paying her bills. She was able to pay her necessities, but got behind with 
her consumer debt. She had an attorney who pursued a lawsuit against the driver. The 
attorney was supposed to pay all of her medical bills from the settlement amount. Some 
of the medical bills were delinquent due to the delay in the settlement payment. The 
medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($120) and 1.f ($93) are attributed to the accident 
and are paid.7  
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($3,752) and 1.d ($6,373) are for credit cards to the 
same creditor. Applicant stated that she was making regular payments for these debts 
until she was in the car accident and was unable to pay. She was able to arrange a 
payment plan with the creditor and paid them. She stated the creditor also charged off 
these debts, and she received a federal income tax form 1099c, cancellation of debt, 
which was included in her 2012 federal income tax return. Applicant provided 
documents to show the debts were settled and paid. Her credit report also indicates that 
the accounts were settled and paid.8  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($696) was a credit card debt that Applicant was unable to 
pay on time due to the car accident. She settled and paid the account.9 The debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.h ($1,704) was paid in October 2013. Both debts are listed as resolved on 
Applicant’s credit report.10 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 67-69; AE E page 1. 
 
6 Tr. 40-47; AE E page 2-3, AE K. 
 
7 Tr. 33-34; 54-57, 86-89, 95; AE A pages 17, 21, AE E page 4. 
 
8 Tr. 47-54; AE A pages 13-14, AE E pages 6 and 9.  
 
9 Tr. 58-65; AE A pages 21-22, 25, AE E page 5. 
 
10 Tr. 60-65; AE A pages 21-22, 25, AE E page 5. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant did not recognize the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($202). She did not recall ever 
having an account with this creditor. Regardless, she paid the bill in June 2011 so it 
would be removed from her credit report. She provided supporting documents.11 The 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($1,033) was another credit card debt that Applicant fell behind on 
after the car accident. The debt is paid.12 
 
Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in 2002. Question 33 
asked if, in the past seven years, Applicant had filed a petition under any chapter of the 
bankruptcy code, including Chapter 13. Applicant answered “No.” She also answered 
“No” to questions that asked if she had delinquencies over 180 days or any current 
debts. When asked why she did not disclose her 1998 Chapter 13 filing, the 2002 
bankruptcy discharge, and her previous delinquent debts, she explained she was told 
by the recruiter that because she had completed the Chapter 13 payment plan she did 
not have to disclose it. She acknowledged that she signed and certified under criminal 
penalty of law that all of the information she provided was true. She explained she was 
following the recruiter’s advice when she did not disclose her bankruptcy. She was 
asked by Department Counsel: “So you were willing to abide by [the recruiter’s] advice, 
turn the page and sign a certification that signaled to you that [if] you provided false 
information, you might be guilty of a felony that could include imprisonment or [a] fine? 
You were willing to do that?”13 Applicant responded: “Yes, evidently, because I did do 
that.”14 She was 33 years old when she completed the SCA. She explained it was a 
scary environment for her when she completed her SCA. She did disclose her bad 
check offense, a public intoxication charge from 1997, and two speeding tickets from 
1997 and 1998.15  
 
Applicant completed her most recent SCA on September 12, 2013. Question 26 
asked if, in the past seven years, Applicant had any bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency; had an account or credit card suspended, charged off, or canceled 
for failure to pay as agreed; or had been over 120 days delinquent on any debt not 
previously entered. She answered “No.” Applicant explained at her hearing that on the 
day she completed the SCA she was very busy. She had a notebook with all of her past 
debts listed in it. It was the first time she completed the SCA electronically and the 
Internet kept going down and losing her data, so she had to repeatedly start over. This 
                                                          
11 Tr. 65-66; AE A page 5-6, AE I. 
 
12 Tr. 66-67; AE E page 7. 
 
13 Tr. 81. 
 
14 Tr. 81-82. 
 
15 Tr. 78, 115; AE C. Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an applicant’s 
credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 26, 2006) (citations omitted). I have considered Applicant’s explanation for why she failed to disclose 
her bankruptcy on her 2002 SCA, which was not alleged in the SOR, for these limited purposes. 
 
 
5 
 
 
happened numerous times. She stated that each time she started over, she disclosed 
all of her past delinquent debts. She stated she does not know what happened, but her 
SCA shows she entered “No” to Question 26. She stated this was a mistake and she 
does not know why she answered “No.” She stated somehow her answer came up “No.” 
She stated she may have gone back and filled in “No” accidentally. The location where 
she completed the SCA was crowded with people and she did not have ample room to 
lay out all of her papers. It was a very busy area and there was no privacy. She 
admitted her financial situation was embarrassing and she did not want to share it with 
her coworkers. She agreed that she signed the certification under penalty of law that the 
information she provided was accurate and true.16 
 
During Applicant’s interview with a government investigator she disclosed that 
she had significant financial setbacks that led to numerous delinquent accounts that 
were placed for collection. At the time, she indicated to the investigator that she 
believed most of her accounts were now current or were paid in full, and she had not 
listed the financial accounts on her SCA because she thought she only had to list 
currently delinquent or collection accounts, and it was not her intention to be deceptive 
or dishonest. This explanation to the government investigator is inconsistent with the 
statement she made at her hearing that she actually listed the accounts each time she 
attempted to complete the online application, but she must have accidentally filled in 
“No” and she does not know how the answer came up “No.” 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR regarding the falsification allegation she stated:  
 
I admit, when I received your Statement I looked [at] the copy of the e-
QIP. I was in shock at my answer. I am not sure why I answered no. That 
day was very hectic. I had to fill out this form at work. I had no privacy and 
was very busy. The [I]nternet in our building is not reliable and I had to 
leave a few times to go and see about issues we were having with 
vehicles. I filled out these forms maybe 6 times that day. For some reason 
it would not save previous answers[.] I had to go back several times and 
fill them out online. When I finished I did not have time to go back and 
review answers[.] [W]e are 1 [hour time] difference from [our] Office I had 
to turn these into so I was just in a hurry to get them in. This is my 
mistake. I thought that I had said yes and that was why the investigator 
came to talk to me. When I spoke with him I disclosed everything that I 
remembered. I explained that in August or September time frame before I 
left [State A] I had gone to [Bank] and had started paying for the identity 
theft protection which [was] included [in] the credit report for you. I had 
already started to make payments on smaller debts and working my way 
to the big ones. I also explained that this was due to the fact of a car 
accident and I had not worked for approximately a year and this is why I 
got behind. I was doing everything possible to pay these debts. I was seen 
a second time [by a] different investigator and showed her the copies I had 
                                                          
16 Tr. 70. 
 
6 
 
 
from Credit Report[.] [S]he wrote all the items down and I signed some 
papers. I know that everything would be looked at[.] I was not worried 
because I had no idea I had said no on [the] question. 
 
Applicant was unemployed for a few months at the end of 2012 and early 2013 
when the company she worked for merged with another company. She was able to 
work part-time for a period. She also received unemployment benefits for a period.17 
 
Applicant owns a home that she rents to a cousin. She is current on the 
mortgage payments. She recently purchased a 2014 vehicle and is current on the loan 
payments. Applicant has been paying her mother’s mortgage for the past six years and 
her car payment for approximately the past three years. Applicant is up-to-date on all of 
her current bills. She has two credit cards, but neither have balances. She has a 
retirement account and about $4,100 in savings. She maintains a written budget.18  
 
Applicant provided a character letter from her former commander and now 
civilian supervisor. She is described as a key leader and trusted member of the unit. 
She has impressive technical skills. She can make decisions under pressure. She is an 
intelligent, motivated, reliable, dedicated and hardworking professional with an 
outstanding work ethic. Other character letters describe her as honest, compassionate 
and having a high moral character.19  
 
Applicant also provided copies of her military evaluations and numerous military 
awards and letters of recommendation and appreciation, including the Meritorious 
Service Medal and Army Commendation Medal.20 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
                                                          
17 Tr. 96-101. 
 
18 Tr. 59, 89-95, 102, 107-109. 
 
19 AE B. 
 
20 AE G, H. 
 
7 
 
 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
8 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had nine delinquent debts that totaled more than $20,200. She had 
debts discharged through Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2002 and in 1997 she wrote a 
check with nonsufficient funds in her account. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant attributed her early financial problems to a divorce. She filed Chapter 
13 bankruptcy and made payments for four years until her debts were discharged in 
2002. She again experienced financial problems when she was in a car accident and 
out of work for a year. She was unable to pay all of her bills while she was recuperating 
from the accident. Once she reached a financial settlement for her accident, she was 
able to pay all of her bills. A couple of the debts were charged off and she received 
cancellation of debt notices and the amounts were included in her federal income tax 
returns, which she paid. In addition, regarding one debt, her then fiancé misused her 
credit card while she was deployed. Once she became aware, she removed him as an 
authorized user. The debt was charged off, and she received a cancellation of debt 
notification from the IRS. The debt was included with her federal tax returns and she 
paid her tax liability. Applicant was unaware of the theft by services charge until she 
 
9 
 
 
was stopped for a traffic infraction. The offense occurred in 1997. She resolved the 
issue.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is established because she has resolved all of her delinquent debts 
and the theft by services offense happened more than 14 years ago and is unlikely to 
recur. The conditions that caused the financial problems as noted above were beyond 
her control. Applicant acted responsibly when she completed four years of payments for 
her Chapter 13 bankruptcy, and she paid her delinquent debts after she received the 
legal settlement for her injuries due to a car accident. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
Applicant has made a good-faith effort to resolve her debts and there are clear 
indications her financial problems are under control and resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and, 
20(d) apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
Applicant completed two SCAs in the past. The first one was in 2002 shortly after 
completing her Chapter 13 payment plan and the second in 2013. Applicant stated she 
was told by her recruiter not to include her bankruptcy on her 2002 SCA, so she 
complied. On her 2013 SCA, she failed to disclose she had past delinquent debts. I 
considered her testimony and explanations. I also considered her statement to the 
government investigator. She told the investigator she did not think she had to include 
her past delinquent debts because most of them were now current. This explanation 
contradicts her testimony. She stated she thought she included her delinquent debts on 
the SCA, and somehow the electronic SCA kept dumping her information. She 
explained that each time she went back and included her past delinquent debts. Then 
somehow she overlooked her final submission where she mistakenly answered “No” to 
the financial delinquency questions. She then certified and swore her answers were 
 
10 
 
 
true, but she failed to review the final version of the SCA where she must have 
mistakenly answered “no” to the question. Applicant’s testimony was not credible. I find 
she deliberately concealed her past financial problems. The above disqualifying 
condition applies.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the required information. She did not promptly 
make a good-faith effort to correct her omissions. Her omissions are not minor, but 
rather are serious. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that there were unique 
circumstances surrounding her omissions. Her deliberate concealment and falsification 
cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
11 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 45 years old. She experienced financial problems due to a divorce 
and later due to a car accident. She complied with the terms of her Chapter 13 
bankruptcy payment plan, and her debts were discharged. She had difficulty paying her 
bills when she was out of work due to a car accident. Once she received the settlement 
payment for the accident, she paid her delinquent debts. Applicant successfully 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant was aware of her 
financial difficulties, but deliberately failed to disclose them on her 2013 SCA. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the personal conduct guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
