 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01389 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kathleen T. Milam, Esq.  
G. Bartley Loftin, III, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 3, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 27, 2014, and July 17, 2014, and 
elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On August 4, 
2014, Department Counsel requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The 
case was assigned to me on September 23, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
 
2 
 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 29, 2014, scheduling the 
hearing for October 22, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through X, which were admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel sent an informational letter to Applicant on 
August 29, 2014. The letter is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 30, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from 
a military service academy in 1993. He served on active duty in the U.S. military until he 
was honorably discharged in 1999. He has a master’s degree, and he is pursuing a 
doctorate degree. He has worked for defense contractors since his discharge from the 
military in 1999. He started his current employment in April 2014. He seeks to retain his 
security clearance, which he has held for more than 20 years. He is married with two 
minor children and an adult stepchild.1  
 
 The SOR alleges a mortgage loan that was $4,013 past due, with a balance of 
$176,027 (SOR ¶ 1.a), two credit card debts in collection (SOR ¶ 1.c - $5,430; SOR ¶ 
1.d - $3,627), three delinquent medical debts totaling $247 (SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.g), a $16,153 
foreclosed timeshare (SOR ¶ 1.h), and $52,905 in deferred student loans (SOR ¶ 1.i).2  
The allegations were established through credit reports and Applicant’s admissions. The 
debts are addressed in the table below.  
 
SOR AMOUNT STATUS EVIDENCE 
1.a Mortgage loan $4,103 
past due; 
$176,027 
balance 
Current. Tr. at 34, 62-
63; Response 
to SOR; AE G-
J. 
1.c Credit card $5,430 Settled for $1,901 and paid in June 
2014. 
Tr. at 35-36, 
64-65; 
Response to 
SOR; AE K, L, 
W. 
1.d Credit card $3,627 Settled for $1,270 and paid in June 
2014. 
Tr. at 35-36, 
64-65; 
Response to 
SOR; AE M, 
N, X. 
1.e Medical debt $200 
 
Paid in June 2014. Tr. at 36-37; 
Response to 
SOR; AE O, P.
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23, 28-30, 42, 49, 56, 68; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 There is no SOR ¶ 1.b allegation. I did not renumber the allegations. 
 
 
3 
 
1.f. Medical debt $95 Paid in June 2014. Tr. at 36-37; 
Response to 
SOR; AE Q. 
1.g. Medical debt $52 Paid in June 2014. Tr. at 36-37; 
Response to 
SOR; AE R. 
1.h. Vacation 
timeshare 
$16,153 Foreclosed and sold. No deficiency 
balance.  
Tr. at 37-40, 
63-64; 
Response to 
SOR; AE S-U. 
1.i. Student loans $52,905 Deferred until December 2014.  
$78,980 balance. 
Tr. at 40-42, 
65-67; 
Response to 
SOR; AE V. 
 
 In summary, Applicant brought his mortgage loan current; he paid or settled the 
five delinquent debts; the timeshare was sold after foreclosure without a deficiency 
balance due; and the student loans are in deferred status. Applicant will start paying the 
student loans in December 2014.    
 
 Applicant was not as diligent about his finances as he should have been. His wife 
was a stay-at-home mother. His stepchild incurred legal and other expenses that were 
paid by Applicant and his wife.3  
 
 Applicant received a substantial pay increase when he started work for his 
current employer. The company advanced him $20,000 against his salary, which he 
used to settle and pay debts. His wife returned to the workforce in 2012, and she also 
earns a good salary. His stepchild is now employed. Applicant understands the 
importance of fiscal responsibility to his security clearance and his job. He is committed 
to maintaining his finances in proper order.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 25-33, 37-38, 44-49, 56-68; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 34-35, 48-52, 68-69; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
4 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 
 
5 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay his 
financial obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant incurred unexpected expenses, but he was not diligent about managing 
his finances. In July 2014, he switched jobs at a substantial increase in salary. He used 
his $20,000 salary advance to bring his finances in order. His wife returned to the 
workforce at a good salary. Applicant is aware of the importance of keeping his finances 
in order.  
 
  I find that Applicant made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial 
problems have been resolved. They occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to 
recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) are applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
6 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s honorable military service and his stable work record. 
Applicant should have been more diligent about managing his finances, but they are 
now in order and should remain in that state. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.I:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
