 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01154 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Appellant became delinquent 
on his child support payments when he was unemployed after leaving the Air Force. He 
has paid the delinquent child support obligation. The financial considerations security 
concerns have been resolved. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on April 30, 2014, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
On June 12, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), dated September 19, 2014. The FORM contained eight attachments.  
On October 7, 2014, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of 
his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. On October 22, 2014, Applicant responded to the 
FORM. Department Counsel did not object to the response, which was admitted into the 
record. On November 20, 2014, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied owing the medical debt listed in 
SOR 1.a, $3,575 and denied he owed delinquent child support. After a thorough review 
of the pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old mechanic who has worked for a defense contractor 
since September 2011, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. At the end of August 
2010, when he left active duty with the United States Air Force, he was a crew chief in 
the rank of sergeant (E-4). Applicant did not wish to leave the Air Force, but left due to 
downsizing in his career field.  
 
In June 2010, Applicant divorced and was required to pay $700 monthly child 
support. His children are ages eight and ten. Payments for June, July, and August 2010 
were made from his military pay. From September 2010 through September 2011, he 
was unemployed and attending school. (Item 7) While unemployed, he sent child 
support payments sporadically and sent the money directly to his ex-wife or his mother 
and not through the state child support office. Applicant stated he was naïve for making 
payments directly to his ex-wife.  
 
From June 2010 through June 2012, Applicant’s ex-wife and children were living 
with his mother who was providing them food, lodging, and utilities. (Item 7) By making 
his payments directly to his ex-wife or to his mother, the state child support enforcement 
office believed he was $26,000 delinquent in his child support obligation. 
 
In September 2011, after receiving his current job, and continuing until August 
2013, Applicant began sending his ex-wife weekly child support of $80 to $150.2 (Item 
7) He provided documentation that between June 2012 and January 2013, he sent his 
ex-wife directly $2,115 by money gram. (FORM Answer) He asserts he made additional 
payments during this period, but was unable to document the payments. FORM 
                                                          
2 This amount of weekly support equates to $346 to $650 monthly, which was short of the required $700 
monthly child support. There are 26-two week pay periods each year and not 24, which increases the 
monthly amount being paid. 
 
 
3 
Answer) Since mid-August 2013, $389 has been withheld bi-weekly3 by garnishment for 
child support.  
 
Between February 2013 and September 2014, Applicant paid his ex-wife 
$38,932 and did so through the state child support disbursement unit. (FORM Answer) 
This resulted in an overpayment of his child support obligation by $10. (Item 3) In 
February and March 2014, he made $23,000 in payments following the receipt of his 
delayed U.S. Department of Veteran’s Affairs (VA) disability payment.  
 
In February 2012, Applicant suffered from food poisoning, which required an 
overnight hospital stay. He incurred a $3,700 medical debt (SOR 1.a) on which he made 
a $200 initial payment and $50 monthly payments thereafter. (Item 3) Although he was 
making his monthly payments, the debt was listed as a collection. When Applicant 
questioned the creditor as to why the debt was listed as a collection, the creditor was 
unable to explain why this had occurred. As of December 9, 2013, this debt was settled 
in full. (Item 3)  
 
Prior to Applicant’s divorce in 2006, Applicant purchased a 2003 Toyota pickup 
for $21,000, which was paid off. He never missed a payment on the vehicle. In 2010, he 
purchased a 2006 Nissan, which he also paid off and on which all payments were made 
timely. In 2006, he purchased a $4,700 motorcycle. He made timely payments and is 
now paid off. In 2012, he purchased a 2007 Honda for $13,000, which is now paid for. 
(FORM Answer) He is current on his mortgage, utility bills, and other obligations. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
3 Bi-weekly child support of $389 equates to $843 monthly child support. 
 
4 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
 
5 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay the full amount of his child support obligation 
following his separation from the Air Force. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 From June 2010 until June 2012, Applicant’s ex-wife and two children lived with 
his mother. His mother provided them with lodging, food, and utilities. Applicant was 
unemployed from September 2010 through September 2011. During this time he 
naïvely made child support payments directly to his ex-wife or to his mother and not 
through the state child support department. After obtaining his current job in September 
2011, his monthly child support payments were less than what had been court ordered. 
Starting in mid-August 2013, the required monthly child support payments have been 
paid by garnishment. Between March 2013 through September 2014, Applicant paid 
$38,932 through the state child support disbursement unit. Additionally, in December 
2013, prior to the issuance of the SOR, Applicant paid the medical debt listed in SOR 
1.a. 
 
6 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by his 
unemployment after leaving the Air Force, which made it impossible to meet his child 
support obligations. He made some child support payments to his ex-wife, but failed to 
send them through the state child support office. He has now paid all delinquent child 
support obligations. It is unlikely he will again make payments directly to his ex-wife for 
child support payments or fall behind on his support payments. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experienced divorce and unemployment along with 
the financial burden associated with each. AG & 20(b) applies. 
 
Under AG & 20(c) and & 20(d), Applicant has paid all past-due child support 
obligations. Therefore, there are clear indications that the problem is resolved and is 
under control. Additionally, he repaid both obligations, which represents a good-faith 
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. AG & 20 (c) and & 20 (d) 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The debts set forth in the SOR were 
not incurred on luxuries, but were for medical treatment and child support. 
 
Although Applicant was unable to make full monthly child support payments, he 
paid what he could while unemployed. Additionally, his mother was providing support 
not only for his children, but also his ex-wife, received in-kind support because she 
provided to them lodging, food, and utilities from the time of the divorce, June 2010, 
 
7 
thorough June 2012. Since mid-August 2013, Applicant has been paying the full amount 
of his monthly child support. He paid his ex-wife almost $39,000 in 2013 and 2014 for 
past-due child support obligations and is now current on his support obligations. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts are paid—it is whether his 
financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
(See AG & 2 (a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
