 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01581 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns, and she mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 16, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 8, 2014, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 28, 2014, Department 
Counsel requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to 
an administrative judge on September 3, 2014, and reassigned to me on September 23, 
 
2 
 
2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on September 29, 2014, scheduling the hearing for October 22, 2014. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1, 3, and 4 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. GE 2 was admitted over Applicant’s objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel sent an informational letter to Applicant on 
September 2, 2014. The letter is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 3, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old prospective employee of a defense contractor. She will 
be hired if she obtains a security clearance. She has a bachelor’s degree, a master’s 
degree, and a doctorate in theology. She is married with a minor child.1 
 
 Applicant’s husband had brain cancer in the 1980s. The surgery to remove the 
cancer also removed part of his brain. He had additional medical problems in 2005 and 
2006 that may have been related to his brain cancer and surgery. Before his 2005 
problems, he was able to work in a job for people with disabilities. He is now incapable 
of working and collects Social Security disability benefits. He also is on medication, 
which used to cost $600 a month, but is down to $36 every three months.2 
 
 Applicant ran a small retail business from 2001 through 2011. The shop did not 
make much money. She was unemployed for more than a year after the shop closed. 
Applicant did not pay her federal and state income taxes when due for tax year 2006. 
The IRS filed a $5,286 tax lien against her and her husband in 2010. The state filed a 
$923 tax lien against her and her husband in 2011. Applicant believes the individual 
who filed her income tax returns may have made a mistake, and that she should not 
have owed so much. She has not sought assistance from another tax professional to file 
an amended return or dispute the amount owed.3 
 
 The IRS levied Applicant’s husband’s Social Security benefits for a period. 
Applicant and her husband entered into an installment agreement with the IRS in 
August 2013 to pay their tax debt. A payment of $57 was made in February 2014. As of 
July 2014, the balance due the IRS was $6,635. She paid $50 to her state in October 
2014.4   
 
 Applicant and her husband did not file federal and state tax income returns for 
2007 and 2008 when they were due. She did not believe they had to file the returns 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 37, 43, 86; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 38-42, 93; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 42-49; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 49-59; GE 1; AE E, G. 
 
 
3 
 
because their income was below the filing requirements of an employee.5 Because 
Applicant was self-employed, she was required to file returns even if her income was 
below the filing requirements of an employee.6 
 
 Applicant filed the income tax returns before the SOR was issued. Her husband’s 
and her combined adjusted gross income for tax year 2007 was $12,230. Their adjusted 
gross income for 2008 was $11,538.7 They did not receive refunds because the returns 
were filed after the three-year statute of limitations. Refunds also could not be withheld 
to pay their tax liability for 2006.8 
 
 The SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts. All but two of the debts are medical debts. 
Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j ($281), 1.m ($142), and 1.o 
($57). She stated that she paid the $281 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. The most recent 
credit report shows the balance on that debt as $81.9 
 
 Applicant denied owing the remaining debts. The $1,522 medical debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.f is a duplicate of the $1,522 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, and the 
$1,387 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is a duplicate of the $1,387 medical debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. She disputed the debts with the credit reporting agencies. Her 
Experian credit report obtained on October 21, 2014, only lists one of the disputed 
debts: a $350 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.i).10  
 
 Applicant paid some debts that were not alleged in the SOR. She admitted she 
has unpaid medical debts. She has been unable to make greater strides toward paying 
her debts because of her limited income. She is a substitute schoolteacher, and she 
works part-time for a defense contractor. She lives a frugal lifestyle. She does not have 
a credit card, and her car is 11 years old without a loan. She does not have student 
loans. She refused to accept food stamps because she did not want to depend on the 
government. If she obtains a security clearance, she will receive a full-time position by 
the defense contractor and her income will increase substantially. She credibly testified 
that she will pay her taxes and other debts with her additional income. She received 
financial advice from her mother, but she has not received formal financial counseling. 
She plans to attend a financial seminar put on by her church.11 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 59; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 See http://www.irs.gov/Individuals/Self-Employed.  
 
7 Tr. at 50, 59-62; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE A, B. 
 
8 See http://www.irs.gov/taxtopics/tc153.html.  
 
9 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4; AE F. 
 
10 Tr. at 77-86; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4; AE F. 
 
11 Tr. at 62-65, 75-79, 82-86, 88, 91-96; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE F. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
November 2013. Under the financial questions, she listed that she owed the IRS about 
$6,000. She also listed a $269 medical debt that she reported as paid. She did not list 
any additional delinquent debts.12  
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86. She was unaware of the 
extent of her medical debts.13 Having considered all the evidence, including that 
Applicant was forthcoming about the amount owed the IRS, I find that she did not 
intentionally falsify the SF 86.  
 
 Applicant submitted letters from people who have known her for about 20 years. 
The authors attested to her honesty, dependability, responsibility, leadership, 
dedication, trustworthiness, and integrity.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
12 Tr. at 64; GE 1. 
 
13 Tr. at 64. 
 
14 AE D. 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable to pay her financial 
obligations. She did not file federal and state income tax returns when they were due for 
tax years 2007 and 2008. The IRS filed a $5,286 tax lien against her and her husband 
in 2010, and the state filed a $923 tax lien against them in 2011. The above 
disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.h are duplicates of the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the 
 
6 
 
same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s 
favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged 
twice). SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.h are concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue 
 
  Applicant’s husband has had extensive medical problems. The operation to 
remove his brain cancer also removed part of his brain. He was able to work in a job for 
people with disabilities until about 2005 when he had additional medical problems. He is 
no longer able to work, but he collects Social Security disability benefits. His medication 
used to cost about $600 a month, but is now down to a manageable $36 every three 
months. Applicant’s business was never very profitable, and she was unemployed for 
more than a year after the shop closed in 2011. She currently works as a substitute 
teacher and on a part-time basis for a defense contractor. All these events were beyond 
her control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act 
responsibly under the circumstances.  
   
  Applicant and her husband had limited income in tax years 2007 and 2008. 
There may have been a mistake on their 2006 income tax returns. Nonetheless, the IRS 
determined their tax liability for 2006, and unless an amended return is submitted or the 
amount otherwise disputed, that is the amount that they owe. Applicant mistakenly 
thought she did not have to file income tax returns for 2007 and 2008. Applicant has 
been working for several years to resolve her financial problems. She filed her tax 
returns. She maintained contact with the IRS and made some payments. She paid 
 
7 
 
some debts that were not alleged in the SOR. She successfully disputed several debts. 
She credibly testified that she will pay her delinquent debts with the additional salary 
that will come with her new position. 
 
  A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
  I find that Applicant made a good-faith effort to pay her debts, but her income has 
been too low to make a substantial dent in her tax bill. Her financial problems occurred 
under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are applicable. 
AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b)15 are not completely applicable because Applicant did not 
appropriately handle her taxes, and she still has debts to be resolved. AG ¶ 20(e) is 
applicable to the successfully-disputed debts. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
                                                          
15 The Appeal Board reversed an administrative judge’s adverse decision in which the judge determined 
that AG ¶ 20(b) was applicable: 
 
Applicant’s challenge to the legal sufficiency of the Judge’s decision is persuasive. The 
Judge found that Applicant’s case satisfied the criteria of [AG ¶ 20(b)], in that Applicant’s 
financial problems were due to causes largely beyond his control and that his response to 
those problems had been reasonable. That finding is sustainable. Having so found, it is 
inconsistent for the Judge then to conclude that Applicant had nevertheless failed in 
meeting his burden of persuasion as to mitigation. The decision does not explain why, 
under the facts of this case, if Applicant had been reasonable in addressing problems 
rooted in causes beyond his control, the mere fact that it might take him a long time to 
complete the process was a reason to deny him a clearance.  
 
ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2008). 
 
8 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  Applicant did not intentionally provide false information on her SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) 
is not applicable. SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b are concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and the events beyond her 
control that contributed to her financial problems. Her current income does not permit 
her to make significant strides in addressing her debts. I am convinced that her efforts 
will greatly increase when she has the income to do so.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns, and she mitigated the financial considerations 
security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
