 As defined in Chapter 3 and Appendix 10 of DOD Regulation 5220.2-R, as amended (Regulation).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 14-00898
)
)
Applicant for Position of Trust )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant demonstrated good judgment in addressing her past-due debts.
Concerns about her personal conduct raised by her involvement in three instances of
criminal conduct are mitigated by her lack of culpability and by her improved personal
and professional circumstances. Her request for eligibility to occupy a position of trust is
granted.
Statement of the Case
On June 12, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  for her1
 Required by the Regulation, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive).2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were3
published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
2
job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, DOD adjudicators were unable to determine that it is clearly consistent
with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request for a position of trust.  2
On April 30, 2014, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts which, if proven, raise trustworthiness concerns addressed through the
adjudicative guidelines (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F) and personal3
conduct (Guideline E). On May 23, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) and
requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on August 12, 2014, and I convened a hearing on
September 12, 2014. Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 3. Applicant presented an
amended answer, which is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1. She also
testified and presented Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A and B. All exhibits were admitted
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 23, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $17,400 for ten
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.j). The debt at SOR 1.a is for $1,318 past-
due on a car loan with a balance of $18,836. Applicant admitted, with explanations, all
of the SOR allegations except for SOR 1.i, which she denied.
Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that in July 2009, Applicant was
arrested and charged with possession of cocaine and cannabis, both third degree
felonies, and that those charges were nolle prosequi in January 2010 (SOR 2.a); that in
August 2009, Applicant allowed her aunt to use Applicant’s debit card and PIN to
deposit a forged U.S. Treasury check for $8,000 into Applicant’s checking account. It
was also alleged that in September 2009, Applicant again gave access to her checking
account to her aunt, who attempted to deposit a counterfeit cashier’s check (SOR 2.b);
and that in July 2010, Applicant was cited for misdemeanor possession of cannabis.
The citation was later dismissed (SOR 2.c). Applicant admitted with explanations all of
the SOR 2 allegations. 
In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, and based on all
available information, I make the following findings of fact:
Applicant is 26 years old and was hired by her current employer in August 2013.
Her duties require that she have access to the personally identifiable information (PII) of
her DOD health care customers. Applicant started working there as an employee of a
3
temporary agency, but was offered full-time employment as a regular employee in
November 2013. The job offer is a direct result of her demonstrated value to the
company and the excellent work she performs there.
Applicant is a high school graduate. She enrolled in a community college for one
semester before deciding to pursue cosmetology training through two different
vocational institutes. She completed her training and earns money part-time as a hair
dresser in addition to her regular employment. Since January 2006, she has held
several different, often temporary jobs in data entry, clerical, and customer service
positions. She was unemployed between December 2006 and February 2007; between
November 2008 and February 2009; and between June 2010 and October 2011.
(Answer; Hx. 1; Gx. 1; Gx. 2)
Applicant was raised by a great aunt on her mother’s side, because Applicant’s
mother was a drug user and apparently unable to care for Applicant. Applicant’s next
closest relative was one of her mother’s sisters, who herself turned out to be a poor role
model. Nonetheless, Applicant stayed in touch with her aunt until recently because
Applicant wanted to maintain a family connection. On two occasions in 2009, when
Applicant was 21 years old, her aunt convinced Applicant to let her use Applicant’s debit
card and personal identification number (PIN) to make deposits in Applicant’s bank
account. Both deposits turned out to be fraudulent instruments, but Applicant did not
know at the time what her aunt was doing was illegal. No one was prosecuted for these
actions and Applicant no longer associates with her aunt. (Gx. 2; Hx. 1; Tr. 25, 31 - 32,
55 - 71)
Applicant accrued the debt at SOR 1.a, the past-due amount for a car loan after
voluntary repossession, when she was laid off from her job in June 2010. She has not
yet been able to resolve this debt.The debt alleged at SOR 1.b was accrued because
Applicant financed the purchase of a motorcycle for a former boyfriend, who agreed to
make the payments. When they broke up, he stopped making payments. Applicant’s ex-
boyfriend retained possession of the motorcycle, which Applicant believes was rendered
useless in an accident. She has not yet attempted to resolve this debt. The debt at SOR
1.c is the past-due amount for a different car loan after a voluntary repossession.
Applicant had paid the loan as required for over a year. But the car developed
significant mechanical problems, and she eventually could not afford the repair bills as
well as the monthly payment. She decided to return the car, but has not yet arranged for
repayments. Applicant recently paid off the used car loan for her current automobile. As
discussed below, the $300 she was paying each month is now being used to repay
other debts. When she has finished paying those, she will be able to start repaying the
debt at SOR 1.a. (Answer; Hx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 38 - 40, 82 - 84)
The debt at SOR 1.d is a past-due student loan from Applicant’s vocational
training. She has not resolved this debt, in part, because she has been unable to
identify the current collection creditor holding the account. (Answer; Hx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 40)
 Regulation, ¶ C3.6.15. 4
 Regulation, ¶ C6.1.1.1. 5
4
Applicant is currently repaying, through automatic withdrawals from her bank
account, the delinquent cell phone account alleged at SOR 1.f and the past-due retail
account alleged at SOR 1.j. When those debts are repaid, automatic payments will be
made on the past-due cable television debt  alleged at SOR 1.e and the medical debts
alleged at SOR 1.g and 1.h. The cable television and internet debt alleged at SOR 1.i
has been resolved. (Answer; Ax. B; Tr. 40 - 41)
Applicant’s current job pays her $41,500 annually. She occasionally makes more
money from overtime work, and she earns additional income on weekends through her
cosmetology work. With the help of a finance professional, she has established a
structured budget through which she manages her personal finances. Her listed monthly
expenses include her debt payments, after which she has an estimated $300 remaining.
Applicant also has about $4,000 saved in a retirement account. Applicant would have
started her repayment efforts sooner had she not incurred unexpected moving
expenses while she was still paying off her car loan. She has always filed her tax
returns on time and she has not incurred any new delinquent or past-due debts. (Ax. B;
Tr. 71 - 86)
As to the allegations at SOR 2.a and 2.c, Applicant was not culpable in either
event. In July 2009, she was riding in a car with the same ex-boyfriend for whom she
financed the purchase of a motorcycle. The car was stopped by police for a traffic
violation and drugs were found in the car. The charges were not prosecuted because
her ex-boyfriend admitted the drugs were his and that Applicant had no prior knowledge
the drugs were in the car. In July 2010, Applicant let another ex-boyfriend use her car
while she was at work. Later in the day, he picked her up and they were stopped by
police for a traffic violation. Her ex-boyfriend was arrested for driving with a suspended
driver’s license and both of them were cited for misdemeanor marijuana possession
after a small amount was found in her car. Applicant’s citation was dismissed after her
ex-boyfriend took responsibility for the marijuana. (Answer; Hx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 31, 43 - 55)
Applicant no longer associates with either ex-boyfriend or with anyone who uses
drugs. She has never used drugs. Applicant also maintains a distant relationship with
her aunt. Applicant has established an excellent reputation at work and has been
recognized for her diligence and professionalism. She has a reputation in the workplace
and among her other associates for honesty and reliability. (Ax. A) 
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  In4
deciding whether a person should be assigned to an ADP position, it must be
determined that his or her loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that it is
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.  The Regulation also5
 Regulation, ¶ C8.2.1. 6
 Directive. 6.3.7
5
requires that DOD contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the
Directive before any adverse determination may be made.6
The Directive requires that each decision be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,7
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of eligibility for a position of trust.
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A person who has
access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government
based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in
ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of
one who will protect sensitive information as his or her own. Any reasonable doubt
about an applicant’s suitability for access should be resolved in favor of the
Government.
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The facts
established raise a trustworthiness concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed
at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
6
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations). As to AG ¶ 19(a), the record shows
Applicant has been unable, not unwilling, to repay her past-due debts.
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(a) applies only in part. Applicant’s financial
problems are recent, in that many of her debts remain unpaid. However, her current
employment is characterized by excellent work and professionalism, and she has a
good reputation for reliability and honesty. Combined with her efforts to resolve her
debt, the circumstances that led to her financial problems – immaturity, unemployment,
and bad personal relationships – are not likely to recur. 
The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b) applies because Applicant’s
circumstances have changed for the better. She has a steady job at which she excels,
and she has removed herself from past associations that have led her to incur financial
and other problems. Further, Applicant has embarked on organized repayment efforts
based on available resources. But for unexpected moving expenses, she would have
begun making payments sooner.
7
Finally, the mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) apply because Applicant
began repaying her debts as soon as she had the means to do so. She also sought
professional advice in establishing a viable monthly budget that encompasses her debt
resolution efforts. Although she still has several debts to repay, the presence of unpaid
debts is not necessarily disqualifying. Equally as important is an individual’s judgment
and initiative in responding to adverse financial conditions. Applicant has demonstrated
that she will continue to resolve her past debts while improving her current and future
financial prospects. On balance, she showed that she is acting in good faith and that her
finances are under control. Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised
by her financial problems.
Personal Conduct
Available information is sufficient to support the SOR 2 allegations and raise a
concern under this guideline. That concern is addressed through Guideline E at AG ¶ 15
as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
On two occasions, Applicant was charged with drug-related offenses because
the boyfriend she was with each time possessed marijuana and/or cocaine. Applicant
was not aware before each arrest that her boyfriend possessed drugs. Each time,
however, her boyfriend did the right thing and accepted responsibility for the drugs and
the charges against her were dropped. Also, Applicant’s aunt, the one family member
with whom Applicant had a continuing relationship, used Applicant’s personal
information to commit bank fraud involving several thousands of dollars. Again,
Applicant was not aware of her aunt’s intentions and was not charged with any criminal
offense.
These events raise concerns, not about Applicant’s drug use or criminal conduct,
but about her associations and the likelihood she will again be involved in inappropriate
conduct. Specifically, available information requires application of the following AG ¶ 16
disqualifying conditions:
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
8
By contrast, Applicant’s personal and professional circumstances have changed
for the better. She no longer sees either ex-boyfriend and she does not associate with
anyone who uses illegal drugs. Also, she and her aunt no longer have a close
relationship. Applicant now realizes her aunt deceived her and does not have
Applicant’s best interests at heart. There is little likelihood Applicant will be involved in
similar conduct or circumstances. The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 17(f) (association
with persons involved in criminal activities has ceased or occurs under circumstances
that do not cast doubt upon the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or
willingness to comply with rules and regulations) applies here. On balance, Applicant
has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by the Government’s information.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guidelines E and F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of
the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has demonstrated she is more
mature and responsible than she was when the incidents at issue here occurred. She is
now gainfully employed with a salary sufficient to allow her to start resolving her past-
due debts. She also has made changes in her personal life to ensure she will avoid
being involved in further inappropriate conduct. A fair and commonsense assessment of
all available information shows that the Government’s concerns about Applicant’s
trustworthiness have been satisfied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national
security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for ADP eligibility
is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
