                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-01231
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Catie E. Young, Attorney At Law, Griffith, Young and Lass
November 7, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (E-QIP) on September 19, 2013.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On May 13,
2014, the Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as
amended), issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why the (DoD) could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 22, 2014, and he requested a hearing
before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge.  This
case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on September 16, 2014, and a notice of
hearing was issued that same day, scheduling the hearing for October 2, 2014.  At the
hearing the Government presented three exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1
through 3.  The Applicant presented thirty-two exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s
Exhibits A through FF.  He also testified on his own behalf.  Applicant requested that the
record remain open in order to submit additional documentation.  The record remained
2
open until close of business on October 16, 2014.  Applicant submitted three Post-
Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits GG through II.  The
official transcript (Tr.) was received on October 14, 2014.  Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 55 years old and is married.  He has a Bachelor’s Degree in
Computer Science.  He is employed with a defense contractor as a Software Engineer
and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with this employment.
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
Applicant admitted allegations 1.(a), and 1.(b), set forth in the SOR under this
guideline.  He denied the remaining allegations.  Credit reports of the Applicant dated
October 10, 2013, and September 4, 2014, reflect that he is or has been indebted to
each of the creditors set forth in the SOR in an amount totaling in excess of $300,000.
(Government Exhibits 2 and 3.)  The facts of this case are somewhat confusing,
however the gist of Applicant’s argument is that a series of unexpected and unfortunate
circumstances caused his excessive financial indebtedness.      
After graduating from college in 1981, he began working for a defense contractor.
In late 1993, Applicant began his own software company, known as “A”; a sole
proprietorship, specializing in F15 Radar.  Due to his specific skill set, he was able to
secure several contracts programming the radar.  This company was in business until
2000.  Applicant also began another company in the 1990's, known as “B”; an internet
service company that provided internet dial-up, web hosting, and e-mail to certain
areas.  He was later able to expand, providing nation-wide services.  In 2000, he
merged the two companies and created another company known as “AB”.  Due to
budget cuts within Government, Applicant had to move into other areas of providing
software services.  
In about 2006, the Government preferred to use another company, and “AB” lost
the contact.  Applicant was offered employment with the other company, and eventually
accepted an offer and began employment as a sub-contractor.  In 2007, the company
approached Applicant and told him that he was being paid too much, and so they
converted the sub-contract back to him being an employee for the company.  Applicant
took the job, but went on a pre-planned vacation, against their desire.  Two days after
3
returning to work, Applicant was fired, and not given a reason.  From January through
August 2008, Applicant was unemployed.  This period of unemployment took a toll on
Applicant’s finances.  
It was also about this time that Applicant signed a two year lease agreement with
an individual who agreed to buy his primary residence after 2 years for $140,000.
(Applicant’s Exhibit AA.)  Applicant and his wife moved into a rental.  At some point, the
person who was leasing Applicant’s property left town without notice, and left the house
in shambles.  As a result, Applicant lost his homeowners insurance.  The lender double
charged him for force-placed insurance. The house was eventually foreclosed upon. 
Applicant also discussed another business opportunity with the bank.  Applicant
testified that the bank advised that he should finance the venture with a credit card
secured by insurance in the unlikely event the business failed.  It was not long after the
opening of the business that Applicant had a falling out with his partners. He was locked
out of the building, and could not continue the business operations.  Applicant states
that he notified the bank, but was told that this was not considered a business
interruption, and was refused insurance coverage.   
By 2008, Applicant could not keep up with maintaining both the business debt
and his personal expenses.  He defaulted on the business credit cards.  The bank
subsequently levied his personal checking and savings accounts.  The bank sold the
majority of the debt to collection agencies, and filed a civil lawsuit against the Applicant
for the remaining debt.  
Throughout the hearing, Applicant continued to argue that he is not legally
responsible for debt incurred by his corporation, since he did not personally guarantee
any of the loans that were taken out in the name of the corporation.  The question then
becomes which debts are his, and which are the corporation’s.  Credit reports of the
Applicant reflect each of the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR, which demonstrates
that the lender or creditor is holding the Applicant responsible for the debt.  Since
litigation is still pending on the issue, Applicant and his counsel were unable to
specifically identify which debts were Applicant’s personal responsibility, and which
were not.  Accordingly, I will consider the delinquent debts that are in dispute to be the
Applicant’s responsibility.  
a.  Applicant became indebted to a mortgage lender, on a mortgage account, that
was past due in the approximate amount of $15,336.  The account was in foreclosure
status with a total loan balance of $96,925.  This was the loan on the Applicant’s
primary residence.  Applicant claims that the property was sold for $117,413.86, and
that the lender is issuing a letter that reflects an account with a zero balance.
(Applicant’s Exhibits B and C.)  
b.  Applicant was indebted to a lender for an account that had been placed for
collection in the approximate amount of $47,918.  Applicant states that he entered into a
repayment agreement, for $24,000, that he is paying off on a monthly basis through
4
incremental monthly payments.  A letter from the creditor dated May 29, 2014 indicates
that at that time, he was current with the payments on his settlement agreement.
(Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  
c.  Applicant was indebted to a bank for an account that had been placed for
collection in the approximate amount of $40,397.  Applicant contends that the bank
discharged the debt on December 31, 2013.  Applicant received an IRS Form 1099-C,
Cancellation of Debt from the creditor.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E.)  He also contends that
he filed a Statement of Insolvency with the IRS.  Despite the general rule requiring
inclusion of a canceled debt as gross income, if prior to cancellation, the taxpayer is
insolvent, exclusion of the canceled debt is proper.  (See, Internal Revenue Service
Code Section 108(a)(1)(b), referenced in letter from Applicant’s CPA, Post-Hearing
Exhibit GG.)   
 
d.  Applicant is indebted to an insurance company for an account that had been
placed for collection in the approximate amount of $14,087.  Applicant is disputing the
debt.  Applicant explained that his interest rate increased from 9.9% to 29.99% because
he was delinquent on his bank debt.  The insurance company filed a civil lawsuit against
the Applicant that is currently in litigation.   (Applicant’s Exhibit F.)  The debt remains
outstanding.  
e.  Applicant was indebted to a bank for an account that has been placed for
collection in the approximate amount of $8,726.  Applicant contends that the bank
discharged the debt on December 31, 2013.  Applicant received an IRS Form 1099-C,
Cancellation of Debt from the creditor.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E.)  He also contends that
he filed a Statement of Insolvency with the IRS.  Despite the general rule requiring
inclusion of a canceled debt as gross income, if prior to cancellation, the taxpayer is
insolvent, exclusion of the canceled debt is proper.  (See, Internal Revenue Service
Code Section 108(a)(1)(b), referenced in letter from Applicant’s CPA, Post-Hearing
Exhibit GG.)   
f.  Applicant is indebted to a lender for an account that is 120 days or more past
due in the approximate amount of $811 with a balance owed of approximately $5,445.
Applicant contends that the debt was incurred by his business known as AB, which he
did not personally guarantee.  Applicant is disputing the debt, but if found to be liable for
it, he states that he will pay it in full.  The debt remains outstanding.     
g.  Applicant was indebted to a bank for an account that has been placed for
collection in the approximate amount of $2,183.  Applicant contends that this is his
wife’s debt.  Applicant’s wife was diagnosed with dissociative disorder, which he
describes as sort of like multiple personality disorder.  She sees a psychiatrist and
therapist.  He believes she opened the credit card to use to pay for her medical
expenses.  (Tr. p. 87.)  The bank filed a lawsuit against his wife for repayment of the
debt.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I.)  It appears that the debt has now been paid in full.
(Applicant’s Exhibit J.)
5
h.  Applicant is indebted to a bank for an account that has been placed for
collection in the approximate amount of $7,070.  Applicant contends that this account is
his wife’s debt.  The bank filed a lawsuit against his wife for repayment of the debt.
Applicant is disputing the debt, but if found to be liable for it, he will pay it in full.
(Applicant’s Exhibits L and  K.)  The debt remains outstanding.
i.  Applicant was indebted to a bank for an account that has been placed for
collection in the approximate amount of $6,159.  Applicant contends that this debt is his
wife’s debt.  He states that his wife has settled the account, and agreed to a repayment
plan.  (Applicant’s Exhibit M.)  The repayment plan is $67.50 monthly for a total of
approximately $2,900.  (Applicant’s Exhibit N.)  Applicant contends that he is current on
the payments.    
j.  Applicant is indebted to a bank for an account that has been placed for
collection in the approximate amount of $40,111.  Applicant contends that this debt is a
duplicate of the debt set forth in allegation 1 (b).  (See, Tr. p. 94, and Applicant’s Exhibit
D.)  
k.  Applicant is indebted to a lender for an account that has been placed for
collection by a bank in the amount of $13,534.  Applicant disputes the debt, and
contends that he did not personally guarantee it, as it was a business debt.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit P.)  If it is determined that he owes the debt, he will pay it.  The debt remains
outstanding.   
Applicant’s personal financial statement indicates that after paying his regular
monthly expenses and the few debts he lists, he has a net remainder of $284 left at the
end of the month.  (Applicant’s Exhibit Q.)  In May 2014, Applicant sought out some
investment and financial counseling to help organize and improve his financial situation.
A comprehensive financial plan was prepared by a financial counseling service.
(Applicant’s Exhibit BB and FF.)  Applicant’s bank account for the period from June
through September 2014, reflects that he is paying his current bills.  (Applicant’s
Exhibits CC and DD.)  He is also current with his active credit cards.  (Applicant’s
Exhibits I, Z, and EE.)
Letters of recommendation were submitted on behalf of the Applicant from
professional associates and friends, including a Project Manager, Systems
Administrator, a Software Engineer, a retired Air Force colonel, a church director, and a
registered nurse, who have known the Applicant for many years.  Applicant is described
as very intelligent, professional, helpful, honest, and driven.  His job performance
exceeds normal expectations.  He has a high degree of integrity, and is extremely
dependable.  He is considered to be an asset to the company, and is highly
recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibits R, F, S, T, U, V, W, and
X.)   
6
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
7
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudication
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have a reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence that is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation, or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
8
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that a significant amount of Applicant’s delinquent debts
remain owing.  They are in dispute, and have not been paid or resolved, and he has no
means of resolving them.  His failed business venture, and periods of unemployment
and underemployment, obviously contributed to some of his financial indebtedness.
However, these occurrences did not cause all of his debt.  Applicant has made a series
of poor decisions that have negatively affected his finances.  In addition to losing his
house in foreclosure, Applicant used credit cards to finance his living expenses which
further increased his indebtedness.  From a cursory review, it appears that Applicant
has paid many of his delinquent debts, when he actually has not.  For example, two of
his debts were cancelled by the creditor.  Applicant is not paying his income taxes for
the debt forgiveness because he claims that he is insolvent.  Two other debts listed in
the SOR, he claims are his wife’s.  Applicant’s wife does not work and has no
independent source of income separate from Applicant’s.  In  regard to the debts that he
claims are in dispute, but will pay if found liable, he has no financial resources to do so.
He remains excessively indebted and he has not demonstrated that he can or will do
much of anything to resolve his problems.  Even Applicant’s recent personal financial
statement indicates that, after paying his regular monthly expenses, he has about $250
left at the end of the month.  Although his intentions are good, he has no means to pay
his delinquent debt, since he is insolvent.  
      
Applicant’s history of excessive indebtedness, without sufficient mitigation,
demonstrates a pattern of unreliability and poor judgment.  Applicant is simply unable to
pay his delinquent debts.  Without more, the Applicant has failed to establish that he is
fiscally responsible.  Furthermore, although there is some evidence of financial
counseling, it is uncertain what, if anything, he has learned from the course.  
Under the particular circumstances of this case, Applicant has not met his burden
of proving that he is worthy of a security clearance.  His financial affairs are in such
disarray, he does not have a concrete understanding of his financial responsibilities,
and he has not sufficiently addressed his delinquent debts in the SOR.  Thus, it cannot
be said that he has made a good-faith effort to resolve his past due indebtedness.  He
has not shown that he is or has been reasonably, responsibly, or prudently addressing
his financial situation.  There is inadequate evidence in the record to demonstrate that
he can properly handle his financial affairs or that he is fiscally responsible.  His debts
are significant.  Assuming that he demonstrates a history and pattern of fiscal
responsibility, including the fact he has not acquired any new debt that he is unable to
pay, he may be eligible for a security clearance sometime in the future.  However, he is
not eligible now.  Considering all of the evidence,  Applicant has not introduced
persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation, or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome
the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
9
obligations, apply.  It can be argued that Mitigation Condition 20.(b) the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce,
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances applies,
because of his failed business and periods of unemployment, and underemployment.
However, this mitigation condition is not controlling.  Applicant did not act responsibly
under the circumstances.  He continued to spend money he did not have, and at this
point does not have the finances available to pay his debts.  Applicant could benefit
from intense financial counseling. In this case, none of the mitigating conditions are
applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his history of financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his
ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that Applicant
has not overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
    FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1:  Against the Applicant.
        
Subpara.  1.a.         For the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.b.            For the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.c.   Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.d.         Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.e.   Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.f.   Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.g.         For the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.h.            Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.i.   For the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.j.         For the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.k.            Against the Applicant. 
10
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
