1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-01660
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on October 2, 2013. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 2, 2014, detailing security concerns
under Guideline H, drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
Items 4 and 5.2
2
Applicant received the SOR on June 10, 2014. He submitted a notarized, written
response to the SOR allegations dated June 16, 2014, and he requested a decision on
the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on July 28, 2014. Applicant received the FORM on August 4,
2014. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit a response. DOHA assigned
this case to me on November 3, 2014. The Government submitted eight exhibits, which
have been marked as Items 1-8 and admitted into the record. Applicant’s response to
the SOR has been marked as Item 4, and the SOR has been marked as Item 1.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegation in ¶ 1.a of the
SOR. His admission is incorporated herein as a finding of fact. He denied the factual
allegation in ¶ 1.b of the SOR.  He also provided additional information to support his1
request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete and thorough review of
the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 27 years old, works as a janitor for a DOD contractor. He began
his current employment in July 2011. Applicant’s supervisor described him as a
dependable and reliable worker. He has a strong work ethic, and he is motivated to
succeed. Quality control rates his work well above the required standards, and there are
no customer complaints about his work. He recommended Applicant for a security
clearance. Applicant worked as a mechanic from February 2009 until April 2010. At all
other times since his graduation from high school in May 2005, Applicant was
unemployed. Applicant married shortly after he completed his e-QIP. He does not have
any children.2
Applicant began consuming alcohol when he was 18 years old while socializing
with friends. He drank about six beers a week. He would drink to intoxication about once
a month. On August 28, 2009, Applicant purchased beer after leaving work and
consumed the beer while driving. A local police officer observed his vehicle cross the
center and stopped him. The police officer smelled alcohol on him and arrested him for
Items 5 - 7.3
Items 4 - 6.4
Item 8.5
3
driving under the influence (DUI). A later breathalyzer test showed his blood alcohol
level at .19%. Applicant appeared in court in October 2009, and he was found guilty of
DUI. The court fined him $1,100 plus $300 in court costs; suspended his license for 90
days; directed that he attend alcohol awareness classes and participate in six months of
random alcohol and drug testing; and placed him on unsupervised probation for one
year. Applicant complied with the terms of his sentence and was released from
probation. During his November 18, 2013 interview with the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) investigator, he told the investigator that his alcohol use negatively
impacted his finances and his work. Since his court appearance in October 2009, he
has not consumed alcohol. He has no future intent to consume alcohol. He attends
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) about once a month to assist him in his efforts to remain
sober and has done so since June 2011.3
Beginning in August 2005, Applicant purchased 10 tablets of Lortab (correct
spelling of Loritab) on the street illegally. Lortab is a prescription drug and controlled
substance. It is similar to Oxycodine, and it is an opioid. Applicant used Lortab about
three times a year until April 2010. During one of his random alcohol tests, he tested
positive for Lortab. Since he did not have a prescription for the drug, he appeared in
court. The court ordered him to an inpatient treatment program. Applicant completed a
20-day inpatient program. He stated that he was diagnosed with chemical dependence
and drug  abuse by this program. Applicant has not used Lortab or any other drug since
enrolling in and completing this program. Applicant attends Narcotics Anonymous (NA)
on a monthly basis to assist him with sobriety. On his e-QIP, he indicated an intent not
to use Lortab or any other controlled substance in the future.4
The OPM investigation revealed a failure to appear warrant dated May 9, 2011
and an arrest. In his second interview with the investigator on January 22, 2014, the
OPM investigator presented him with this information. Applicant did not discuss it
separately because he thought it had been discussed during his previous interview.
Applicant advised that he missed a meeting with his probation officer in late March
2011. He received a letter in April 2011 to appear in court on May 2, 2011. At this time,
his probation officer told him that there was an arrest warrant on him for missing a
previous court date. He did not receive a notice to appear for an earlier court date.
Applicant completed his probation in February 2012.  5
Applicant provided the information about his DUI arrest and sentence on his e-
QIP. Likewise, he provided information about his Lortab use on his e-QIP. The Federal
Bureau of Investigation criminal records report shows the 2009 DUI arrest only. The
Item 4; Item 6.6
4
record does not contain any medical records showing a diagnosis of chemical
dependence or any other medical evidence.6
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
5
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
AG ¶ 25 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence;
and
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical
social worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment
program.
6
Applicant purchased and used Lortab, a drug listed in the Controlled Substance
Act, without a prescription for more than five years. To use this drug, he  possessed it. A
security concern has been established under ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c).
As for the possible diagnosis of chemical dependence, the record does not
contain any medical records showing such a diagnosis by a qualified medical
professional or a licensed clinical social worker. AG ¶¶ 25(d) and 25(e) are not raised.
The Drug Involvement guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns under AG ¶ 26(a) through ¶ 26(d), which are as follows:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation; and,
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program,
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional.
Applicant last used Lortab in April 2010, almost five years ago. He has avoided
associating with his drug contacts because he no longer has a need to purchase this
drug. He is married; he is employed full time and well-respected at his job; and he
prefers to spend time with his wife and at church. On his e-QIP, he indicated that he did
not intend to use this drug or any other controlled substance in the future. Finally, the
court released him from probation after he successfully completed an inpatient drug
treatment program. The record lacks any evidence of a relapse by Applicant. Applicant
has mitigated the security concerns about his past drug use under AG ¶¶ 26(a) and
26(b). AG ¶ 26(d) does not apply because there is no medical report with a prognosis.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
7
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information:
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and,
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources.
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
8
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group; and,
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
SOR allegation 2.a concerns alcohol consumption, which is covered by Guideline
G. SOR allegations 2.b and 2.c are addressed under Guideline H, previously discussed.
AG ¶¶ 16(c) and (d) are not established. However, a security concern is established
under AG ¶¶ 16(e) and 16(g). Applicant’s conduct creates a vulnerability to exploitation,
manipulation, or duress. His decision to purchase Lortab placed him in association with
individuals who sold illegal drugs, a criminal activity.   
The Personal Conduct guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns under AG ¶ 17(a) through ¶ 17(g), which are as follows:
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and,
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
Applicant stopped consuming alcohol in October 2009 after his court
appearance, which is more than five years ago. His use of Lortab ceased in April 2010,
almost five years ago. Applicant has worked steadily for more than three years, and he
has married. He attends AA and NA monthly to maintain his sobriety. He benefitted from
inpatient treatment and from the alcohol education classes. These programs led to his
decision to remain sober and to stop associating with those who sold him Lortab. He
has mitigated any security concerns under AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 17(e), and 17(g). 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
9
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. As a young
adult, Applicant consumed alcohol with friends to be included socially. He drank to
intoxication about once a month. By 2009, his alcohol consumption had increased as
shown by his decision to buy beer and drink it while he drove. This decision caused his
DUI arrest and created financial and work problems. He realized he needed to change
his drinking patterns, which he did. Shortly thereafter, he also made a decision to cease
his drug use and did.
Applicant provided the information about his alcohol arrest and drug use on his e-
QIP. He also provided the information that he was told by an unidentified individual that
he had a diagnosis of chemical dependence to the OPM investigator. Without his
admissions, the Government would not have any information about his past drug use or
his possible diagnosis. He has been honest and forthright about his past drug and
alcohol use, making his statements that he no longer consumes alcohol or uses any
controlled substances credible. In the last five years and as he has matured, Applicant
made changes in his lifestyle. His current lifestyle and his past conduct cannot put him
in a position to be pressured or coerced to give classified information. There is little
likelihood that he will return to his past conduct.
10
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug use and
alcohol consumption under Guidelines H and E.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
