 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-00398 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 17, 2013, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On March 26, 2014, the Department of Defense 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 6, 2014. Applicant admitted the 
four allegations. Applicant requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of 
a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
On July 30, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant 
on August 6, 2014. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on August 13, 2014. 
Applicant did not file a response to the FORM within the 30-day time allowed that would 
have expired on September 12, 2014. I received the case assignment on November 3, 
2014. Based upon a review of the complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 35 years old, married, and has two children. He works for a defense 
contractor and has been continuously employed there since June 2013. He was 
unemployed from January to April 2013. (Items 1-6) 
 
Applicant has four delinquent debts totaling $18,396. Applicant admitted all of the 
allegations. These debts are not resolved. (Items 1-6)  
 
The first debt is $15,059 owed on a “medical credit card” since October 2010 
(Subparagraph 1.a). He used the card to pay for a surgery for his wife.  He stated his 
unemployment from January to April 2013 adversely affected his ability to repay all his 
debts. He claims he sought to negotiate an installment payment agreement but the 
creditor demanded a $10,000 down payment with the balance of $5,000 to be paid on 
an installment plan. Applicant could not afford that scenario. He also stated that he 
sought credit counseling and credit repair service from an organization in July 2013 and 
continuing into the present. Applicant stated he benefited from their service but did not 
specify what services or results were provided by this company. He has not made any 
payment on this debt and it is not resolved. (Items 1-6)  
 
The second delinquent debt is for $601 for a medical debt owed since November 
2008 (Subparagraph 1.b). Applicant has not made any payments on it. Applicant stated 
he disputed this debt many times but did not provide copies of any letters contesting this 
obligation. This debt originated in the summer of 2008. Applicant claims his medical 
insurance should have taken care of this debt. He also asserts he has tried to settle the 
debt but no organization will claim ownership or take payment of the debt. He is willing 
to try again but to date has not received a reply from anyone. This debt is unresolved. 
(Items 1-6) 
 
The third debt is owed on a medical account for $189 (Subparagraph 1.c). It has 
been owed since 2012. He claims he tried to pay or settle the debt but no organization 
has responded to his inquiries. This debt is unpaid and not resolved. (Items 1-6) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
The fourth and final debt is for $2,547 owed on a judgment since 2006 
(Subparagraph 1.d). Applicant purchased a computer while living overseas. He claims 
he tried to get information from the collection agency but has not been successful. Now 
he asserts the debt has disappeared from his credit reports from the three national 
credit reporting agencies. This debt is unpaid and unresolved. (Items 1-6)  
Applicant contends he has attempted to contact his creditors to resolve the 
delinquent debts but to no avail. He also asserts he is not overextended financially and 
is capable of budgeting properly his money. (Item 2; Answer) 
   
Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his job performance. He 
submitted no character references or other evidence tending to establish good 
judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, 
demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a 
hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2006 to the present, Applicant accumulated four delinquent debts, totaling 
$18,396, which remain unpaid and unresolved.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Only one mitigating condition might have 
partial applicability. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s debt problems are continuing into the present and show a consistent 
pattern of lack of payment. The circumstances of incurring the debts were not unusual. 
The debts date from 2006 with no resolution of any of the four delinquencies. This entire 
scenario casts doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 The debts were not beyond Applicant’s control. The debts were delinquent long 
before his four months of unemployment in 2013. Applicant did not demonstrate he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances at any time since 2006. AG ¶ 20(b) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling, but there is no evidence his delinquent 
debt problem is under control. The first part of AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable. The second part 
is not.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 There is no evidence Applicant started any good faith-efforts to resolve his debts. 
AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant claims he disputed one or two debts. He did not submit any documents 
to prove that he did so. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
 There is no affluence at issue in this case regarding Applicant’s debts. AG ¶ 
20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts. Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts 
during the past seven years. Finally, Applicant did not submit any documents to support 
any of his contentions in his Answer. He made mere assertions without any credible 
evidence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
