 As defined in Chapter 3 and Appendix 10 of DOD Regulation 5220.2-R, as amended (Regulation).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 14-00672
)
)
Applicant for Position of Trust )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s financial problems were caused, in part, by circumstances beyond
her control. However, she has only acted in the past month to try to improve her
finances. None of the debts alleged has been paid or otherwise resolved. Applicant also
deliberately withheld information about past criminal charges from her application for a
position of trust. Her request for eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied.
Statement of the Case
On June 27, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  for her1
 Required by the Regulation, as amended, and by the Directive, as amended.2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were3
published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
 Due to a typographical error, the SOR contains two allegations at 1.j. At hearing, I amended the SOR to4
correct this error by renaming the first SOR 1.j as “1.j(1),” and the second SOR 1.j as “1.j(2).” (Tr. 14)
2
job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, DOD adjudicators were unable to determine that it is clearly consistent
with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request for a position of trust.  2
On March 26, 2014, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts which, if proven, raise trustworthiness concerns addressed through the
adjudicative guidelines (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F) and personal3
conduct (Guideline E). On June 16, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer)
and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on August 5, 2014, and I convened a hearing on
September 12, 2014. Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 5. Applicant testified and
presented Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. All exhibits were admitted without objection.
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 29, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant was discharged of her
debts through Chapter 7 bankruptcy in December 2004 (SOR 1.a). It was also alleged
she has since accrued another 19 delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.b - 1.s ) totaling4
$11,094. Applicant admitted, with explanations, the allegations at SOR 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.h,
1.o and 1.p. She denied any knowledge of the remaining SOR allegations.
Under Guideline E, the Government alleged Applicant deliberately made false
statements in her EQIP by failing to disclose that she was arrested in November 1996
and charged with felony cruelty towards a child (SOR 2.a(1)) and felony aggravated
battery (SOR 2.a(2)); that she was arrested in September 2006 and charged with
unemployment fraud by false statement, a 3  degree felony (SOR 2.a(3)); and that sherd
was arrested in February 2010 and charged with battery domestic violence (SOR
2.a(4)). At hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR 2.a allegation by
substituting the word “arrests” at the end of the main body of that allegation with the
word “charges.” Without objection, I granted the motion. (Tr. 14 - 15) 
Applicant admitted SOR 2.a(2), but said she did not remember SOR 2.a(1) or
2.a(4). As to SOR 2.a(3), Applicant simply stated that there was no result from the
charge. A fair reading of her responses under Guideline E is that she admitted certain
3
facts but has denied the gravamen of the allegations; namely, that she intended to
deceive the Government about her arrest record. (Tr. 15 - 18) 
In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, and based on all
available information, I make the following findings of fact:
Applicant is 43 years old and was hired as a customer service representative by
her current employer in August 2013. Her duties require that she have access to the
personally identifiable information (PII) of her DOD health care customers. Applicant
was unemployed for about six months before starting her current job. From October
2012 until February 2013, she worked in customer service positions after working in
various data entry and administrative positions since January 2000. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2)
Applicant was married from September 2002 until she obtained a divorce in
October 2011. She cohabited with a boyfriend from February 2013 until May 2014,
when she left because the relationship was physically abusive. Applicant has three
children between the age of 14 and 25. A fourth child died in 2012 at the age of 24. (Gx.
1; Gx. 2; Tr. 5 - 23)
When Applicant submitted her EQIP, she disclosed that she owed an estimated
$1,200 debt for unpaid rent that was being enforced through a civil judgment entered
against her in October 2011. She also disclosed that she was arrested in February 2013
for failing to pay a traffic ticket. Records obtained by investigators during the ensuing
background investigation showed that Applicant also was arrested or charged with the
offenses alleged in SOR 2.a(1) - (4); that she filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in
August 2004, as alleged in SOR 1.a; and that she owed the debts alleged in SOR 1.a -
1.s. (Gx. 1; Gx. 3 - 5)
Applicant was interviewed be a Government investigator on August 7, 2013. She
was asked about her arrest record and confirmed the 2013 arrest for an unpaid traffic
ticket, but she denied any other arrests or charges. She then was confronted with the
information the investigator had obtained about her other arrests, and she was asked
why she did not disclose them as required by the questions at EQIP Section 22.
Applicant explained that she did not disclose all of her arrests either because she did
not agree with the charges and felt they should not have been brought, or because the
charges in one instance were eventually dropped. At her hearing, Applicant recalled in
detail the circumstances of her arrests or the events leading to criminal charges. For
example, she recalled that she was represented by a public defender in multiple court
appearances, and that she was physically detained by police at least twice after
domestic violence allegations or after she was investigated for fraudulently obtaining
unemployment benefits. Applicant further stated that she only listed the one arrest
because that was the only one for which she was handcuffed and transported in a
police car. (Gx. 2; Tr. 42 - 56, 86 - 88)
Applicant’s 2004 bankruptcy was necessitated by loss of income when she
became pregnant with her youngest child. Thereafter, she and her ex-husband fell
 Among those expenses were costs associated with finalizing Applicant’s divorce. (Gx. 2)5
 This debt was not alleged in the SOR.6
 Regulation, ¶ C3.6.15. 7
4
behind on their mortgage and other credit obligations. Additionally, Applicant claimed
her ex-husband abused her and stole money from her. After they divorced, her ex-
husband did not pay child support as required. Applicant’s mortgage was eventually
foreclosed and she declared $134,509 in liabilities against $17,622 in assets when she
filed her Chapter 7 petition. Applicant also encountered financial problems in the late
1990s when her cousin stole her personal information and obtained credit using
Applicant’s name. However, she also co-signed a car loan for her brother, who
eventually defaulted on the loan, leaving the obligation to Applicant. (Gx. 2; Gx. 4; Gx.
5; Tr. 36 - 44, 64 - 76)
Applicant was involved in an auto accident in 2010. She received a $60,000
settlement from a suit she filed against the other driver’s insurance company. After
attorney’s fees and other expenses,  Applicant received $18,203. Applicant testified she5
was under the impression that many of the debts alleged in the SOR were from the
settlement before she received any money. However, a review of the closing statement,
which Applicant signed in April 2012, shows there was no payment to any of the
creditors listed. Applicant used the settlement funds to repair the car she was driving
when she had the accident. She also paid past-due day care bills for her daughter’s
children, and paid other expenses she had at that time. In 2014, Applicant used her
2013 tax year refund to buy a used car to replace the car that was in the accident. (Gx.
2; Tr. 57 - 60)
Applicant has not paid or otherwise resolved any of the debts alleged in SOR 1.b
- 1.s. She is able to meet all of her current obligations, in part, because she and her
daughter live together and split expenses. Each month, she has about $500 remaining
after paying rent, utilities, and other regular expenses. However, in May 2014, she
suffered a stroke and lost income because she missed work. In January 2014, Applicant
established a repayment plan to satisfy a past-due debt for a furniture purchase.  Under6
the plan, she pays $102 monthly on a $740 debt. As of the hearing, the remaining
balance was $180.40. In August 2014, Applicant spoke with a credit union debt
management specialist to get help with repaying her debts. Applicant opened a savings
account into which she deposits $150 from each paycheck. She intends to save enough
money to use in negotiating settlements with her various creditors. (Gx. 2; Ax. A; Tr. 67
- 89)
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  In7
deciding whether a person should be assigned to an ADP position, it must be
determined that his or her loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that it is
 Regulation, ¶ C6.1.1.1. 8
 Regulation, ¶ C8.2.1. 9
 Directive. 6.3.10
5
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.  The Regulation also8
requires that DOD contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the
Directive before any adverse determination may be made.9
The Directive requires that each decision be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,10
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of eligibility for a position of trust.
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A person who has
access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government
based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in
ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of
one who will protect sensitive information as his or her own. Any reasonable doubt
about an applicant’s suitability for access should be resolved in favor of the
Government.
6
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The facts
established raise a trustworthiness concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed
at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations). As to AG ¶ 19(a), the record shows
Applicant has been unable, not unwilling, to repay her past-due debts.
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s financial
problems continue, in that she has only begun to address her financial issues and all of
the debts attributable to her through the Government’s information remain unpaid. I
have also considered the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s debts arose
from a combination of circumstances beyond her control. To her credit, she contacted a
credit union for help in starting to address her debts, and she has begun saving money
to use in negotiations with creditors. However, these actions are very recent and
Applicant has not yet established a meaningful track record of repayment and financial
7
responsibility. For these reasons, neither AG ¶¶ 20(b) or (d) apply. In light of all
available information, I conclude she has not presented sufficient information to mitigate
the Government’s concerns under this guideline.
Personal Conduct
Available information is sufficient to support the SOR 2 allegations and raise a
concern under this guideline. That concern is addressed through Guideline E at AG ¶ 15
as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Applicant recalled in sufficient detail the events leading to the criminal charges
that she omitted when she completed her EQIP. During her background interview, ahe
and the investigator reviewed her answers to all of the criminal history questions in the
EQIP. Aside from the 2013 arrest for an unpaid traffic ticket, Applicant claimed she had
not had any other arrests or criminal charges. When she was confronted by the
information that supports SOR 2.a(1) - (4), she did not deny those events and stated
that she did not list some of them because she did not agree with the charges. Others
she did not list because the charges were eventually dismissed. Overall, the record
shows that Applicant was deliberately selective about how much adverse information
she was willing to disclose, both in her EQIP and in during her background interview.
The foregoing requires application of the following AG ¶ 16 disqualifying conditions:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative.
Of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 17, the following are pertinent to
these facts and circumstances:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
8
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; and
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment.
I conclude the record does not support any of these mitigating conditions.
Applicant had to be confronted with information about her arrests before she
acknowledged them. Although not alleged in the SOR, the same was true for her
unlisted delinquencies. Thus, there is no indication she made a good-faith attempt to
correct her EQIP answers. Nor did Applicant present any information or make any
argument that suggests she received improper or inaccurate guidance regarding the
questions posed or her obligations to disclose the information at issue. Finally, multiple
deliberate false statements in response to questions in an EQIP or during a background
interview are not minor acts. The Government must be able to rely on Applicant’s
willingness to be candid and forthright at all times in protecting the sensitive information
entrusted to her. If she is shown, as here, to be unwilling to be honest about her own
background information, it is reasonable to conclude that she may also be unwilling to
properly perform her duties in this regard. Applicant has not presented sufficient
information to show she has mitigated the Government’s concerns under this guideline.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant’s financial problems arose through
circumstances not entirely of her own making. However, her lack of action in response
to her financial problems until very recently reflects poorly on her judgment and
reliability. She has also demonstrated that she is willing to make false statements to the
Government about information required to properly assess her suitability for a position
of trust. Applicant has not demonstrated that she understands the gravity of the
Government’s concern or that such conduct will not recur. Doubts about her judgment
and trustworthiness remain. Because protection of the interests of national security is
the focal point of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the
individual.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.s: Against Applicant
9
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of
national security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for ADP
eligibility is denied.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
