                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-01239
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr.,  Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Remand Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits on remand, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
History of the Case
On May 20, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 16, 2014, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s File of
2
Relevant Material (FORM) on July 29, 2014, and based on the initial record reviewed
did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on September 4, 2014.    
On October 23, 2014, the Appeal Board remanded the case for reconsideration
in light of Applicant’s post-FORM materials that through administrative oversight were
not presented for consideration. Applicant’s post-FORM materials are admitted as
Items 8-14.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated 11 delinquent debts.
Together, they exceed $15,000. 
In his response to the SOR (Item 2), Applicant admitted the allegations covered
by the SOR with explanations. He claimed he has encountered difficulty keeping up
with his monthly expenses since his father-in-law passed away in April 2008. He
claimed his children and his spouse are his first priority, and, as a result, he has been
able to address only about half of his debts to date. He claimed he plans to willingly
satisfy the rest of his debts in a timely way. (Item 2)
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 44-year-old aircraft service technician of a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in August 1988, and has three children from this marriage.
(Item 4) Applicant earned a high school diploma but no college degree or diploma.
(Item 4) He claimed no military service and provided no endorsements, performance
evaluations, or corroborative evidence of community and civic contributions. 
Applicant’s finances
Between 2002 and 2009, Applicant accumulated many delinquent debts while
prioritizing his financial commitments to his wife and children. (Items 2 and 6) By
February 2009, each of these accounts had been charged off. Applicant’s delinquent
accounts are covered in subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k as follows: 1.a ($606); 1.b
($2,415); 1.c ($1,961); 1.d ($99); 1.e ($527); 1.f ($400); 1.g ($1,626); 1.h ($1,178); 1.i
($4,577); 1.j ($692); and 1.k ($1,021). (Item 2)  Credit reports show that none of these
accounts were addressed before Applicant received the SOR in May 2014. (Items 6
and 7) In his post-FORM materials, applicant claimed two of the listed debts are
duplications, specifically the accounts covered in subparagraphs 1.f and 1.j. (Items 9,
10 and 13) Applicant’s 1.f and 1.j debts are manifest duplications and represent the
single debt of the same underlying creditor. (Items 5-7, 9-10, and 13) Applicant’s
duplication claims are corroborated by his credit reports and are  accepted.
3
Background information from Applicant’s security clearance application reveals
that Applicant has been gainfully employed on a full-time basis since at least March
1995. (Item 4) There is nothing in his clearance application to confirm any periods of
underemployment or temporary layoffs during this lengthy 20-year stretch of
employment. No family disabilities or extraordinary medical expenses are noted in
either Applicant’s credit reports or response. 
To be sure, Applicant did rely some on his father for household expenses while
he resided with him. Applicant became indebted for his father’s funeral expenses
associated with his father’s passing in 2008. (Item 8) Loss of expense-sharing from his
father is not enough, however, to explain why Applicant has been unable to manage his
consumer accounts, avoid the charge-offs documented in his credit reports, and
address his debts before the issuance of the SOR.
Since receiving the SOR, Applicant addressed three of his smaller debts. In his
post-FORM submissions, he documented his settlement of his creditor 1.a debt with a
payment of $374 and his creditor 1.d debt with a $99 payment. (Items 2, 11, and 12)
And Applicant documented his payment arrangement with creditor 1.f/1.j. His agreed
payment terms require him to make four monthly payments of $142, commencing in
June 2014. (Item 2) In his post-FORM submissions, he documented his three partial
payments totaling $427 to his 1.f/1.j creditor. (Items 13 and 14)
Applicant assured he and his wife are meeting their bills and family needs with
his increased income. (Items 2 and 8) While Applicant promised to address his
remaining debts listed in the SOR, he has made no documented follow-up efforts to pay
any of the remaining debts.  Instead, he has relied on these remaining debts falling off
his credit report once they “hit the 7-year mark” in July 2015. (Item 8) 
That several of Applicant’s remaining debts (i.e., creditors 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.g
through 1.i, and 1.k) may be close to removal from his credit report is not in any way
indicative that he has addressed the underlying debts with payments or payment plans
when he became financially able to do so. (Items 6-8, and 9) Possible explanations for
the anticipated removal of his still outstanding debts from his credit report include
settlement, disputed listing, and passage of time. Applicant has not addressed any of
these possibilities in sufficient detail to identify the basis of his claims of anticipated
removal of his remaining debts from his credit report. Nor does the administrative
record reflect any financial counseling initiatives by Applicant.
 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be considered before
4
deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied.
The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it
may lead to financial crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be
explained by known sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate
proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts. (AG, ¶ 18)
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
5
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts
over a considerable number of years that he failed to address with the resources
available to him. Applicant’s recurrent problems with managing his finances over an
extended number of years (at least since 2009) reflect lapses of judgment in
administering his financial responsibilities.  
Applicant’s pleading admissions of his delinquent debts covered in the SOR
negate the need for any independent proof. See ISCR Case No. 94-1159 at 4 (App. Bd.
Dec. 4, 1995 (“any admissions [applicant] made to the SOR allegations . . . relieve
Department Counsel of its burden of proof”’). See, generally,  McCormick on Evidence, §
262 (6th ed. 2006).  Each of Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in his latest
credit reports and provide ample corroboration of his debts.
Since 1995 at the very least, Applicant has enjoyed steady gainful employment
without any visible breaks in work status.  Credit reports reveal, though, that Applicant
neglected to manage his finances and cure the delinquencies in his listed consumer
accounts before the issuance of the SOR. 
Applicant’s loss of expense-sharing associated with his father’s residing with him
before his death in 2008, while certainly significant, is not enough to explain his inability
to address his accounts in the years following his father’s passing. Not until after he
received the SOR in May 2014 did Applicant begin to address his delinquent debts.
While he has since addressed three of his smaller debts, he provided no documentation
6
of his exploring payment initiatives with his remaining creditors. His reliance on the
anticipated removal of his remaining debts from his credit report provides no credible
assurances that he has addressed these debts with payments or payment plans.
With his increased earnings from his employment at his disposal to address his
overdue accounts, Applicant could be expected to make more concerted efforts to
address his delinquent debts. Applicant’s actions warrant the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts;” and DC ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to
inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the principal concern of
a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are explicit in cases involving debt delinquencies.
Some extenuating circumstances are associated with Applicant’s loss of his
father’s contributions to his household necessities during the many years he resided with
him. Applicant’s loss of family expense contributions, while potentially extenuating, are
not sufficiently developed to definitively explain why he has not been able to deal with
his debts in the six years since his father’s death in 2008. Applicant has had several
years to show more progress in addressing his finances. As a result, neither MC ¶ 20(a),
“the behavior happened a long time ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” nor MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions
that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce,
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly,” are entitled to any more than partial
application. 
Financial counseling could have been helpful to Applicant in devising a repayment
plan to address his debts. However, records developed before and after the issuance of
the FORM do not reveal any financial counseling initiatives pursued by Applicant before
or after his receipt of the SOR.  Based on the facts and circumstances presented, MC ¶
20(c), “the person has received counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,” is not applicable to
Applicant’s situation.  
Applicant’s finances have been marked by recurrent periods of instability for a
number of years and show insufficient signs of stabilizing. He still must address his
remaining debts covered in the SOR before he can restore his finances to acceptable
levels of stability commensurate with holding a security clearance. Afforded
opportunities to follow through with updated payment documentation and initiatives,
Applicant has failed to document sufficient follow-through on his remaining debts.
7
While an applicant need not have paid every debt alleged in the SOR, the
applicant needs to establish that there is a credible and realistic plan to resolve identified
financial problems, accompanied by significant actions to implement the plan. See ISCR
Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). While Applicant’s addressing of three of
his delinquent debts is encouraging, his efforts to date do not reflect any headway with
his remaining debts.  More is needed of Applicant with the increased income currently
available to him. 
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence reveals recurrent lapses of
judgment associated with Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts and his failure to
address them with the increased income available to him. His partial mitigation efforts
over the past year, while encouraging, are not enough to demonstrate a strong track
record of timely debt satisfaction.  
Without any corroborative evidence of work performance or community and civic
contributions to weigh and consider, there is little evidence in the record by which to
make a whole-person assessment of Applicant’s accomplishments in his business and
personal life. Overall, Applicant’s efforts to date are insufficient to meet mitigation
requirements imposed by the AGs governing his finances.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
      Subparagraphs. 1.a, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.j:     For Applicant
      Subparagraphs. 1.b-1.c, 1.e, 1.g-1.i,          
and 1.k:                           Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
