 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-02529 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations and personal conduct.  Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 30, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On July 15, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility – Division A (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive);  and Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (effective within the DOD on September 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 ((SF 86), dated January 30, 2013).  
 
2 
                                      
 
1, 2006) (AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive. 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and 
E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators could not make 
a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 25, 2014. In a sworn 
statement, dated July 25, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations.2 He was 
informed that his Answer was incomplete and that it was necessary for him to elect 
either a hearing before an administrative judge or have his case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. He subsequently requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. On August 29, 2014, Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed. The case was assigned to me on September 2, 
2014. A Notice of Hearing was issued on September 2, 2014. I convened the hearing, 
as scheduled, on September 17, 2014.3 
 
 During the hearing, four Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 4) were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but offered no documentary 
evidence. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on October 1, 2014. The 
record closed on October 1, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR under financial considerations (¶ 1.a. through 1.h.) and personal conduct (¶ 2.a. 
and 2.b.). Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a driver since January 2013.4 He also went through periods of 
unemployment from August 2006 until December 2006, and from October 2010 until 
December 2010.5 He graduated from a vocational high school in June 1987.6 Applicant 
                                                          
2
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated July 25, 2014. 
 
3
 The Directive established that notification as to the date, time, and place of a hearing be furnished to an 
applicant at least 15 days in advance of the time of the hearing.  See, Directive, Encl. 3, § E3.1.8. In this instance, 
Department Counsel and Applicant were in discussions regarding the potential time and location long before the 
actual Notice of Hearing was issued. The Notice of Hearing was issued on September 2, 2014, and Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the Notice on September 11, 2014. Thus, the period between the issuance of the Notice and 
the hearing was approximately 15 days, and the period between receipt of the Notice and the hearing was 
approximately 10 days. I inquired of Applicant if he had any procedural issues to take up before getting into the 
evidence and he responded “no.” I construed his answer to mean that the period of notice was sufficient, and 
Applicant thereby waived the 15-day notice requirement. See, Tr. at 13-14. 
 
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 9-10. 
 
5
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 11, 13. 
 
3 
                                      
 
enlisted in the U.S. Army in July 1990, but because he had some serious dental issues, 
he was given an uncharacterized separation after only one month in recruit basic 
training.7 Applicant was married in November 1990, separated in February 2010, and 
divorced in May 2011.8 He has resided with a cohabitant since April 2011.9 He has no 
children.10 He has never held a security clearance. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about 12 to 15 years 
before 2013. Applicant recalled that he had filed for bankruptcy during that time period 
and that the “case” was discharged. He could not recall if his filing was under Chapter 7 
or Chapter 13 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.11 No evidence was developed to determine 
if the case was dismissed or if the debts were discharged. At some unspecified point 
thereafter, a series of events occurred that contributed to the accumulation of debt from 
various credit cards, medical bills, and other sources. In addition to his two periods of 
unemployment, credit issues arose when, as he contends, his now ex-wife started 
opening credit card accounts in both their names and spending too much money.12 
Applicant was unaware of some of the accounts, and he was under the erroneous 
impression that his wife was making payments on some of the other accounts.13 Some 
of those accounts became delinquent and were placed for collection. Once he was 
divorced, Applicant did not have any ongoing financial obligations in terms of support or 
alimony.14 In 2012, Applicant did not timely file his federal and state income tax returns 
for 2011 because he forgot to do so.15 Applicant never sought financial counseling or 
debt consolidation counseling.16  
 
In addition to his unfiled federal and state income tax returns with an unspecified 
liability, the SOR identified seven purportedly continuing delinquencies as reflected by a 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
6
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 8-9; Tr. at 21-22. 
 
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 16-17; GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated February 28, 2013), at 1; Tr. at 25-
26. 
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 18; GE 2, supra note 7, at 1; Tr. at 26-27. 
 
9
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 19. 
 
10
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 2; Tr. at 27. 
 
11
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 2. 
 
12
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 2. 
 
13
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 2-3; Tr. at 29-30. 
 
14
 Tr. at 27. 
 
15
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 2. 
 
16
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 3; Tr. at 61. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
credit report from February 201317 totaling approximately $818. Applicant acknowledged 
that all of those debts were incurred before he was divorced.18 Those debts listed in the 
SOR and their respective current status, according to the credit report, other evidence in 
the case file, and Applicant’s admissions regarding the same, are described below. 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.g.): There are two veterinary accounts with balances of $251 
and $59 that were placed for collection in 2009 and 2011, respectively.19 The account 
was for veterinary services for one of Applicant’s three dogs.20 He has not made any 
effort to approach the creditor to establish repayment plans, and he has not made any 
payments to the creditor.21 In February 2013, Applicant told the investigator from the 
U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) that he would contact the creditor in an 
effort to resolve the accounts,22 but during the hearing he acknowledged he did not do 
so.23 The accounts have not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.e., and 1.f.): There are three medical accounts with unidentified 
medical service providers with balances of $110, $96, and $90 that were placed for 
collection in 2008 or 2012.24 Applicant has not made any effort to approach the creditors 
to establish repayment plans, and he has not made any payments to the creditors.25 
The accounts have not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): There is an insurance account with a balance of $107 that was 
placed for collection in 2012.26 Applicant has not made any effort to approach the 
creditor to establish repayment plans, and he has not made any payments to the 
creditor.27 The account has not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): There is a cable account with a balance of $105 that was placed 
for collection in 2012.28 Applicant has not made any effort to approach the creditor to 
                                                          
17
 GE 3 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated February 12, 2013). 
 
18
 Tr. at 28. 
 
19
 GE 3, supra note 17, at 8-9.  
 
20
 Tr. at 56. 
 
21
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 3; Tr. at 54. 
 
22
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 3. 
 
23
 Tr. at 31. 
 
24
 GE 3, supra note 17, at 8-9. 
 
25
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 3; Tr. at 54-55. 
 
26
 GE 3, supra note 17, at 8. 
 
27
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 3; Tr. at 54. 
 
28
 GE 3, supra note 17, at 8. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
establish repayment plans, and he has not made any payments to the creditor.29 The 
account has not been resolved. 
 
During his 2013 OPM interview, Applicant contended that he was able to meet 
his financial obligations, and that he did not live beyond his means.30 However, during 
the hearing his story changed:31 
 
Right at the moment, I’m just working and trying to make the money to 
survive, and when I do have the extra money, I’ve been trying to catch up 
on bills because I’m behind with my rent and all that from . . . with her. I’ve 
been just trying to catch up, and right now, I’m just staying afloat. And, my 
salary, I’m bringing home just over $600 a week and it’s rough to take care 
of three people on $600 a week. 
 
The “three people” in question are Applicant’s cohabitant, her 10-year-old 
daughter, and Applicant.32 He explained that his cohabitant previously had a good job, 
but had a heart attack, is diabetic, and went into renal failure, making her bedridden and 
unable to work.33 As a result, he pays for all their household expenses, utilities, clothing, 
food, and his cohabitant’s car payments, as well as her medical expenses that are not 
fully covered by disability and Medicare.34 When asked about his financial priorities with 
regard to his delinquent debts, Applicant stated that his first priority is taking care of his 
family.35 He conceded that he “probably could have” addressed his smaller delinquent 
debts, and did not say he was “totally unable to” do so, but in trying to take care of his 
family, those debts were put aside.36 
 
Applicant’s net income is approximately $600 to $638 per week which equates to 
$3,600 per month.37 He paid off his truck,38 but the motorcycle he purchased in 2012 
still has a year’s payments left.39 He has about $100 to $200 in his checking account, 
                                                          
29
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 3; Tr. at 54. 
 
30
 GE 2, supra note 7, at 3. 
 
31
 Tr. at 31. Although he claimed at one point to be behind in his rent, Applicant subsequently acknowledged 
he was actually current. See Tr. at 35. 
 
32
 Tr. at 31-32. 
 
33
 Tr. at 32-33. Although Applicant’s cohabitant is allegedly bedridden and unable to work, he also 
acknowledged she recently got into a wreck with her car causing $1,000 in damages, and that he had to find a way to 
come up with the funds necessary to repair the vehicle. See Tr. at 42. 
 
34
 Tr. at 33, 35. 
 
35
 Tr. at 58. 
 
36
 Tr. at 58-59. 
 
37
 Tr. at 34. 
 
38
 Tr. at 36. 
 
39
 Tr. at 40-41. 
 
6 
                                      
 
but no savings.40 He also has a boat which is in need of unspecified repairs.41 Applicant 
contends he has no funds available for discretionary spending of savings, but since he 
did not submit a personal financial statement, it is difficult to assess his true financial 
status. It is his intention to “stay afloat right now and get to where [he] can start really 
paying these things.”42 
  
In both his SF 86 and Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he had failed 
to timely file his federal and state income tax returns for 2011.43 The OPM investigator 
did not address the state income tax return, and Applicant did not mention it. During the 
hearing, Applicant revised his Answer to the SOR and contended that he is “pretty sure” 
or believed he had filed the state return and received a refund of $100.44 He did not 
submit any documentation to support his contentions pertaining to the state income tax 
filing. He did not timely file his federal income tax return because he did not have the 
estimated $1,000 to pay at that time.45 He subsequently intended to file the federal 
return along with his 2012 return, but did not do so. He now contends he filed the 2011 
return with his 2013 return in April 2014.46 He did not submit any documentation to 
support his contentions pertaining to the federal income tax return for 2011. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.a.): On January 30, 2013, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he 
responded to a particular question pertaining to his financial record. The question in 
Section 26 – Financial Record asked if he was currently over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt. Applicant answered “no” to the question. He certified that the response was 
“true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief, but the response to 
that question was, in fact, false. Applicant subsequently denied intending to falsify his 
response, and explained that he knew he had some debts, but not as many as he 
eventually found out about, and accidently clicked “no” when he should have said “yes.” 
He claimed that he simply made a mistake.47  
 
(SOR ¶ 2.b.): As noted above, Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state 
income tax returns for 2011. There is uncorroborated oral evidence that he eventually 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
40
 Tr. at 38-39. 
 
41
 Tr. at 39. 
 
42
 Tr. at 60. 
 
43
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 28-29; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
44
 Tr. at 42, 49. 
 
45
 Tr. at 42-43, 45; GE 1, supra note 1, at 28-29. 
 
46
 Tr. at 43-44. 
 
47
 Tr. at 50-52. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
may have filed his state income tax return, but no documentary evidence to support his 
contentions pertaining to the federal income tax return for 2011 was submitted. 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”48 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”49   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”50 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.51  
                                                          
48
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
49
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
50
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
51
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”52 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”53 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise 
security concerns. In addition, a failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns as required. . . may raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19(g). At some point 
about 12 to 15 years before 2013, Applicant filed for bankruptcy, but the nature and 
                                                          
52
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
53
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
ultimate result of that filing is not very clear in Applicant’s mind. At an unspecified point 
during his marriage, some accounts became delinquent and were placed for collection. 
Applicant found himself with insufficient funds to make routine monthly payments, and 
various other accounts also became delinquent, and they, too, were placed for 
collection. Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state income tax returns for 
2011. Applicant contends he has no funds available for discretionary spending of 
savings, and cannot pay any of his delinquent debts. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(g) 
apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. Evidence 
that the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.54  
AG ¶ 20(b) only minimally applies. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. 
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s intermittent and continuing 
financial difficulties over many years, but essentially since at least 2008, make it difficult 
to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” While there is evidence 
that some of his financial difficulties may have been caused by his ex-wife, those 
delinquent seven debts are relatively small (between $59 and $251). Applicant’s two 
periods of unemployment occurred in 2006 and 2010, but Applicant failed to offer any 
specifics as to what financial difficulties may have been caused by those two periods. 
Additionally, while Applicant has made continuing payments for all household expenses, 
utilities, clothing, food, and his cohabitant’s car payments and some of her medical 
expenses, and he attributes his inability to make payments towards his own delinquent 
                                                          
54
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (internal citation and footnote omitted, quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
debts to taking care of his cohabitant and her daughter, without more detailed 
explanations, it is difficult to assess to what degree those financial hardships were 
beyond Applicant’s control. The filing status of his federal and state income tax returns 
for 2011 still remains unclear. Applicant has been with his current employer since 
January 2013. He had the financial ability to pay off his truck and purchase a 
motorcycle, but he has not made any effort to approach the seven creditors to establish 
repayment plans, and he has not made any payments to those creditors. Instead, he 
has simply ignored his delinquent debts while noting that his ex-wife created them. 
There are simply too many inconsistencies and too many explanations. There is 
insufficient evidence that Applicant was unable to do more to pay his delinquent SOR 
debts. To the contrary, there is evidence that he probably could have addressed those 
delinquent debts. Applicant failed to act responsibly under the circumstances.55  
Applicant never received financial counseling or debt consolidation guidance. In 
addition, he failed to establish that there are clear indications that his finances are under 
control. Applicant failed to initiate a “good-faith effort,” to start repaying any of his SOR-
creditors. Over the years since the debts were established Applicant did not act 
aggressively, timely, or responsibly to resolve his delinquent debts. Instead, he ignored 
his debts and continues to do so. More positive movements should have already taken 
place to resolve some of his delinquent accounts. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
                                                          
55
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)).  
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Under AG ¶ 16(e), it is also potentially disqualifying if there is 
personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . . 
 As noted above, on January 30, 2013, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he 
responded to a certain question pertaining to his financial record. The question in 
Section 26 – Financial Record asked if he was currently over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt. Applicant answered “no” to that question. He certified that the response was 
“true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief, but the response to 
that question was, in fact, false. Although he admitted the allegation in his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant subsequently denied intending to falsify his response, and explained 
that he knew he had some debts, but not as many as he eventually found out about, 
and accidently clicked “no” when he should have said “yes.” He claimed that he simply 
made a mistake.  
 
 Applicant’s response provides sufficient evidence to examine if his submission 
was a deliberate falsification, as alleged in the SOR, or merely the result of a mistake, 
as he claims. He denied the false responses were deliberate or an attempt to falsify the 
material facts. Applicant’s explanation, to be accepted, requires that a substantial 
degree of unreasonableness be ignored. If Applicant had acknowledged the deliberate 
nature of his actions and expressed that it was foolish on his part to have falsified his 
responses and concealed the truth, his actions might have been considered aberrant 
behavior. Applicant clings to his explanation that when he completed the SF 86 he knew 
there were a few delinquent accounts, but was unaware that so many of his accounts 
were delinquent and placed for collection. He claims that he simply pushed the wrong 
button in answering the question. In the absence of any character evidence pertaining 
to Applicant’s honesty and truthfulness, his position is unreasonable. AG ¶ 16(a) has 
been established.  
 
Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state income tax returns for 2011. 
AG ¶ 16(e) has been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(a) may apply if the individual made 
prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before 
being confronted with the facts. If the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, 
or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment, AG ¶ 17(c) may apply. Also, AG ¶ 17(d) may apply if the individual 
has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or 
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that 
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. With the 
exception of his periods of unemployment, Applicant has generally been employed. He 
is apparently a caring cohabitant and stepfather figure.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial 
than the mitigating evidence. Applicant failed to timely file federal and state income tax 
returns for 2011. Although he contends he eventually filed the state return, and claims 
the federal issue is under review by the IRS, he has offered no documentation to 
support his contentions or his claim. Applicant conceded that he “probably could have” 
addressed his smaller delinquent debts, and did not say he was “totally unable to” do so, 
but in trying to take care of his family, those debts were put aside. Instead of addressing 
even the smallest of his delinquent debts (a $59 bill for veterinary services to one of his 
dogs or a $90 medical bill for his ex-wife), Applicant chose to purchase a motorcycle, 
pay off a truck, and repair his cohabitant’s damaged vehicle. In prioritizing his debts, 
Applicant simply ignored the delinquent ones. When asked about delinquent debts in his 
SF 86 Applicant responded that he did not have any when in reality, he did. From his 
actions and attitude, it appears that he had no intention to address his delinquent 
accounts. He has established no plan to do so. Applicant’s long-standing failure to repay 
creditors, at least in reasonable amounts, or to arrange payment plans, reflects traits 
which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance.  
I am mindful that any one factor, considered in isolation, might put Applicant’s 
credit history in a sympathetic light. I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in 
light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal 
analysis.56 The absence of any efforts or evidence to reflect actual payments to his SOR 
                                                          
56
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
13 
                                      
 
creditors are sufficient to raise continuing security concerns. The absence of more 
timely efforts to file his 2011 federal and state income tax returns is also disquieting. 
See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:57 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a negative track record of making no efforts to pay 
his creditors, and generally ignoring them.  And, he failed to timely file his 2011 federal 
and state income tax returns. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from his financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
57
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
14 
                                      
 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
