1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-00586
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s use of marijuana between 2002 and 2008, at times while holding a
security clearance, is mitigated. However, he deliberately failed to list his drug use in his
last two security clearance applications. Finally, he has had persistent and recurring
financial problems, including a failure to pay his 2007 taxes on time. Applicant’s
response and the information he presented are not sufficient to mitigate the resulting
security concerns. Applicant’s request for continued access to classified information is
denied.
Statement of the Case
On September 23, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to renew his eligibility for a security clearance he first
received in 1999. After the ensuing background investigation, Department of Defense
(DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it was clearly consistent with the national
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These1
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 A copy of the decision in ISCR Case No. 09-02313 is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1.2
 Cites to this Ax. A will denote the pertinent subsection; e.g., section 7 of the exhibit will be cited as “Ax. A7.”3
 See Directive, E3.1.17.4
2
interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. On October 28, 2009, DOD issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raised security concerns  addressed
in the adjudicative guideline  for financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant1
responded to the SOR and requested a hearing, which was held on March 11, 2010. On
May 7, 2010, an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a decision  in which he found that Applicant had mitigated the2
Government’s security concerns about Applicant’s finances.
On June 6, 2013, Applicant submitted another EQIP to renew his clearance
eligibility and obtain a higher level of clearance. After the ensuing background
investigation, DOD issued an SOR on May 12, 2014, alleging facts which raise security
concerns addressed in the adjudicative guidelines for illegal drug use (Guideline H),
personal conduct (Guideline E), and financial considerations (Guideline F).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on August 5, 2014, and I convened a hearing on September
11, 2014. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 5. Applicant
testified, presented one witness, and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A, which contains
12 documents.  All exhibits were admitted without objection. I held the record open after3
the hearing to receive from Applicant additional relevant information. Applicant’s timely
post-hearing submission has been included in the record, without objection, as Ax. B.
DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on September 25, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline H, the Government alleged that Applicant used marijuana about
50 times between 2002 and 2009 (SOR 1.a); and that Applicant’s illegal drug use
occurred while holding a security clearance he received in 1999 (SOR 1.b). Under
Guideline E, the Government alleged that when Applicant submitted his previous EQIP
in September 2008, he deliberately omitted the fact that he used marijuana as alleged in
SOR 1.a (SOR 2.a). It was also alleged he again deliberately omitted the drug use
alleged in SOR 1.a when he submitted his most recent EQIP in June 2013 (SOR 2.a).
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant failed to file his 2007 tax
return as required (SOR 3.a); and that he owed $162,943 for 13 delinquent or past-due
debts (SOR 3.b - 3.n). At hearing, the Government moved to withdraw the SOR 3.a
allegation to conform to the evidence.  I granted the motion. (Tr. 82 - 83)4
3
In response to the SOR (Answer), Applicant admitted with explanations the SOR
1.a, 1.b, 2.a and 2.b allegations. As to the Guideline F allegations, Applicant denied
SOR 3.a, and 3.e - 3.n, with explanations, and he admitted with explanations SOR 3.b -
3.c. In addition to his admissions, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 38 years old and works for a defense contractor providing technical
support and instruction to the military regarding his company’s products. A recent
performance evaluation reflects well on his judgment and trustworthiness. Applicant has
been married to his current wife since March 2013. A previous marriage began in
October 1998, but ended by divorce in July 2008. Applicant holds an associate’s
degree, and he is currently taking additional online college courses in business
administration. (Gx. 1; Ax. A2; Ax. A8; Tr. 16)
Applicant has been working for his current employer since May 2011, and
requires a top secret clearance for this work. Applicant first received a security
clearance in 1999 for his work with a defense contractor for whom he worked until
September 2006. He left that job to work in real estate investment, but he returned to
defense contracting work with a previous employer as an engineering consultant in
June 2007. (Gx. 1; Tr. 64)
Applicant first smoked marijuana in 2002. His first wife used marijuana, but
Applicant generally did not want to be included in her drug-related activities. Applicant
never bought or sold marijuana. He started using the drug at the behest of his first wife
when he started having trouble sleeping. He estimates he used marijuana for that
purpose, and occasionally in social settings with his ex-wife or with a relative who lived
nearby, about 50 times until 2008 or 2009. Applicant passed a pre-employment drug
test before starting work with his current employer. Although his company has a drug
testing program in support of its drug-free workplace policies, Applicant has not been
tested for drugs through work. In September 2014, he tested negative for illegal drugs in
a test he procured. Applicant also presented information showing that he has been
treated clinically for his sleep difficulties, and that he has been prescribed legal
medications that have made his use of marijuana unnecessary. Applicant claims that
most of his drug use occurred when he was not working for defense contractors. His
current wife has known him since 2010 and has never seen him use any illegal
substance. (Answer; Ax. A3; Tr. 29 - 30, 33 - 34, 56 - 59, 61 - 63, 70 - 72)
Applicant did not list his drug use in either his 2008 EQIP, which was submitted
to renew his clearance eligibility, or in the 2013 EQIP he submitted for a top secret
clearance. Applicant explained that in 2008, he had stopped using marijuana and did
not consider that information to be important as it was no longer part of his life. He
provided a similar rationale for his failure to list his drug use in 2013. Further, Applicant
testified that he “did not understand the ramifications of answering [EQIP questions
about drugs] falsely.” During Applicant’s DOHA hearing in 2010, the subject of illegal
drug use was not raised by the SOR. He acknowledged that during both his 2008 and
2013 background investigations he was interviewed by Government investigators.  He
does not remember if he was asked about illegal drug use in either interview, but he
 At the hearing in the present case, I informed the parties that I would consider the facts and conclusions5
contained in the administrative judge’s decision in Applicant’s 2010 case. (Tr. 65 - 68)
4
admits he did not disclose his drug use because he “thought it was an old issue.”
Applicant first disclosed his drug use in response to DOD interrogatories in March 2014.
He acknowledged at hearing that his drug use was likely uncovered through interviews
of personal references he provided in his 2013 application for a top secret clearance.
(Answer; Hx. 1; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Tr. 30, 60 - 61, 64 - 65)
Applicant’s 2010 DOHA hearing  focused on his financial problems. The SOR,5
dated October 28, 2009, alleged that he owed about $570,000 for 11 past-due or
delinquent debts. Most of the debts were for mortgages and equity loans related to
Applicant’s brief venture into real estate investment. The administrative judge decided in
favor of Applicant because Applicant incurred the debts through circumstances beyond
his control – the collapse of the housing market in 2007 and Applicant’s divorce – and
because Applicant was showing good judgment in his efforts to resolve those debts.
(Hx. 1)
Credit reports obtained subsequent to Applicant’s 2013 application for clearance
showed that Applicant still carries some of the mortgage debt alleged in the 2009 SOR,
and that he has acquired new debts since 2010. Among his new debts is a tax lien
obtained in 2009 by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for $11,635 in unpaid 2007
federal income taxes (SOR 3.d). It has been reduced by a payment of $5,153.60 from
an involuntary levy of Applicant’s bank account in 2012. Applicant has hired a lawyer to
negotiate a repayment plan with the IRS. (Gx. 1; Gx. 4; Gx. 5; Ax. A7; Tr. 34 - 35, 40 -
42)
The debt alleged at SOR 3.i is a $20,700 second mortgage debt obtained during
Applicant’s real estate business for one of his investment properties. In response to the
SOR and at hearing, Applicant had asserted that the loan was satisfied through a short
sale in 2009. However, in his post-hearing submission, he stated that his review of his
records showed that the mortgage had actually been foreclosed. (Answer; Gx. 3 - 5; Ax.
B; Tr. 49 - 51)
The debt alleged at SOR 3.k is also a second mortgage on one of his investment
properties. The property was sold as part of a short sale settlement in which Applicant
agreed to pay $15,000. He provided $3,000 and financed the remaining $12,000
through the promissory note that is now alleged as a delinquency. Applicant repaid the
note at $100 each month, and the balance is now about $6,000. (Answer; Gx. Ax. A11;
Tr. 52 - 54)
The debt alleged at SOR 3.n was a delinquent credit card account for $12,459. In
October 2013, the debt was forgiven and a Form 1099-C was issued attributing
$9,662.02 to Applicant as income. On his 2013 tax return, Applicant claimed that this
amount should be excluded as a “discharge of indebtedness to the extent insolvent (not
 See Directive. 6.3.6
5
in a Title 11 [bankruptcy] case.” There is not enough information in the record from
which to determine if exclusion of the forgiven debt is proper. (Ax. B)
As to his remaining debts, he does not recognize the medical debt at SOR 3.f,
but he has not acted to resolve the debts at SOR 3.b and 3.c, which are the subject of
civil judgments against him totaling $12,323. He provided documentation regarding
dismissal of a civil suit by the same creditor as in SOR 3.c; however, that suit is
unrelated to the SOR 3.c judgment. (Ax. A6; Tr. 34, 37)
As to the debts at SOR 3.g, 3.h, 3.j, 3.l and 3.m, Applicant is trying to have them
removed from his credit report as they have been charged off by the original creditor as
business losses and are beyond the statute of limitations for collection. (Answer; Tr. 44 -
48, 51 - 52)
Applicant asserts that his current finances are much improved and that he has
demonstrated good financial management. In support of his claim, he cites a higher
credit score. He and his current wife have also made significant adjustments in their
expenses. They have obtained cheaper transportation and they avoid unnecessary
entertainment costs, such as dining out. Applicant also cites his compliance with the
obligations from his divorce decree. It specified that he would retain the marital
residence, but would pay his ex-wife $46,725 as her share of the equity in the house
after he refinanced the mortgage and her name was removed from the mortgage and
deed. Applicant was also required to pay his share of a joint credit card. To do so, he
borrowed $18,000 from his mother. Since June 2008, he has been paying his ex-wife
$500 each month and still owes her $31,925. He has been repaying his mother $600
each month and now owes her about $200. (Ax. A5; Ax. A9 - 12; Tr. 34 - 35, 72 - 75)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those
factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).9
6
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to7
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  8
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.9
Analysis
Drug Involvement
Applicant used marijuana between 2002 and 2008 or 2009. He held a security
clearance the entire time. He estimates he used marijuana about 50 times over that
period. He first used drugs at age 27 when his first wife, a regular marijuana user,
suggested he try the drug to help him sleep better. Applicant also used the drug socially
with his first wife and one of his relatives who lived nearby. He stopped using drugs
around the time of his divorce and after he was clinically treated for sleep difficulties and
other issues. This information raises a security concern expressed at AG ¶ 24, as
follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
7
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
More specifically, Applicant’s conduct requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see above definition)) and ¶ 25(g) (any illegal
drug use after being granted a security clearance).
In assessing the applicability of the pertinent mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26,
I  have considered several issues. First, Applicant has not used marijuana since 2008 or
2009. His circumstances have changed, in that, he no longer associates with persons
involved with illegal drugs. His current wife does not use drugs, Applicant has been
treated for his sleep problems, and there is little likelihood that he will use marijuana
again. These facts support the following AG ¶ 26 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence.
On balance, available information shows that Applicant’s past drug use is no
longer a security concern.
Personal Conduct
Applicant deliberately made false statements to the Government when he failed
to disclose his drug use in his two most recent security clearance applications. This
information raises a security concern about personal conduct, which is addressed at AG
¶ 15 as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
8
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
More specifically, the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) applies. 
Applicant started using marijuana to help with trouble sleeping, but after receiving
qualified medical treatment and appropriate medications, he stopped using marijuana.
Applicant claims he decided to omit information about his drug use from his 2008 and
2013 EQIPs because he was no longer using marijuana and felt it was no longer
important information. He also claims he omitted the information because he did not
fully realize the ramifications of doing so. Applicant was interviewed by a Government
investigator after each EQIP was submitted. In neither interview did he avail himself of
the opportunity to correct his EQIP omissions. 
Applicant did not make any good-faith effort to correct his falsifications. Available
information reasonably suggests that he would not have disclosed his drug use in
response to Government interrogatories had investigators not already learned of his
conduct from other sources. His lack of candor about his past conduct continues to cast
doubt on his current suitability for access to classified information. There is no basis for
application of any of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 17.
Financial Considerations
In Applicant’s 2008 EQIP he disclosed several significant delinquencies related to
his failed real estate investment activities of 2006 and 2007. In a DOHA hearing in
2010, the administrative judge determined that Applicant showed good judgment in
response to his financial problems. It was also determined that Applicant had
established a meaningful track record of debt repayment and debt reduction.
In Applicant’s 2013 EQIP, he again disclosed several significant delinquencies,
some of which still remained from his real estate activities. Much of the debt at issue
here was accrued after Applicant returned to work as a defense contractor in 2007.
Available information shows that only two of the debts alleged in the SOR in the present
case have been addressed by Applicant. He has paid about half of the debt for a
promissory note at SOR 3.k, and the debt at 3.n was simply forgiven after being written
off as a business loss, and the amount owed was declared on a Form 1099-C as
possible income for tax year 2013. 
By contrast, his 2007 tax debt was reduced through an involuntary bank levy, but
the lien against him is still in place and he has not yet begun negotiations with the IRS
to resolve the remaining balance. Applicant originally stated that the mortgage debt at
SOR 3.i had been satisfied through a short sale; however, it was actually foreclosed and
9
no information was presented as to whether Applicant’s obligation for that debt has
been resolved. As to his remaining personal debts, he is relying on the statute of
limitations against collections to avoid repaying those debts. 
Available information is sufficient to raise a security concern about Applicant’s
finances. That concern is expressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations).
Applicant presented information showing that he is repaying his ex-wife as
required by the terms of his divorce, but that he still owes her more than $30,000. To his
credit, Applicant has nearly completed his payments on an $18,000 loan from his
mother, and he has not accrued any new unpaid debts since about 2011. However, two
civil judgments have not been addressed and Applicant did not present information
showing how he intends to resolve those obligations. Of the mitigating conditions listed
under AG ¶ 20, applicability of the following pertinent factors must be considered:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
These mitigating conditions do not apply because Applicant’s financial problems
have continued since he was cleared in 2010. Although the amount at issue is much
lower than in Applicant’s previous case, his total debt is still significant. Although
10
Applicant’s financial problems are rooted in his real estate activities and his divorce, at
least seven years have passed without definitive action on many of his debts.
Additionally, he has new debts that have not been acted upon, and Applicant is relying
on the statute of limitations rather than trying to establish payment plans for many of his
debts. There has been no good-faith effort to repay his debts, and he has not sought
professional counseling or other financial assistance in resolving his debts.
The questions about his judgment raised by his financial problems persist. On
balance, the positive information about his decreased spending, and about his
repayment of debts to his mother and ex-wife is not sufficient to overcome the adverse
information about his lack of action regarding his tax lien and his other delinquent
accounts. None of the pertinent mitigating conditions under this guideline apply. 
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guidelines E, F, and H. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context
of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 38 years old and presumed
to be a mature, responsible adult. He has a good record of performance with his current
employer, and his second marriage appears to be more stable and productive than his
first. His illegal drug use is behind him; however, his untruthfulness about that conduct
weighs heavily against a finding that he can be trusted in a classified environment. On
two occasions, he deliberately interfered with the Government’s ability to properly
assess his suitability for access to classified information. Combined with his ongoing
financial problems, available information sustains the doubts raised by the
Government’s information. Because protection of the national interest is the principal
goal of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a: Withdrawn
Subparagraphs 3.b - 3.n: Against Applicant
11
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
