1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-01264
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant has paid or resolved her past-due debts. Her largest debt, resolved in
2008, was the result of a business that failed seven years ago. The debt was settled but
is erroneously still reported in her credit history as past-due. Applicant’s current finances
are sound and she is not likely to incur future delinquencies. Her request for a security
clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On August 23, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a top secret security clearance required for
her work as a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it
  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
2
was clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to hold a security
clearance.  1
On May 28, 2014, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative
guidelines  financial considerations (Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision without a
hearing. On August 27, 2014, Applicant requested a hearing. Her request is included in
the record as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1. 
The case was assigned to me on September 5, 2014, and I convened a hearing
on September 10, 2014. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 -
5. Applicant testified and presented Applicant Exhibits (Ax.) A and B. All exhibits were
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on September
25, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $34,704 for six
past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.f). Of those debts, SOR 1.f alleges a debt of $33,847.
Applicant admitted SOR 1.b and 1.f. (Answer) At hearing, Department Counsel moved
to withdraw the SOR 1.e allegation to conform to the evidence. I granted the motion.
(Tr. 54)
Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified
her answers to financial questions in her EQIP (SOR 2.a). Applicant denied, with
explanations, this allegation. (Answer) At hearing, Department Counsel moved to
withdraw this allegation to conform to the evidence. I granted the motion. Accordingly,
only security concerns under Guideline F are addressed in this decision. 
In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make the
following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 42-year-old mother of two children, ages 20 and 12. She and her
husband, an information technology specialist and Naval Reserve officer, have been
married since 1991. Applicant works for a defense contractor, who hired her in August
2013 as a planner in support of a joint U.S. military command. She requires a top secret
clearance for her work. Applicant previously held a secret clearance between 1999 and
2011 when she was employed as an analyst by a different defense contractor. (Gx. 1;
Tr. 49 - 50)
 See Directive. 6.3.3
3
Between 2011 and 2013, Applicant was unemployed outside the home. During
that time, she took college-level courses online. She had already earned a bachelor’s
degree in 1995. In 2008, Applicant worked in a marketing communications job unrelated
to the defense industry. (Gx. 1; Tr. 14)
Applicant did not list any delinquent debts in her EQIP; however, she disclosed
that a publishing business she started in 2003 had been “liquidated” in 2008. The debt
alleged at SOR 1.f is for a business credit card used for her business-related expenses.
This account became past-due at times starting in 2007, when business revenue was
shrinking. The balance past-due around 2007 and 2008 was $12,872. It was not listed
as a delinquency in her 2009 credit report, and Applicant testified that she was not
asked about it during her first background investigation subject interview. During her
current subject interview, and during her hearing testimony, Applicant stated that after
the business closed, she continued to make payments when she could but eventually
had to negotiate a settlement with the creditor, a bank that is no longer in business.
When the balance had been paid down to about $7,000, the creditor agreed to accept
$3,500 to settle the debt. Applicant averred that she paid the settlement account but
that the debt was repeatedly sold to collection agencies. The amount alleged in SOR 1.f
reflects fees, penalties, and interest added on by those collection agencies. This debt
no longer appears on Applicant’s credit reports. (Answer; Gx. 1 - 5; Ax. B; Tr. 35 - 37,
43 - 44, 48, 49 - 50, 52 - 53).
As to the remaining SOR allegations, Applicant presented information showing
that they have been paid or otherwise resolved. The debt at SOR 1.c was paid in 2008,
and the debt at SOR 1.d became past-due because of a billing error. Applicant also
provided information showing a good credit rating and prudent use of personal credit.
Applicant has no debts that are past-due or delinquent. (Answer; Ax. B; Tr. 32 - 34)
Applicant has an excellent reputation in the workplace. Until her interim clearance
was revoked pending this adjudication, she had handled classified information properly
and without incident. Past and present co-workers, both civilians and military members,
hold her in high regard for her reliability and trustworthiness. (Ax. A)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,3
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.5
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).6
4
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  5
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.6
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Aside from the debt alleged at SOR 1.e, which was withdrawn at hearing,
available information is sufficient to support the SOR allegations under this guideline.
5
The facts established raise a security concern about Applicant’s finances that is
addressed at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations). Until recently, available information showed that
Applicant had accrued significant debt since 2008.
By contrast, available information requires consideration of the following pertinent
AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
All of these mitigating conditions apply. All of the information probative of
Applicant’s debt resolution efforts shows the debts alleged in the SOR have been paid
6
or otherwise resolved. Applicant is well-informed about her credit and was already
addressing her debts before the SOR was issued. For example, the debts at SOR 1.c
and 1.f were resolved in or about 2008. Applicant also showed that she and her
husband have good credit with no past-due or delinquent debts. Applicant’s dispute of
the debts at SOR 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f are supported either by actual payment receipts or,
as with SOR 1.f, that debt was not listed as delinquent in a 2009 credit report, but
turned up in a 2013 credit report as a collection account. It is now absent  from her more
recent credit reports. On the matter of SOR 1.f, I also found Applicant’s statements and
testimony to present credible and plausible explanations of the status of that debt. Her
claims that she acted several years ago to settle that debt is consistent with her
documented approach to her other debts. On balance, I conclude Applicant has
satisfactorily addressed the security concerns about her past indebtedness, and that
she is unlikely to experience financial problems in the future. 
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 42 years old and presumed to be a
mature, responsible adult. Her good reputation in the workplace, and the positive way
she responded to her financial problems support that presumption. Applicant’s finances
are sound and she is not likely to incur such debts in the future. A fair and
commonsense assessment of all available information shows that Applicant has
mitigated the security concerns presented by her past-due debts.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d, 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Withdrawn
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: WITHDRAWN
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
