 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------                                   )    Case No. 14-01509  
  ) 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns related to Guideline F, but mitigated 
concerns raised under Guideline E. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On June 16, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
In a July 11, 2014, response, Applicant admitted both allegations raised in the 
SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. On August 21, 2014, counsel for DOD 
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing seven attachments to support 
the Government’s position in this matter. Applicant did not submit a response or any 
 
 
 
 
2 
additional information within the specified time period following his receipt of the FORM. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on 
November 5, 2014. I have thoroughly reviewed the FORM and other case file materials. 
Based on the materials submitted, I find that Applicant failed to meet his burden in 
mitigating financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old transportation specialist who has worked for the same 
defense contractor since November 2013. He completed high school and has taken 
some post-secondary courses. Applicant served with distinction in the United States 
Army before being honorably discharged. Divorced, he married his present wife in 1998. 
His is the father of two adult children and two minor children, one of whom lives with 
him.  
 
 In 2006 or 2007, Applicant co-signed a student loan for a friend, on which the 
friend agreed to make appropriate payments. Applicant did not monitor her payments. 
He did not worry about it because he assumed it was being timely paid. In 2010, 
Applicant bought a home with no difficulties, then purchased a vehicle without any credit 
issues. At some subsequent, unspecified time, he learned the former friend was not 
making timely payments on the student loan. He contacted her and was told she was 
working with the creditor. He has written that he later contacted the creditor to see what 
he could do to help, but there is no corroborating evidence to that effect. The loan 
balance, now in collection status, is worth approximately $28,931.  
 
When interviewed by investigators between January 2014 and February 2014, 
Applicant stated that he did not know when the debt had become delinquent, did not 
dispute it, did not consider it to be his, and had done nothing about the debt. FORM, 
Item 5 at 3. This interview occurred at some unspecified point after he had contacted 
one of the three leading credit reporting bureaus which, by January 2014, was reporting 
that he had claimed that he had not been advised there was an outstanding balance on 
the account. FORM, Item 6 at 11.   
 
 In the interim, on November 13, 2013, Applicant submitted his security clearance 
application (SCA). He did not identify the loan in response to Section 26, Financial 
Record: “In the past seven (7) years you had bills or debts turned over to a collection 
agency” (Include financial obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as 
those for which you were a cosigner or guarantor) or “You are currently 120 days 
delinquent on any debt?” (Include financial obligations for which you were the sole 
debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosigner or guarantor). Rather, he 
answered “no” to these questions, failing to disclose the student loan.   
 
     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
 
 
 
 
3 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
 
 
 
 
4 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has a 
delinquent debt worth approximately $28,931. Such a fact is sufficient to invoke two of 
the financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Four conditions could mitigate the finance-related security concerns in this case: 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Here, Applicant freely became a co-signer on a friend’s student loan. Once he 
became a co-signer, he left the management of the loan entirely to her for a number of 
years. His assumption that all was well with this account and with his credit was based 
on his lack of difficulty financing a home and a new vehicle, not through diligent reviews 
of his credit report or inquiries to his friend. Applicant stated that he did not know when 
the debt had become delinquent. He did not dispute the debt, does not consider it to be 
his, and has done nothing about the debt. Given these circumstances and facts, none of 
the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
Applicant’s denied having delinquent debt on his security clearance application.  
If his answer was intentionally false, one of the following disqualifying conditions would 
apply:  
 
AG ¶ 16 (a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
and 
 
AG ¶ (b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
As noted, for AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) to apply, Applicant’s omission must have 
been deliberate. The Government presented facts indicating that his answer was 
incorrect. Applicant countered by explaining that he had honestly forgotten about the 
loan and had not monitored his friend’s progress on repayment. When an allegation of 
falsification is controverted, the Government has the burden of proving it. Proof of an 
omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of 
mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence 
concerning an applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. (See 
ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 1, 2004)(explaining ISCR Case No. 02-
23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
As noted, Applicant’s explanations are credibly plausible, a factor fortified by a 
record that indicates no other suggestions of falsity. Given the totality of the facts and 
circumstances, I find the Government has not established that the Applicant 
intentionally withheld information during his investigation. AG ¶¶16(a) and 16(b) are not 
established and Personal Conduct concerns are mitigated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
limited facts and circumstances noted in this case. I incorporate my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, others may have warranted additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old transportation specialist who has worked for the same 
defense contractor since November 2013. He has earned a high school diploma and 
completed some post-secondary classwork. Applicant served with distinction in the 
United States Army before being honorably discharged. His first marriage ended in 
divorce in 1996. He remarried in 1998. He has two adult children and two minor 
children. About a decade ago, he became a co-signer on a friend’s student loan.  He 
trusted her to manage the loan properly, then abdicated all responsibility on the debt as 
its guarantor. Neglected, that loan is now in collection status for nearly $30,000. 
Applicant claims to have made some inquiry about the loan to his friend and the 
creditor, but there is no documentary evidence reflecting his efforts, if any. In becoming 
a co-signer on another’s loan, one takes on a guarantor status with the lender. In 
abdicating that responsibility, one raises genuine security concerns about reliability. 
Here, such concerns have not been mitigated. 
 
With regard to his execution of his SCA and his denial of a delinquent or past-
due debt, there is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant intentionally meant to 
falsify facts. Without such evidence, a personal conduct disqualifying condition cannot 
be raised. Based on the limited evidence and information presented, however, I cannot 
find that financial considerations security concerns have been mitigated. Therefore, 
clearance is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
