1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-01735
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: James W. Zirkle, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant has only consumed alcohol once in the past year, and is remorseful
about his alcohol-related misconduct. However, given the recency and severity of his
last offense, I am unable to conclude that he has mitigated the security concerns.
Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On June 6, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security
concerns under Guidelines G, alcohol consumption, and J, criminal conduct.  The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) as promulgated by the
President on September 1, 2006.
His blood/alcohol content was greater than .20%. (GE 3 at 7)1
2
Applicant answered the SOR on June 26, 2014, admitting the allegations and
requesting a hearing. On September 16, 2014, a notice of hearing was issued
scheduling the case for September 26, 2014. At the hearing, I received three
Government exhibits marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. Also, I
considered Applicant’s testimony. The transcript (Tr. ) was received on October 7, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 27-year-old single man. He graduated from college in 2012,
majoring in liberal arts. Since April 2013, he has worked for a defense contractor as a
security assistant. He primarily serves as a courier who delivers both classified and
unclassified information. (Tr. 23, 27)
Applicant is a good employee. His supervisor characterized him as “a hard
worker, customer-focused, and a very strong and reliable member of [their]
department.” (Answer, Attachment 1)
In July 2007, Applicant, then 19 years old, was charged with driving after illegal
consumption of alcohol and underage purchase/possession of alcohol. (Tr. 12, 34) He
was convicted of the first charge and placed on one year of probation. As part of his
probation, he attended ten, three-hour, alcohol-education sessions. (Tr. 34) 
Applicant began consuming alcohol in approximately 2002 when he was 15 years
old. From 2002 to 2010, he drank approximately a 12-pack of beer per week. (GE 2 at
14)
In August 2007, Applicant, while standing on the deck, drinking a beer and
talking on a cell phone at a party, was issued a citation for attending a party with
unlawful consumption of alcohol, and possession of a malt beverage/unfortified wine by
a 19/20 year old. These charges were later dismissed. (Tr. 36, 12)
One evening In August 2009, Applicant, while carousing with friends and walking
across a college campus with a beer in his hand, was stopped by police and charged
with possessing an open container of alcohol. He was later found guilty and fined $91.
(GE 3 at 5) He had graduated from college three months before this episode. (GE 1 at
15)
In October 2010, Applicant was stopped by police for driving with an expired
license tag. (Tr. 14) The police officer smelled alcohol on his breath and ordered him to
perform a field sobriety test. Applicant failed,  leading to his arrest for driving while1
under the influence of alcohol (DWI). After arresting Applicant, the police officer
conducted a search of his vehicle and discovered a marijuana pipe. (GE 2 at 14) He
then charged Applicant with possession of marijuana. Applicant pleaded guilty to both
The second charge was not amended.2
3
charges, and was placed on 12 months of probation. (Tr. 41) Also, Applicant’s license
was restricted for one year, and he was fined $2,000. (GE 2 at 14) 
In June 2013, Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator. (GE 2 at 11)
They discussed his history of alcohol-related misconduct. Applicant noted that since the
2010 arrest, he had decreased his alcohol consumption from a 12-pack per week to a 6-
pack per week. (GE 2 at 14)
In August 2013, two months after Applicant’s subject interview, he was arrested
and charged with DWI (second offense), and driving with a blood/alcohol content
greater than .20 percent, after accidentally driving his car into the back of a police car.
Applicant was extremely intoxicated at the time and cannot remember getting into the
car before the accident. (Tr. 15) After a pre-trial agreement, the prosecution reduced the
DWI charge to a first-offense charge, whereupon Applicant pleaded guilty.  He was2
sentenced to 360 days imprisonment (350 days suspended), and one year of
supervised probation. As part of Applicant’s probation, he was required to attend an
alcohol safety and education class, an ignition interlock was placed on his automobile,
and his license was restricted for use during working hours and for medically necessary
travel. (Tr. 16; GE 3 at 12) Applicant’s probation expires on November 17, 2014. (GE 3
at 12)
After the August 2013 alcohol-related arrest, Applicant realized that he “had a
serious problem . . . that not only threatened [his] life, but the lives of people around
him.” (Answer at 2) Subsequently, he reported the incident to his company’s facility
security officer and voluntarily enrolled in the company’s employee assistance program
(EAP). (Answer at 2) The EAP counselor referred Applicant to a licensed social worker,
who subsequently began providing therapy services. Applicant attended eight sessions
between September 11, 2013 and December 4, 2013. (Answer at 2) The first four
sessions were once per week, and the last four sessions were every other week. (GE 2
at 7)
On June 26, 2014, Applicant’s counselor wrote a letter to the court. (Answer,
attachment 2) She did not make a formal assessment of alcohol abuse or dependence.
She did, however, refer to Applicant’s problem as an addiction. Also, she told him that
abstinence from alcohol is the best option for his condition. (Answer at 2) Ultimately,
she concluded that Applicant has “gained knowledge of his addiction and insights
regarding his own alcohol misuse,” and “was making consistent efforts” at maintaining
sobriety. (Answer, attachment 2)
At or about the time Applicant began counseling, he started attending Alcoholics
Anonymous (AA). (Tr. 49) His attendance was voluntary. (Tr. 48, 61) He attended
approximately once a week through February 2014. He stopped going, and did not
begin the 12-step program. (Tr. 50) He felt that he “learned a lot through [his] sponsor,
4
and through talking with everybody else there, and . . . was ready . . . to try doing it
[himself].” (Tr. 50)
With the exception of a glass of champagne on New Year’s Day, 2014, Applicant
has not consumed any more alcohol since the August 2013 episode. (Tr. 17-18, 59) He
has no plans for drinking alcohol in the future. (Tr. 60)
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing
the complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in
the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a security clearance.
Analysis
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
Under this guideline, “excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise
of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.” (AG ¶ 21). Applicant’s history of
alcohol-related criminal conduct triggers the application of AG ¶¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence . . . or other
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent,” and 22(c) “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to
the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”
Applicant’s therapist did not explicitly characterize him as alcohol dependent. She
did, however, characterize his problem as an addiction, and she advised him to abstain
from drinking alcohol.  AG ¶ 22(e), “evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence
by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol
treatment program,” applies.
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially applicable:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
5
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment;
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse; provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse,
and is making satisfactory progress; and
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of AA or a similar organization and has received
a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a
licensed clinical worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol
treatment program.
As of the issuance of this decision, Applicant was on supervised probation for the
August 2013 DWI. Although Applicant’s probation is set to expire on November 17,
2014, his status as a probationer is of paramount importance because it signifies that
the state court that convicted him is so concerned about the possibility that Applicant
may commit another alcohol-related offense that it has placed restrictions on his ability
to start his car and on where he can drive. Under these circumstances, AG ¶ 23(a) does
not apply. 
Shortly after Applicant’s August 2013 DWI, he began receiving counseling from
his therapist and attending AA. He worked with his therapist for two months and he went
to AA meetings for five months. Recently, in June 2014, his therapist provided a positive
update.
Applicant has only consumed one alcoholic beverage in the past year. However,
given his therapist’s admonition that he abstain from alcohol, I cannot credit him with the
four-month period of abstinence that preceded the drink that he consumed on New
Year’s Day 2014. Nevertheless, the eight months of abstinence since New Year’s Day
2014, together with Applicant’s acknowledgement of the problem and his steps of
actions to overcome the problem are sufficient to apply AG ¶ 23(b).
Other than court-ordered alcohol education classes, Applicant had not attended
any therapy sessions before August 2013. Although he is not currently working with his
therapist, he visited her in June 2014 and she gave him a positive update. Also,
Applicant attended AA sessions for five months after the August 2013 episode. AG ¶
23(d) applies.
6
   Applicant testified insightfully about his alcohol problem, and he appears well on
his way toward maintaining sobriety. However, his status as a probationer generates
doubt about his security clearance worthiness, and any such doubt must be resolved in
favor of national security. (AG ¶ 2(b)) Applicant has not mitigated the alcohol
consumption security concern.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness [and] by its very nature, it calls into question a person’s
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations” (AG ¶ 30). Applicant
has a history of alcohol-related criminal conduct spanning from 2007 to 2013. He
remains on probation for his most recent offense. AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or
multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(d), “the individual is currently on parole or
probation,” apply.
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 potentially apply:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited
to . . . remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good
employment record, or constructive community involvement.
Over the past year, Applicant has received treatment with a therapist and
attended several AA sessions. His therapist gave him a positive assessment. Applicant
testified insightfully about the nature of his problem and his commitment to confronting
it. His job performance is good. These factors are sufficient to trigger the application of
AG ¶ 32(d).
Applicant remains on supervised probation, and he remains closely monitored,
as his ability to start his car is restricted by an ignition interlock device, and his license is
restricted to travel to and from work and to medically necessary appointments. These
are serious restrictions and are still in place as part of his probation that has yet to
expire. Moreover, this most recent offense occurred not only after Applicant completed
his security clearance application, but after he underwent his subject interview. The
crime itself was significant, as Applicant’s blood/alcohol level exceeded .20 percent, he
could not remember getting behind the wheel of his car, and he collided with a police
car. Under these circumstances, AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply.
7
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
There is a significant presence of rehabilitation. However, it is outweighed by the
nature, seriousness, and recency of the latest offense. Under these circumstances, it is
not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
In reaching this decision, I was particularly concerned about Applicant’s history of
alcohol-related driving offenses, as his job duties include driving.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                            
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
8
