 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01488 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 19, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 3, 2014, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 18, 2014. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
September 26, 2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 15, 2014. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through J, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until 
October 27, 2014, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. He submitted AE 
K, which was admitted into evidence without objection.1 DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on October 24, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all the allegations in SOR, except he partially admitted ¶¶ 1.f 
and 1.g. I have incorporated his admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 40 years old. He immigrated to the United States in 1990 and 
became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 2009. He was enrolled in an online 
college from 2001 to 2004 and received a bachelor’s degree. He married in 2005 and 
has two children ages seven and four.2  
 
Applicant began having financial problems in 2010 when his youngest child was 
born. The child and his wife had costly medical problems through 2014. Applicant had 
costly medical insurance premiums. Once his family met the deductible the insurance 
covered 80%, and he was required to pay the remaining 20%. In 2012 he paid $3,818; 
in 2013 he paid $4,130; and in 2014 he paid $3,449 for out-of-pocket medical expenses. 
Applicant’s family’s medical needs impacted his finances. He stated he has a health 
saving plan, but with all of the medical needs it was depleted quickly.3  
 
Applicant stated he began contacting his creditors and paying his debts in 2013 
and 2014. He explained it took time, but he realized he had a duty and responsibility to 
pay his debts. He paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($50), 1.b ($66), 1.c ($180) and 1.d 
($28) in May 2014. He disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($42), believing it was a billing 
error. He contacted the creditor and it was removed from his credit report.4 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($23,984) is a credit card debt. Applicant stated he 
stopped making payments on the debt about three years ago because of financial 
difficulties. He attempted to negotiate a payment plan but the original creditor would not 
accept it. He contacted the collection company, and it accepted a payment plan of 
$29.50 a month. Applicant’s cumulative previous monthly payment total is $1,239. The 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is a post-hearing request that the record be held open. I granted the request. Included 
in Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s email forwarding Applicant’s email. Department Counsel had 
no objection to the submission. Hearing Exhibit II is my response to the parties. 
 
2 Tr. 96. 
 
3 Tr. 22-31. 
 
4 Tr. 31-41; GE 3 page 8; AE B, C, E, J. 
 
3 
 
 
payment agreement is in effect until November 30, 2016, at which time the account will 
be reviewed. The current balance owed is $23,689. He estimated that the principal 
owed on the card was originally about $17,000 to $18,000.5  
 
Applicant purchased a house in 2006. He obtained a three-year adjustable rate 
interest-only loan. He was aware that the monthly payment could increase when the 
rate was adjusted. The purchase price of the house was $245,000. He had to obtain two 
loans on the house to cover the purchase price. The first mortgage was for $196,000 
and the second mortgage was for $49,000. His monthly combined mortgage payment 
was $1,450. Three years later the adjustable rate increased and the monthly mortgage 
payment increased to $1,900. Applicant stated he could not afford to make the 
payments. Applicant contacted an attorney to assist him in obtaining a loan 
modification. He was advised it was a long process. He was told to stop making the 
monthly mortgage payments. He stopped making the payments sometime in 2009. He 
continued to pay the home owner’s association fees of $290 a month. In August 2014, 
Applicant’s began a probationary payment plan for a loan modification. He is required to 
pay $904 a month for three months. After he completes the plan the lender will modify 
the loan and the new payment will likely be close to the probationary amount.6  
 
Applicant was questioned about the current status of his house. He stated he no 
longer lives in the house that he is attempting to obtain the loan modification. Instead he 
now rents that house to tenants. The rental income from the house is $1,200 a month. 
He uses the rental money to pay the $904 for the modified mortgage loan payment and 
the $290 for homeowner’s association fees. He moved his family several months ago to 
a larger house where he pays $2,150 a month, which is $250 more than he was to pay 
when his original mortgage was adjusted. He stated he felt he needed to move his 
family because he was concerned the house would be foreclosed, and he would not 
have a place for them to live. He intends to remain in his present rental residence and 
retain the other house to use as a rental property. Applicant indicated his attorney told 
him he could move out and rent what was previously his primary residence. He does not 
know if the mortgage company is aware that the loan is now for a business property.7 
 
From sometime in 2009 or early 2010 until August 2014, Applicant did not make 
any mortgage payments. He stated he used the money to pay other bills. He has about 
$5,000 to $6,000 in savings. In August 2013 he took his family on a trip to Pakistan to 
see his parents for a month. He supports his parents who live part-time in Pakistan. The 
other six months of the year, his parents reside with him in the United States, and he 
pays all of their living expenses. He pays their medical bills while they are in the United 
States. His wife is not employed outside their home.8  
                                                          
5 Tr. 41-44; AE A.  
 
6 Tr. 48-70, 91-95. 
 
7 Tr. 48-70, 77, 91-95. 
 
8 Tr. 48-76, 90-91. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant provided an email after the hearing that stated: “Besides above 
mentioned medical bills, in 2010 we’ve also invested approximately $10,000 in an online 
business [name of business] which turned out to be a failure and we lost all our 
investment.”9 
 
When Applicant began working for his present employer in 2007, he earned 
approximately $70,000. He received incremental pay increases of $1,000 annually since 
then. Applicant’s current annual income is approximately $77,000. He received a bonus 
in December 2013 of about $6,000 to $7,000. He also received a 2013 federal income 
tax refund of about $4,000. He believed this amount was consistent with previous tax 
year refunds.10  
 
Applicant stated he stopped using general credit cards and only uses a debit 
card. He has two department store credit cards that each have a $1,500 balance. He 
used them recently to purchase furniture. His payments have not started yet because 
he made the purchases only a week ago.11  
 
Applicant has a $40,000 government student loan and a $20,000 private student 
loan. He stated he has been paying the private student loan for four years and recently 
began paying the government student loan.12  
 
Applicant stated that in the past he mismanaged his finances, but now he is living 
within his means and has made progress with his finances. He believes based on 
cutting down on expenses he can now afford to pay all of his bills. He also stated he 
saves the bonuses he receives from work and uses them for other things. He stated he 
is more diligent about how he spends his money.13  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
9 AE K. 
 
10 Tr. 61, 80-85, 93-94. 
 
11 Tr. 44-48. 
 
12 Tr. 88-89. 
 
13 Tr. 78-79, 96. 
 
5 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
6 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay for several 
years. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debts which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant paid the small debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d. He makes minimal 
payments for the large consumer debt he owes in SOR ¶ 1.g. He disputed the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.e, and it was removed from his credit report. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(e) apply to 
these debts.  
 
 Applicant’s family had medical expenses that affected his finances. However, the 
biggest impact on his finances was when his mortgage payment increased when the 
interest rate was adjusted upward. He could not afford to pay the $450 increase and 
sought a loan modification. Applicant’s family’s medical expenses were beyond his 
 
7 
 
 
control. The increase in his mortgage was not beyond his control because he was 
aware when he secured an interest-only adjustable rate loan that the payments could 
increase. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b) Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant did not make any payments on the house he was 
living in for more than four years. He essentially lived in the house for free for that time. 
He used his mortgage payment to pay his other bills. He took a trip to Pakistan with his 
family, and he provided financial support for his parents. He no longer lives in the house 
because he moved to a bigger house where the monthly rental payment is $2,150, 
which is more than what he was to pay when the original monthly mortgage payment 
increased. He is now using the house as a rental property. Over the four years of not 
paying anything for housing, Applicant had approximately a $69,000 financial windfall. 
He could not explain where all the money was spent, except as noted above. He 
provided information that he invested $10,000 in 2010 in a business that later failed. It is 
unclear why he could not afford the increase in his mortgage payments, but he could 
afford to make a $10,000 investment. He did not explain where he obtained the 
investment money or why he did not use it to repay his large consumer debt or to 
resolve his delinquent mortgage loan. AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies. Applicant is still 
resolving his mortgage debt. His actions raise concerns about his judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply.  
 
 I am unable to conclude that there are clear indications Applicant’s financial 
problems are resolved or are under control. He had $1,450 extra each month for more 
than four years to pay his expenses and debts because he was not paying for housing. 
Now he is living in a more expensive home with substantially the same income. AG ¶ 
20(c) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 40 years old. Due to his family’s medical problems he incurred 
substantial medical expenses that impacted his finances. Of greater impact was when 
his adjustable rate mortgage payment increased. Applicant stopped paying his 
mortgage and instead used the funds to pay other debts, support his parents, and take 
an international trip. He also invested $10,000 in 2010 in a business that failed. 
Applicant’s actions raise questions about his trustworthiness, reliability, and good 
judgment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
