 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-00766 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 5, 2013, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On April 25, 2014, the Department of Defense 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 13, 2014. Applicant admitted all 
five allegations. Applicant requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of 
a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
On July 31, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant 
on August 4, 2014. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on August 11, 2014. 
Applicant filed a response to the FORM within the 30-day time allowed that would have 
expired on September 10, 2014. I received the case assignment on November 10, 
2014. Based upon a review of the complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old and has never been married. He works for a defense 
contractor. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant has five delinquent debts listed in the SOR. They total $14,615. 
Applicant admitted all five financial allegations. He repaid one debt and the amount now 
delinquent is $13,189. (Items 1-6)  
 
 Applicant owes a retail store $621 (Subparagraph 1.a). This financial obligation 
became delinquent in May 2013. There is no evidence Applicant made any attempt to 
repay it.  This debt is not paid and is not resolved. (Items 1-5) 
 
 Applicant owes a department store $610 (Subparagraph 1.b) since July 2008. 
This debt is unpaid and not resolved. (Items 1-5) 
 
 Applicant owes a lending institution $8,597 on a repossessed automobile 
(Subparagraph 1.c) since December 2013. This debt is not repaid and is unresolved. 
(Items 1-5) 
 
 Applicant owed a credit union $1,426 on a credit card (Subparagraph 1.d) from 
July 2011. Applicant submitted a letter from the lender that this debt was paid on or 
before May 14, 2014. This debt is resolved. (Items 1-5, Answer with attachments) 
 
 Applicant owes another credit card issuer $3,361 (Subparagraph 1.e) since July 
2008. This debt is not paid and is unresolved. (Items 1-5) 
 
 Applicant claimed in his Answer that he would attempt to establish installment 
payment plans. However, he did not submit any documents showing any efforts to 
arrange such payment agreements. (Answer) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
           Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He did not submit any character references or other evidence tending 
to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2008 to the present, Applicant accumulated five delinquent debts, totaling 
$14,615. Applicant finally resolved one of the debts, so his outstanding financial 
delinquencies total $13,189. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties.  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
  
Applicant continues to owe four delinquent debts. His pattern of delinquent debts 
shows an inattention to his financial obligations. Applicant’s failure to resolve his debts 
makes AG ¶ 20(a) not applicable to his situation. His actions cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Applicant did not demonstrate any reason he could not have paid these four 
debts before the government raised a security concern. Nor did he show why he had 
not paid them or established installment payment plans prior to the filing of the SOR. He 
did not show he acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant did not present any evidence of financial counseling. He did not show 
the financial problems were under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
Applicant only repaid one delinquent debt. He has four others he has not 
resolved. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant did not submit any evidence that he had a reasonable basis to contest 
any of the delinquent debts. He did not present any evidence he took any action to 
resolve the four remaining debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
There is no affluence demonstrated by Applicant that would apply as a mitigating 
condition. AG ¶ 20(f) does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. Applicant exhibited a lack of appropriate judgment by failing to pay 
his debts.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
     _________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
