1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00435
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina Marine,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On April 11, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under  Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
(DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 12, 2014. A notice of
hearing was issued on September 19, 2014, scheduling the hearing for October 30,
2014.  Government Exhibits (GX) 1-2 were admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified, and submitted Applicant Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted without
objection. The transcript was received on November 7, 2014.  Based on a review of the
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
2
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts
relating to Pakistan. The request and the attached documents are included in the
record as HE I. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Facts,
below.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and
1.b, with explanations.
Applicant was born in Pakistan in July 1968. While in Pakistan, he attended
university, receiving an undergraduate degree with a major in statistics and economics.
He immigrated to the United States in March 1992 based on a petition for asylum.
Applicant became a naturalized citizen in July 2001. He married his wife, who is also a
naturalized U.S. citizen from Laos. (GX 1) He has three children who are U.S. citizens.
Applicant has been employed with his current employer, as a computer analyst, since
July 2000. (GX 1) This is his first request for a security clearance with the DOD.  
The SOR alleges foreign influence security concerns because of Applicant’s
mother and six siblings. They are citizens and residents of Pakistan. (GX 1)
Applicant’s mother, who is approximately 80, is a citizen and resident of
Pakistan.  She retired as a teacher. Applicant contacts his mother once a week by
phone. She is quite ill and does not know  the nature of Applicant’s work in the United
States. Applicant sends his mother money on a holiday as a gift. (Tr. 39) His mother
has no connection with the government of Pakistan.
Applicant has six siblings who are citizens and residents of Pakistan. He has four
brothers and two sisters. Applicant maintains contact with his brothers by telephone. He
states that the frequency is about one to two times a year for holidays. (Tr.45) None of
Applicant’s brothers have any connection with the government of Pakistan. Applicant’s
two sisters are stay-at-home mothers. (Tr. 49) 
Shortly before Applicant’s father died in 2002, Applicant visited him for two
weeks. He stayed with his parents in their home. That was his last visit to Pakistan. He
has no plans to return at this time. (Tr. 21)
Applicant’s family has not visited him in the United States. (Tr. 52) Applicant
does not maintain contact with any extended family members in Pakistan.  Nor does he
maintain any contact with friends or former students. (Tr. 36)
Applicant and his wife purchased a home in 2003 in the United States. He
believes the value of the home is approximately $800,000. He  has a car and bank
3
savings accounts. He earns approximately $90,000 annually. (Tr. 106) Applicant has no
assets or property in Pakistan. (GX 2) He has a 401(k) valued at about $30,000.
Applicant submitted eight letters of recommendation from various managers and
coworkers. Each attests to his leadership skills, dependability, and ethics. His current
manager states that Applicant is greatly respected within the program. He is
knowledgeable and mentors and trains others. Applicant’s judgment and decisions are
in line with company and program policies. (AX A) He would work to resolve any issues
of conflict with his employers.
Applicant emphasized that his parents are honest people who taught him to be
honest and to work hard. Applicant has worked in many jobs that did not employ his
complete skills but he continued to be promoted and has worked very hard and gained
many promotions. He also pursued his studies while working full-time. His work
evaluations have always been either exceptional or outstanding. (Tr.17; AX A)
Applicant is involved in his community through the sports that his sons play. He
takes an active part in their extra-curricular activities. Applicant was credible when he
stated that the United States is his home. This is where he wants to live for the rest of
his life with his wife and children. (Tr. 22) He has been with his company for many years
and he wants to help them. He enjoys his work and wants to provide a service to the
U.S. Government.
Administrative Notice
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic with a population of more than 167
million people. After September 11, 2001, Pakistan supported the United States and an
international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom to remove the Taliban from
power in Afghanistan. Despite this support, members of the Taliban are known to be in
the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan, the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
(Kpk), and in the Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and Pakistan.
The Taliban, Lashkar e-Tayyiba (LT), the Haqqani Network, and al Qaida
operate in Pakistan, and in some instances elements of the Pakistan government may
be covertly aiding these terrorist or anti-U.S. entities. Taliban financing has been traced
from Pakistan to Afghanistan, allowing the insurgency in Afghanistan to  strengthen its
military and technical capabilities. It is likely that in November 2008 it was responsible
for the attack in Mumbai, which caused numerous casualties. The Haqqani Network
attacked the U.S. Embassy in Kabul in September 2011. Pakistan has intensified its
counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for dealing with militants has been mixed.
The U.S. Department of State has defined several areas of Pakistan to be
terrorist safe havens. The security situation in Pakistan worsened in 2008, driven in part
by insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous
Afghanistan-Pakistan border. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide
vital sanctuary to al Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist
4
groups. Al Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the
Afghanistan insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and
Western interests in Pakistan and worldwide. Together with the Pakistan Taliban and
other extremist groups, Al Qaida uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan
and prepare regional and transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain
equipment and supplies. Al Qaida and its extremists have waged a campaign of
destabilizing suicide attacks throughout Pakistan. The attacks targeted high profile
government, military, and western-related sites. Nearly 1,000 individuals were killed in
2008 due to such attacks. In the last three months of 2009, terrorists based in Pakistan
conducted at least 40 suicide terrorist attacks in major cities of Pakistan and killed
about 600 Pakistan civilians and security personnel. 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to
Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Since 2007, several American citizens present in
Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other reasons. The human rights situation
in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial killings, torture, and disappearances occur.
Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police corruption is widespread, and the Pakistan
Government maintains several domestic intelligence agencies to monitor politicians,
political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign intelligence
agents. Credible reports indicate that authorities use wiretaps and monitor mail,
phones, and electronic messages without the requisite court approval. In addition,
Pakistan continues to develop its own nuclear infrastructure, expand nuclear weapon
stockpiles, and seek more advanced warhead and delivery systems. In the aftermath of
Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, the United States cutoff military aid to
Pakistan for several years.
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan became allied with the United States in
counterterrorism. Pakistan committed to elimination of terrorist camps on the
Afghanistan-Pakistan border and sent thousands of troops and sustained hundreds of
casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency efforts and  
demonstrated determination and persistence in combating militants. The United States
is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster Pakistan’s military forces and security. In
2003, President Bush announced that the United States would provide Pakistan with $3
billion in economic and military aid over the next fiver years beginning in 2005.
On May 1, 2011, U.S. special operations personnel raided a large compound in
Pakistan and killed Osama bin Laden, the leader of al Qaida. The raid raised concerns
that the Pakistan government had knowingly permitted terrorists, militants, and
insurgents to find safe havens in Pakistan.
As of August 2014, the U.S. State Department continued to warn U.S. citizens to
defer all non-essential travel to Pakistan, as the presence of several foreign and
indigenous terrorist groups poses a potential danger to U.S. citizens throughout
Pakistan.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
5
. Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline B (Foreign Influence)
The security concern under Guideline B is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
A disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). A
disqualifying condition also may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group,
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶
7(b).
Applicant’s mother and siblings are citizens and residents of Pakistan. Applicant
maintains contact with them. Security concerns could arise in connection with the
potential that hostile forces might seek protected information from Applicant by
threatening harm to his extended family. Based on this evidence, AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b)
are raised.
Since the Government produced evidence to raise  disqualifying conditions in AG
¶¶ 7(a) and (b) the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of
7
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the
Government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it,
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States,
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is
associated with a risk of terrorism.
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Pakistan
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or
his mother and siblings living in Pakistan, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out
such a possibility in the future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct
intelligence activities as effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Pakistan
has a significant problem with terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with his mother and
siblings create a potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently
close to raise a security concern abut his desire to assist family members in those
countries by providing sensitive information. 
Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.”  AG ¶ 8(a). The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well
as each individual family tie must be considered.  ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App.
Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) can mitigate concerns when “there is no
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(c) can
mitigate if “contact of communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation.” 
8
AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant’s mother and siblings do
not know the nature of Applicant’s work. He keeps in touch with them by phone. He
talks to his mother more than his siblings. His loyalty and connections to his family living
in Pakistan are positive character traits. However, for security clearance purposes,
those same connections negate the possibility of mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), and
Applicant failed to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his
relationships with relatives living in Pakistan] could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation.”
AG ¶ 8(b) applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant
connections to the United States. He has lived in the United States since 1992 and was
given asylum. He married his spouse in 1995. She is a naturalized citizen. Applicant
has three children who are U.S. citizens.  He is a family man who wants to provide for
his family in the United States. When Applicant took an oath and swore allegiance to
the United States when he became a naturalized U.S. citizen, he manifested his
patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States over all other countries. 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the
potential conflict of interest created by his relationship with his family living in Pakistan.
He communicates with his mother by phone once a month or more and with his siblings
once or twice a year. There is no evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the
Pakistan government or those conducting espionage have approached or threatened
Applicant, or his family. As such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant or his
family living in Pakistan would be specifically selected as targets for improper coercion
or exploitation. Of course, the primary risk to his family living in Pakistan is from
terrorists and other lawless elements and not the Pakistan Government.
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his mother and siblings living in Pakistan are
significant. He is close to his mother and does sometimes communicate with his
siblings by phone. Still, he has not been to Pakistan since his father’s illness.
Applicant’s connections to the United States are strong.  He has no desire to return to
Pakistan.  He is committed to his personal and professional life in the United States. His
wife and three children are U.S. citizens who live with him in the United States. There is
substantial mitigation in this case. Applicant spoke about his undivided loyalty to the
United States.  His connections to the United States heavily outweigh his connections
to his family in Pakistan. He has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties
in the United States that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor
of the United States. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated under Guideline
B.  Even if security concerns are not mitigated under Guideline B, they are mitigated
under the whole-person concept, infra.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
9
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen. He is an educated man, who lives with his wife
and three children in the United States. His immediate family resides in the United
States with him.  His financial assets are in the United States. Applicant has strong
personal and professional ties to the United States..
 A Guideline B decision concerning Pakistan must take into consideration the
geopolitical situation and dangers there. The country is dangerous because of violence
from terrorists and other lawless elements Terrorists continue to threaten Pakistan, the
interests of the United States, and those who cooperate and assist the United States.
Pakistan does not fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many
instances. The United States and Pakistan are allies in the war on terrorism. Pakistan
and the United States have close relationships in diplomacy and trade. They also have
profound policy disputes.
 Applicant’s mother and siblings are citizens and residents of Pakistan. Even
though he does not travel to Pakistan (except for his father’s terminal illness), he
maintains contact with them. His connections to his family in Pakistan make Applicant
more vulnerable as a target of coercion by lawless elements in Pakistan. His family in
Pakistan will be at a greater risk if his clearance is granted. They have no knowledge of
Applicant’s work. However, his primary duty is to his own wife and children who are
U.S. citizens. He will not travel back to Pakistan. He will seek advice to resolve any
issues that may arise in the future with the help of his employer. For all these reasons,
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under foreign influence.  
10
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
