 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00759 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 25, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudication Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG). 
 
Applicant submitted an undated answer to the SOR, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was originally assigned to another 
administrative judge, but was reassigned to me on August 21, 2014. The Defense Office 
 
2 
 
 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 26, 2014, 
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on October 9, 2014. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel’s exhibit list was marked as HE I. Applicant testified and offered 
exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted into the record without objection. The 
record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information, and he submitted 
AE G through K, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 20, 2014.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to conform to the proof after 
resting his case and right before closing argument. He moved to amend by adding an 
allegation that Applicant failed to pay federal taxes owed for various years between 
2005 and 2010 (no specific years were stated). At hearing, I denied the motion 
indicating that the Government was well aware of the non-payments at the time the 
SOR was drafted and had ample information at the time to allege the non-payments in 
the SOR.1 I have reconsidered my ruling and will allow the amendment. The additional 
or new SOR allegation will be numbered ¶ 1.b. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR (Answer), he admitted the allegation listed in 
the SOR. During his hearing testimony, he also admitted owing the IRS for federal taxes 
he failed to pay for various years. Those admissions are adopted as findings of fact. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He is married and has three adult children and one 
adult stepchild. He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since 
August 2007. He attended high school, but did not graduate. He served in the Air 
National Guard for two different states for a combined 18 years before being medically 
discharged in 2007. He has held a security clearance since 1991.2  
  
 The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to file his federal tax returns for the period 
2005 through 2010. Additionally, he owed federal taxes in an undetermined amount for 
some of those tax years (estimated amount was approximately $42,000). These 
allegations are supported by Applicant’s admissions in his security clearance application 
and his Answer.3  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 43-44. 
 
2 Tr. at 5; GE 1. 
 
3 GE 1; Answer. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant explained in his April 2013 security clearance application that he had 
no excuse for not filing his federal tax returns. He just failed to do so for the period 
alleged. He was contacted by the IRS in 2012 and proceeded to file federal tax returns 
for all the years he previously failed to file returns. As of the hearing date, he has filed 
all his tax returns for all years required, including 2013, and provided documentation of 
the same. There is no issue concerning his state tax returns.4 
 
 Applicant entered into a payment agreement with the IRS whereby he would pay 
$800 monthly toward his total tax debt. He supplied written documentation showing that 
from May 2012 through January 2014 he made his monthly payments, which totaled 
approximately $16,800. The IRS also captured several years’ worth of Applicant’s tax 
refunds and applied them toward his debt. Because there was some confusion with his 
on-line payment entries and whether they were being credited to the correct year’s 
taxes, he entered a second agreement with the IRS in March 2014 to pay $600 monthly. 
This amount is being deducted right out of his bank account every month. He is current 
on his payment plan to the IRS. He believes he still owes approximately $30,000 to the 
IRS. He intends to pay his tax obligations in full.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 30, 32-33; GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. at 18, 20, 22, 26, 36; GE 2; AE A-K. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant did not file his federal tax returns as required and he has delinquent 
federal tax debts that remain unpaid. I find all the disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 Applicant’s tax debts are recent and remain unresolved. He has made strides to 
address his tax obligations, in particular, filing his federal tax returns and making regular 
monthly payments to the IRS. Despite his recent efforts, his past actions reflect his bad 
judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness during the five year period when he failed 
to file his tax returns. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies. Applicant 
had no good reason not to file his federal tax returns or pay the taxes owed. AG ¶ 20(b) 
does not apply. Although Applicant presented no evidence of financial counseling, there 
is evidence that Applicant has filed all his missing tax returns and is making steady 
payments on his tax debt. Yet, he did not address his tax issue until he was notified by 
the IRS. I find AG ¶ 20(c) applies to SOR ¶ 1.b, but not to SOR ¶ 1.a. AG ¶ 20(d) does 
not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
6 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
service. I also considered his efforts to file all his federal taxes and make monthly 
payments toward his federal tax debt. On the other hand, I considered that Applicant 
disregarded his responsibilities to file and pay federal taxes for an extended period of 
time and it was only after the IRS contacted him that he took action.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   1.a:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
