 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-00110 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant paid most of her former child support arrearage, but demonstrated no 
progress toward resolving five other delinquent debts totaling $8,758. Applicant did not 
mitigate resulting trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
On June 14, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 14, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, 
dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
  
 
2 
 
 
On May 9, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 3.) On July 25, 2014, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) mailed Applicant a complete copy 
of the FORM on July 31, 2014. Applicant received the FORM on August 7, 2014, and 
was provided 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. She submitted no additional material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
during that time; made no objection to consideration of any contents of the FORM; and 
did not request additional time to respond. On September 25, 2014, DOHA assigned the 
case to me.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling $9,108. In her response to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted the truth of the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f. 
She denied the $576 collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d because she did not know 
what it was for. She also denied owing the $350 arrearage in child support payments 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, and provided documentation showing that she had paid the past-
due balance down to $45.54 as of May 9, 2014. (Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant is 31 years old and has been married since July 2010. She has four 
children. Three of them, ages 13, 7, and 4, live with Applicant and her husband. Her 12-
year-old son lives elsewhere, and she has been ordered to pay $65 per month for child 
support. She graduated from high school in 2001, and took some courses from a 
technical college in 2004 and 2005. She reported being employed in various jobs for 
about five of the ten years before obtaining her current employment in May 2013. (Item 
4.)  
 
 Applicant admitted owing a total of $7,700 toward three delinquent student loan 
debts, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. They were placed for collection in May 
2007. She said that she initially did not intend to repay these debts because she had 
personal issues with the school, but later began making $50 monthly payments after 
encountering trouble obtaining housing and admission to other schools due to her 
debts. She provided neither proof of such payments, nor updated information on 
delinquent balances due. She also said that she was no longer making payments 
toward these debts in her answer to the SOR. The delinquencies alleged in the SOR 
are based on her June 27, 2013 credit report. These debts remain unresolved. (Item 3; 
Item 4; Item 5.)  
 
 The $576 delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was placed for collection in 
February 2008. Applicant said that she does not recognize the debt, or know what it 
was for. She provided no documented basis to dispute the legitimacy of this debt, which 
was reported by all three reporting agencies on her June 27, 2013 credit report. This 
debt is not resolved. (Item 3; Item 5.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant disclosed a $582 arrearage in her court-ordered child support 
payments in her June 2013 e-QIP.1 After beginning her current employment, she (or her 
employer) made regular payments toward this debt, reducing the balance due to $45.54 
as of May 1, 2014. Applicant said, in her answer to the SOR, that she would pay that 
amount but she provided no proof of having done so. This delinquent debt has been 
significantly, but not totally, resolved. (Item 3; Item 4; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the $482 delinquent telephone debt, alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.f, that was placed for collection in August 2009. She said that she originally had no 
plans to pay it, since she considered it excessive and incorrect. In her e-QIP she said 
that she intended to pay it as soon as she was able to, and in her answer to the SOR 
she said that she was in the process of settling it after becoming aware of the impact it 
had on her ability to obtain credit. She provided no evidence of payments or other effort 
toward its resolution, however. It remains unresolved. (Item 3; Item 4 at 41-42; Item 5.) 
 
 The record contains no information concerning Applicant’s current income and 
regular expenses, from which her ability to avoid incurring additional delinquent debt 
could be predicted. It also lacks evidence concerning the quality of her professional 
performance, the level of responsibility her duties entail, or her track record with respect 
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. No character 
witnesses described her judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was unable 
to evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have 
her case decided without a hearing.   
  
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense 
contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ 
C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
                                                          
1
 This delinquent debt was alleged in the amount of $350 in SOR ¶ 1.e based on the Item 5 credit report. 
 
4 
 
 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt over the past decade or more, 
much of which she incurred despite the fact that she could not afford to pay it. This 
evidence raises security concerns under both of these conditions, thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts arose over many years, and more than $8,800 in delinquencies 
continue at present without any apparent means of resolution. She did not show that the 
debts arose from conditions beyond her control, or that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. She has received no counseling to assist with debt resolution, nor did 
she demonstrate an ability to avoid recurrence of financial problems. All of the SOR-
 
6 
 
 
alleged debts remain partially or totally unresolved, on the basis of record evidence, and 
no documented basis to dispute the legitimacy of any of them was provided. Applicant 
therefor failed to establish mitigation of trustworthiness concerns under AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
through 20(e).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual who is 
accountable for the decisions and choices that led to her financial difficulties. She 
initially planned to ignore most of her voluntarily-incurred delinquent debts, and provided 
minimal evidence of efforts to resolve them despite more recent statements of intent to 
do so. She failed to demonstrate good judgment or permanent behavioral change. Her 
ongoing delinquent debts establish continuing potential for pressure, coercion, or 
duress, and make continuation of financial problems likely.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant did not meet her burden to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
arising from her ongoing financial situation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs   1.a through 1.f:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
