 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-00346 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Since 2007 Applicant accumulated over $286,250 of delinquent debts, including 
two judgments and a $163,000 mortgage. They remain unresolved. She presented 
evidence that she filed her 2012 Federal income tax return, thereby mitigating that 
allegation. She failed to rebut or mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Her eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
On July 8, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 18, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On May 5, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR (Response) in writing and elected 
to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 2, 2014, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM),1 and mailed 
Applicant a complete copy on July 9, 2014. Applicant received the FORM on September 
24, 2014, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. On October 7, 2014, Department Counsel confirmed receipt of additional 
materials submitted by Applicant. They included a letter and attachments which I 
marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, and eight exhibits that are marked as AE 1 
through 8. Department Counsel had no objection to these exhibits. They are admitted 
into the record. On October 20, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me.   
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Contained in the FORM is Department Counsel’s Motion to Amend the SOR to 
strike all references to a security clearance, and instead insert references to a position 
of public trust. According to the case file, Applicant applied for a public trust position and 
not a security clearance. Applicant did not file an objection to the Motion and the 
amendment is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Paragraph 1 of the SOR contains 20 allegations. In her Response Applicant 
admitted all allegations, except that in Paragraph 1.a, relating to the failure to file a 2012 
Federal income tax return. (Item 3.) Her admissions are incorporated into the findings 
below. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and was divorced in 2002. She has two children from 
that marriage. Since October 2009 she has worked as a contract mail carrier for the 
U.S. Postal Service. In July 2013 she began a position with a health care company, 
which is sponsoring her for a public trust position. She stated that she works over 90 
hours a week. She also works as a personal trainer. (Items 3, 4.)   
   
 From 1992 to August 2009, Applicant was self-employed as a general contractor 
in the housing industry. Until her divorce in 2002, she and her former husband jointly 
owned the business. She subsequently used monies from her divorce settlement to 
establish a business in real estate development. She continued to purchase properties, 
intending to build custom homes on them. Her business was profitable until the real 
estate recession began around 2007, at which time the properties rapidly decreased in 
                                                          
1The Government submitted eight items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 6 is a copy of the Subject 
Interview from the Office of Personnel Management Report of Investigation (Report) for which 
Department Counsel offered no authenticating evidence, and which Applicant did not adopt. Department 
Counsel provided Applicant an opportunity to revise or correct any of the information contained in the 
Report, or object to its introduction into evidence. Applicant did not respond to that opportunity in her 
subsequent Response to the FORM.  Directive ¶ E3.1.20 requires that the Report be authenticated in 
order to be received and considered.  Since it was neither authenticated nor adopted by Applicant, Item 6 
is excluded from evidence in this case and will not be considered. 
 
3 
 
 
value and started her financial problems. She later sold all investment properties, her 
home, and personal items in order to support herself and children. (Item 3, AE A.) She 
submitted documents confirming that she and her former husband had a successful 
business, and that she continued the success and maintained a good credit rating for a 
couple years after the divorce. (AE 2 to 6.)    
  
 On July 15, 2014, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. She went to 
court on August 21, 2014, and anticipated that a discharge of the delinquent debts 
would occur within 60 to 90 days. She participated in credit counseling courses as a 
pre-requisite for filing bankruptcy. (AE A, 7.) In response to the status of the delinquent 
debts Applicant listed on her July 2013 e-QIP, Applicant stated she intended to file 
bankruptcy within the next month to resolve them. (Item 4.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) dated July 17, 2013, and July 2, 2014, 
the SOR alleged 19 delinquent debts that totaled $286,250, and included two 
judgments, and a $163,166 mortgage. The debts began accumulating between 
February 2009 and June 2014. All 19 delinquent debts remain unresolved. The SOR 
also alleged that Applicant did not file her 2012 Federal income tax return. (Items 5, 7.)  
Applicant provided evidence that she filed the return late, on February 28, 2014, and 
reported an adjusted gross income of $26,949. (Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant did not submit a Personal Financial Statement regarding the current 
status of her finances. Nor did she provide any evidence of her work performance.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense 
contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ 
C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
 
4 
 
 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Since 2007 Applicant has been accumulating delinquent debts that she has been 
unable or unwilling to satisfy. She also failed to timely file her 2012 Federal income tax 
return. The evidence raises the above security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in 2007, the bulk of which 
remain unresolved. She did not provide sufficient information to demonstrate that such 
 
6 
 
 
problems are unlikely to continue or recur, calling into question her reliability and 
trustworthiness. The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose as a consequence of the real estate 
recession that began in 2007 and continued thereafter. Those were circumstances 
beyond her control. She provided some evidence that she attempted to responsibly 
address her delinquent debts as they were accumulating by working more than one job 
and disposing of personal and real properties. Thus, AG ¶ 20(b) has partial application.    
 
 Applicant participated in credit counseling as a pre-requisite for the Chapter 7 
bankruptcy she filed in July 2014. She did not submit documentation verifying that the 
19 debts listed in the SOR are included in that bankruptcy or are resolved. Hence, AG ¶ 
20(c) has limited application, as there are not clear indications that her financial 
problems are under control. She has, however, filed her 2012 Federal income tax return 
in February 2014 and anticipated a refund. AG ¶ 20(c) has application to that allegation 
(SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant did not provide evidence that prior to filing bankruptcy, she made 
a good-faith effort to resolve any of the 19 debts, including the small debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.q for $73, 1.r for $73,  1.s for $73, and 1.t for $49, as required under AG ¶ 
20(d). Because Applicant admitted owing the 19 alleged debts, there is no evidence to 
support the application of AG ¶ 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 53-year-old divorced, 
hard-working mother of two children. Until 2007 she was a successful businesswoman, 
operating a real estate development company. As a consequence of the real estate 
recession, she experienced numerous financial problems and accumulated a significant 
 
7 
 
 
amount of debt that remains unresolved. Although she provided evidence that she filed 
a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in July 2014, she did not indicate which debts are included in 
that bankruptcy or submit evidence that she is establishing a track record of financial 
stability. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not meet her burden to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from 
her financial problems. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.t:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
