 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-01110 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 2, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86). On May 
20, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).  The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a security clearance for 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On July 22, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. On October 9, 2014, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On October 17, 2014, 
DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On October 20, 2014, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for 
November 3, 2014. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
received into evidence without objection. Applicant did not call any witnesses, testified, 
and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A(1) through AE A(31), which were received into 
evidence without objection.  
 
 I held the record open until November 14, 2014, to afford Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted AE B through 
AE D, which were received into evidence without objection. On November 12, 2014, 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted all of the allegations with explanations. 
Applicant’s answers and explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old aircraft worker, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since July 2013. He seeks a security clearance, which is a 
requirement of his continued employment. Applicant previously held a security 
clearance when he was on active duty in the U.S. Navy, discussed infra. (GE 1, Tr. 
18-19, 50.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1991. He did not pursue higher 
education, but did receive a certificate from a technical school for attending a nine-
month work-related course and also completed several service schools on active duty. 
(GE 1, Tr. 19-20.) Applicant served in the Navy from June 1991 to June 2012, except 
for a short break in service, and was honorably separated with a 20-year retirement as 
an aviation machinist mate first class (pay grade E-6). (GE 1, Tr. 24-25.) 
 
Applicant married in August 1998, and divorced in December 2007. He has two 
sons from that marriage, ages 15 and 14. Applicant’s sons are geographically distant 
from him and he pays $1,147 in monthly child support to his former spouse.  (GE 1, 
Tr. 20-23, 30-31, 38-39.) Applicant remarried in November 2013 and has a six-month-
old son. His wife works part-time as a waitress and cashier at a local restaurant. (Tr. 
23-24, 40, 51.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR contains seven separate allegations: (1) a utility collection 
account for $82; (2) an unpaid medical account for $129; (3) an unpaid medical 
account for $80; (4) a past-due mortgage account for $52,936; (5) a charged-off credit 
card account for $21,643; (6) a charged-off credit card account for $44,278; and (7) a 
credit card collection account for $29,655.   
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to his 2007 divorce wherein he was 
responsible for the mortgage, all household bills, and payments for two automobiles. 
In 2009, the base where he was stationed closed and he was transferred to a new 
duty station. Before transferring, Applicant rented his home and unfortunately his 
tenant failed to pay rent as agreed. Applicant was unable to pay for two homes on his 
E-6 salary. He remained in contact with his creditors, but did not have the money to 
pay them. (Tr. 11-12, 31-38.) 
 
In late 2010 to early 2011, Applicant consulted and retained a bankruptcy 
attorney. Applicant paid the attorney an upfront $1,300 fee; however, the attorney 
never filed his bankruptcy petition, kept his money, and has since gone out of 
business. (Tr. 12, 26-28, 40-43, 51-52.) Applicant then filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy pro 
per in 2014 and was awarded a discharge on October 30, 2014. (Tr. 43-45.) Applicant 
paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. The remaining SOR debts were discharged 
in bankruptcy. (SOR answer, Tr. 28-30, 49, 53-54, AE B, AE C.)  
 
Applicant completed the required credit counseling for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
(AE B.) He is current on his federal income taxes. (Tr. 45-47.) His budget reflects that 
he is current on his monthly bills and lives within his means. Applicant has a net 
monthly remainder of $854 and this does not include $300 he sets aside in savings 
every month. (Tr. 47-49, AE D.) 
  
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant provided enlisted performance evaluations covering his 20 years of 
naval service as well as numerous awards. His 20 years of service reflects sustained 
above average performance. Applicant also submitted a reference letter from his 
current supervisor. His supervisor stated that Applicant is a very valued and trusted 
employee, who is making a significant contribution to the defense industry. His 
supervisor strongly recommended Applicant for a security clearance. (AE A.) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
 
4 
 
 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
 
5 
 
 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant’s 2007 divorce, 2009 
transfer and tenant problems, and subsequent financial fallout could not have been 
anticipated. He was saddled with all of the marital debt and required to pay his former 
spouse $1,147 in monthly child support.  As noted above, Applicant has paid or 
otherwise resolved all of his debts and has made substantial progress in regaining 
financial responsibility.1  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable. It is clear that Applicant benefited from the financial 
counseling available through the bankruptcy process and his financial situation is on 
the mend. Applicant’s budget demonstrates that he living within his means. Having 
paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c, Applicant is able to receive full credit for those 
debts under AG ¶ 20(d). The remaining debts were lawfully discharged under Chapter 
7 bankruptcy and are resolved.  AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 
7 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s 20 years of honorable naval service and employment with a 
defense contractor weigh heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a 
productive member of society. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within 
his means, and his SOR debts have been addressed. The Appeal Board has 
addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept 
of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Applicant’s debts have been paid or resolved through bankruptcy. Due to 
circumstances beyond his control, his debts became delinquent. He would have filed 
bankruptcy sooner in 2010 or 2011 had his bankruptcy attorney not abandoned him. 
With his financial situation in dire straits and having lost his retainer, Applicant chose 
to “go it alone.” Despite his financial setback as a result of a contentious and costly 
divorce and financial costs associated with a transfer, it is clear from Applicant’s 
actions that he is on the road to a full financial recovery. These factors show 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s years of financial 
responsibility before falling into debt, the circumstances that led to his financial 
difficulties, his financial recovery and steps he has taken to resolve his financial 
situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, the mature and 
 
8 
 
 
responsible manner in which he dealt with his situation, his 20 years of naval service, 
his reference letter, and his testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the 
whole-person, I conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
