1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 14-01253
)
)
Applicant for Position of Trust )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s financial delinquencies stem from a failed business in the mid-2000s,
and a major health problem followed by a marital separation in 2010. Applicant has
made some progress reducing his delinquencies. However, in light of his failure to
execute a Chapter 13 bankruptcy order in 2007 and the amount of the unresolved
delinquencies, he has not made enough progress for me to conclude that he has
mitigated the trustworthiness concern. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an automatic data
processing (ADP) position is denied.
Statement of the Case
On May 22, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
2
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as
amended, and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006.
Applicant answered the SOR on June 20, 2014, admitting the allegations and
requesting a decision on the written record.  On July 21, 2014, Department Counsel
prepared a File of Relevant Materials (FORM). Applicant received the FORM on August
4, 2014, and submitted a reply on September 5, 2014. The case was assigned to me on
September 17, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 53-year-old man with two adult children. He has been separated
from his current spouse since September 2010. (Item 5 at 16) Three previous marriages
ended in divorce. The extent of Applicant’s education is unknown from the record. He
served in the U.S. Navy from 1979 to 1984, and was honorably discharged. (Item 5 at
36) Applicant has been working for a defense contractor as a systems programmer since
2004. (Item 5 at 10)
In July 2005, Applicant and his fiancee, whom he subsequently married two
months later, purchased a home. They financed the purchase with a $138,400 mortgage.
(Item 6 at 7) In October 2005, Applicant and his wife purchased two tanning and fitness
businesses. They financed the purchase of these businesses by taking out a second
mortgage on their home in the amount of $64,000. (Item 7 at 6)
Shortly after purchasing the businesses, the national economic downturn
occurred. Applicant and his wife began increasingly using business credit cards to pay
their bills. Also, they fell behind on their mortgage loans.  (Item 4 at 4) 
In July 2007, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, as referenced
in subparagraph 1.a. (Item 7 at 1) The amount of debt included in the court-ordered
bankruptcy payment plan is unknown from the record. Applicant was ordered to pay
$700 per month to the bankruptcy trustee. At or about the time Applicant filed for Chapter
13 bankruptcy protection, his home was foreclosed upon. (Item 6 at 7)
In July 2010, the court dismissed the bankruptcy petition because Applicant failed
to make the requisite payments. (Item 8) It is unknown from the record how many
payments Applicant made before the bankruptcy petition was dismissed.
One month after the court dismissed the bankruptcy petition, Applicant was
hospitalized with a severe stomach problem. (Item 4 at 4) Subsequently, he remained in
the hospital for one month,  undergoing three stomach surgeries. Upon his discharge, he
was unable to work for six weeks. (Item 4 at 4)
Shortly after Applicant returned to work, his wife left him. (Item 4 at 5) By
November 2013, Applicant had incurred approximately $217,000 of delinquent debt,
including both home mortgage loans (subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c), a delinquent car loan
Their account numbers do not match the account number for subparagraph 1.d. (compare Item 6 at 5 with1
Response at 6,8)
3
(subparagraph 1.d), two business credit cards (subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f), and seven
medical bills (subparagraphs 1.g through 1.m). The principal mortgage loan totals
$138,400 and the second mortgage totals $68,500. The principal mortgage was satisfied
when the home was sold after foreclosure. (Item 6 at 7) The foreclosure occurred at or
about the period Applicant’s finances were in Chapter 13 bankruptcy status. The second
mortgage loan was included in the failed Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. (Item 6 at 4) It
remains outstanding. (Item 6 at 4)
Subparagraph 1.d, totalling $4,503, has been transferred to a collection agency.
Applicant contends that he negotiated a deal with the collection agency whereupon he
will pay this debt together with another debt, unlisted in the SOR, that had also been
transferred to this collection agency. (Response at 1) Although these debts are owed to
the same creditor, neither constitutes the debt listed in subparagraph 1.d.  1
Applicant has satisfied the medical bills listed in subparagraphs 1.i, 1.l, and 1.m.
(Response at 9-10) Applicant has attempted unsuccessfully to contact the creditors listed
in subparagraphs 1.e and 1.k.  Applicant’s contention that he has paid subparagraphs
1.f, 1.g, and 1.j is unsubstantiated. Per Applicant, the creditor listed in subparagraph 1.h
is a collection agent that has no record of any debt that Applicant owes their agency. In
sum, Applicant has satisfied $750 of delinquent debt, and approximately $76,500
remains outstanding. 
There is no record evidence of Applicant’s annual salary. Moreover, there is no
record evidence of whether Applicant maintains a budget or of whether he has ever
attended financial counseling.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s trustworthiness, the administrative judge must
consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied together with the factors
listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
4
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable
trustworthiness determination. 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.” (AG ¶
18) Over the years, Applicant has incurred more than $200,000 of delinquent debt, the
majority of which remains outstanding. AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and,
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s financial problems did not occur because of profligate spending.
Instead, they began after his business failed in the mid-2000s, and were later
exacerbated by a medical emergency and a marital separation. Applicant has satisfied
the debts listed in subparagraphs 1.i, 1.l, and 1.m. I resolve these subparagraphs in his
favor.
Applicant’s satisfaction of the aforementioned delinquencies demonstrates that he
has been acting responsibly in an attempt to address his financial delinquencies, and
represents a clear indication that Applicant is making a good-faith effort toward resolving
his financial problems. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply.
5
Conversely, Applicant’s progress, though encouraging, is minimal compared to
the amount of his outstanding delinquencies. Applicant contends that part of the second
mortgage loan was reduced when the bank sold his home after its foreclosure, and that
by implication, his total outstanding amount may not be as high as his credit report
indicates. However, he provided no evidence substantiating this contention. Moreover,
he failed to comply with a Chapter 13 bankruptcy order, leading to its July 2010
dismissal. Under these circumstances, I cannot conclude, that Applicant will resolve the
remaining debts. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The circumstances surrounding Applicant’s accrual of delinquent debts are
partially mitigating. In addition, there is some presence of rehabilitation, as Applicant
has satisfied a few of his delinquent debts, and appears to be actively working to satisfy
the remaining delinquencies. However, Applicant failed to execute a Chapter 13
bankruptcy plan leading to its dismissal approximately four years ago. His failure to pay
debts through the bankruptcy plan raises doubt about whether he will finish satisfying
his delinquent debts. Also, I remain troubled by the unresolved status of the second
mortgage loan. Under these circumstances, the likelihood that Applicant may not be
able to satisfy these remaining delinquencies remains unacceptably high. Consequently,
I am unable to conclude that he possesses the requisite reliability and trustworthiness to
occupy an ADP position. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
6
Subparagraphs 1.j-1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.l-1.m: For Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy an
ADP position. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an ADP position is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
