 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00779 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 11, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. On June 3, 2014, Applicant answered 
the SOR and requested a hearing. This case was assigned to me on August 18, 2014. 
 
2 
 
 
On September 10, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for September 23, 2014. The hearing was held 
as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
3, while Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E. All proffered 
exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The transcript (Tr.) of the 
hearing was received on October 3, 2014. 
 
Procedural Matter 
 
Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive.1  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel made a motion to withdraw the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant had no objection to the motion. The motion was granted, and SOR 
¶ 1.d was withdrawn.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old computer graphic illustrator who is being sponsored for 
a security clearance by a defense contractor. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2001. 
He also attended post-graduate school from 2001 to 2003, but did not obtain an 
additional degree. He is married and has two children, ages 14 and 16. This is the first 
time that he has sought to obtain a security clearance.3 
 
Excluding the withdrawn allegation, the SOR alleged that Applicant had four 
delinquent debts totaling about $99,285 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c and 1.e). In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted each allegation. His admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact. The largest debt (SOR ¶ 1.e, student loans placed for collection for $93,455) 
amounts to 92% of his delinquent debt.4 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he made financial mistakes and stated that he did 
not take his debts as seriously as he should have. He had a two-month period of 
unemployment in 2006. With the exception of that two-month period, he had been 
continuously employed from January 2001 until he lost his job in June 2014 due to the 
withdrawal of his interim security clearance. He also has been working as a part-time 
pizza delivery driver since March 2011. At the time of the hearing, his part-time job was 
his only income and he indicated that he was one payment behind on his mortgage. 
                                                          
1 Tr. 11. 
2 Tr. 44-45. 
3 Tr. 6-7, 23-24; 27-GE 1, 2. 
4 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
When working full-time, he estimated that he had a net monthly remainder of about 
$500, but stated he was living paycheck-to-paycheck.5  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – judgment entered May 2013 for $2,635. This was a retail store credit 
card account. From July 1, 2013, to September 2014, Applicant made monthly 
payments of about $50 toward this debt. At the time of the hearing, those payments 
totaled $741. He indicated that, after having his pay garnished for another debt, he has 
been proactive on paying this one. Under the repayment agreement, he is only required 
to pay $45 per month toward this debt, but pays a little more to resolve it in a shorter 
period. He has continued making the payments even though he has been laid off from 
his primary job since June 2014.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – collection account in the amount of $2,528. This was a retail store 
charge account that had a date of last activity of February 2009. Applicant and his wife 
purchased a washer and dryer at the retail store for about $1,100 and the remainder of 
this debt constitutes penalties and interest. He has not made any payments on this 
collection account or reached out to the creditor because he currently has no money to 
pay toward this debt.7  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – collection account in the amount of $667. This was a bank debt for 
consumer purchases that was placed for collection in March 2011. Applicant presented 
no proof of payments or of efforts to resolve this debt.8  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – student loan accounts placed for collection totaling $93,455. After 
marrying, Applicant and his wife attended college together for four years. They primarily 
financed their studies through student loans, but also had work-study jobs. At some 
point, their student loans were been combined, and the amount reflected above 
represents the total of their student loans. During an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) interview in November 2013, Applicant was questioned about these loans and 
indicated that he was attempting to negotiate a payment plan. His income tax refund for 
2013 of about $2,000 was withheld and applied to the student loans. In May 2014, his 
wife contacted the creditor holding the student loans and entered into a rehabilitation 
program. Under that program, they were initially required to make nine consecutive 
monthly payments of $150 to rehabilitate the student loans. They made $150 payments 
in May, June, and July, before they were unable to continue doing so because Applicant 
lost his job. Due to that loss of employment, the creditor reduced the rehabilitation 
payments to $5 per month. They made the $5 payments for August and September 
2014. When asked why he defaulted on the student loans, Applicant indicated that he 
                                                          
5 Tr. 23-25, 31-35, 37-40; GE 2, 3; AE B, C.  
6 Tr. 40-41; GE 3; AE B. 
7 Tr. 41-43; GE 3.  
8 Tr. 43-44; GE 3.  
 
4 
 
 
mistakenly thought they were under a hardship deferment. He thought the hardship 
deferment ended in early 2014, but realized they may have become due earlier when 
his income tax refund was withheld.9  
 
Applicant indicated that he plans to resolve the smaller debts before moving on 
to resolve the larger ones. His wife does not work. Since graduating from college, she 
has only worked outside the home for about two or three months in a part-time job. His 
credit report reflected that he satisfied a $969 judgment not alleged in the SOR in June 
2013; that he had five opened accounts paid as agreed; and that, excluding the alleged 
debts, he had four closed accounts with zero balances.10 
 
A retired command master sergeant who has known Applicant for over 18 years 
described him as a man of integrity and an outstanding family man. He also stated that 
Applicant is loyal and totally trustworthy.11 
 
A coworker stated that Applicant has excellent moral character and takes 
seriously the trust placed in him. Another coworker described him as a dependable, 
decent, hardworking, and trustworthy person.12   
 
Applicant’s pastor, who has known Applicant for over 18 years and served as his 
pastor for over 10 years, stated: 
 
During all the years that I have been associated with [Applicant], his 
character has been impeccable! He is a very devoted husband and father 
who strives to be an exemplary role model. He has left a very positive 
impact on the young adults that were under his leadership while serving 
as our youth pastor. I know [Applicant] to be a very moral, honest, and 
sincere individual in his everyday activities within the community where he 
and his family live. 
 
*  *  * 
 
Because of his commitment to his nation and employer, [Applicant] would 
never compromise his position in any way. His upstanding moral character 
would prevent him from doing anything dishonest that would jeopardize 
his career or his commitment to his employer or our nation.13  
                                                          
9 Tr. 28-31, 42-43, 45-50; GE 2, 3; AE C-E. 
10 Tr. 32, 47; GE 3. 
11 AE A. 
12 AE A. 
13 AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to 
satisfy. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing and significant. He admitted that he 
made mistakes in handling his finances. He attributed his financial problem to having a 
family of four that struggled on a limited income. Perhaps, his biggest mistake was not 
properly addressing his student loans when they came out of a hardship deferment. 
From the evidence presented, he failed to establish that his financial problems were the 
result of conditions beyond his control or that those problems are unlikely to recur. AG 
¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) do not apply.  
 
 In June 2013, Applicant satisfied one delinquent debt that was not alleged in the 
SOR through the garnishment of his pay. Before the initiation of the security clearance 
process, he initiated a repayment plan for the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a and has been 
making consistent monthly payments under that plan. He evidently initiated that 
repayment plan to avoid another garnishment. Additionally, he entered into an 
agreement to rehabilitate his student loans after issuance of the SOR. He made three 
$150 payments under that agreement until he lost his job in June 2014. Since then, the 
rehabilitation agreement has been modified to reduce the payments to $5 per month, 
and he has continued to make the payments in the reduced amount. He provided no 
proof of financial counseling. In general, he failed to show that he acted responsibly in 
addressing his delinquent debts or that his financial problems are under control and are 
being resolved in a realistic manner. His financial problems continue to cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies. 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
8 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a devoted husband and father who is active in the community. He is 
a hard-working, valued employee. He often works weekdays and most weekends as a 
pizza delivery driver. There is no indication that he or his family live extravagantly. 
Nevertheless, he failed to show that he has acted responsibly in the handling of his 
finances. Despite the presence of some mitigation, security concerns remain.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant  
   Subparagraphs 1.b -1.c:  Against Applicant   
   Subparagraph 1.d:   Withdrawn 
   Subparagraphs 1.e: Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
