 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01178 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 12, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines F and E. This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. In an undated document and 
 
2 
 
 
then again on July 16, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and indicated that he was not 
opposed to having a hearing. This case was assigned to me on August 18, 2014. On 
October 14, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice 
of Video Teleconference Hearing scheduling the hearing for October 21, 2014.1 The 
hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4. Applicant’s objections to GE 1 (Applicant’s Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP)) and 3 (court documents reflecting a judgment) were overruled. 
After questioning Applicant about GE 2, Department Counsel withdrew GE 2 (summary 
of an Office of Personnel Management interview). GE 4 was admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing 
was received on October 29, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old electronics technician who works for a defense 
contractor. He has worked for that employer since September 2005. He graduated from 
high school in 1979 and attended college for about one year. He served in the Army 
from 1987 to 1994. His first marriage was from 1987 to 2005. He married his current 
wife in 2005. He has five children, ages 15, 24, 29, 32, and 35, and two stepchildren, 
ages 25 and 28. He has held a security clearance for about nine years without incident.2 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had four delinquent debts totaling $13,853  
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d) and that he falsified his e-QIP by failing to disclose three delinquent 
debts (SOR ¶ 2.a). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations with 
comments. However, his comments are interpreted and treated as denials of the 
allegations.3 
 
Applicant has been employed continuously since 2005. At the time of the 
hearing, he was earning about $30,000 per year. In January 2007, his wife lost her job 
because her employer moved. Before she lost her job, she was earning about $27,000 
a year. In 2009, she obtained another job earning about $30,000 a year.4  
 
                                                          
1 Prior to the start of the hearing, Applicant was questioned about whether he received at least 15 
days advance notice of the time and place of the hearing. He indicated that he had talked to Department 
Counsel about the time and place of the hearing and had received the required notice. On the record, he 
reiterated that he had received at least 15 days advance notice of the time and place of the hearing. See 
Tr. 11-12. 
2 Tr. 6-7, 38-39; GE 1.  
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
4 Tr. 39-42, 49. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant encountered difficulty in filing his 2012 federal income tax return. When 
he initially filed that federal income tax return in 2013, it was rejected. He later learned 
that someone had stolen his identity and filed that return. He submitted an identity theft 
affidavit (IRS Form 14039). The IRS conducted an investigation and later provided him 
with his refund of about $2,000. He indicated that he filed his 2013 federal income tax 
return, which took a while to process, and also received a refund for that year.5 
 
Applicant testified that he was responsible for “some of the bills,” but not all of 
them. He indicated that the alleged debts were questionable because he was the victim 
of identity theft. He stated that one of his accounts had unknown charges arising from 
another state. He further stated unknown charges also appeared on his bank account 
and some of his credit cards. He indicated that he put a freeze on his accounts, 
disputed the unknown charges, and opened new accounts. He thought that his ex-wife 
and her mother were responsible for the unknown charges. With the exception of the 
IRS Form 14039, he provided no documentation supporting his identity theft claims, 
including no documents showing he disputed any debts. His credit report did not reflect 
the alleged debts were disputed.6  
 
Record evidence established the following:  
 
SOR ¶ Amount Comments Evidence
 
1.a 
 
$5,265 
This account was opened in January 2005. A 
judgment was filed against Applicant in April 2011. 
Applicant admitted that he had an account with 
the original creditor and received notice of the 
legal proceeding that resulted in the judgment. A 
garnishment order was issued for that judgment, 
but Applicant stated his pay has not been 
garnished for this debt. 
 
Tr. 51-52; 
GE 3, 4. 
 
1.b 
 
$3,910 
This charged-off account was opened in 
December 2006. It had a date of last activity of 
April 2011. Applicant admitted that he had an 
account with this creditor. 
 
Tr. 52; 
GE 4. 
 
1.c 
 
$2,590 
This collection account was opened in April 2010. 
It had a date of last activity of September 2009. 
Applicant admitted that he had an account with 
this creditor. 
 
Tr. 52; 
GE 4. 
 
1.d 
 
$2,088 
This charged-off account was opened in January 
2007. It had a date of last activity of September 
2009. Applicant admitted that he had an account 
with this creditor. 
 
Tr. 52 
GE 4. 
                                                          
5 Tr. 43-45. 
6 Tr. 37, 43, 47-51; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant testified that he did not fully pay the accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d before 
they were closed. He provided no proof of payments toward the alleged delinquent 
debts. He submitted no proof that he has contacted the creditors in an attempt to 
resolve those debts.7 
 
Applicant submitted an e-QIP on September 27, 2013. In Section 26 of the        
e-QIP, he responded “No” to questions that asked whether in the past seven years he 
had a judgment entered against him; defaulted on any type of loan; had bills or debts 
turned over to a collection agency; or had any account or credit card suspended, 
charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed. In fact, he responded “No” to all of 
the financial questions in Section 26 of the e-QIP.8  
 
Applicant testified that he became frustrated when he was filling out the e-QIP. 
He stated that he kept having to go back to redo responses as he was filling out that 
electronic document. He thought that he was answering the questions correctly, but was 
then asked “for more information and more information.” He testified that he listed the 
delinquent debts in a prior security clearance application and tried to indicate in the      
e-QIP that nothing had changed. He stated,  
 
When I was doing the delinquent debts I was stating that nothing had 
changed from the previous security clearance I was doing and I don’t 
know how it ended up showing that I didn’t have no delinquencies, 
because I put that down there as I still had the delinquencies from the last 
time.9 
 
He further indicated that he filled out the previous security clearance application in 
about 2005, which would have been before some of the alleged debts became 
delinquent. He also did not list in the e-QIP that he had been subject to a prior security 
clearance investigation. He testified that he thought he answered “Yes” to the e-QIP 
questions he is alleged to have falsified. He did disclose in the e-QIP that he had been 
subject to disciplinary action in the military.10 
 
Applicant is an ordained deacon. In 2014, he received a certificate of 
appreciation for his participation in a deacon’s retreat. He also received a certificate of 
recognition from his employer for five years of dedicated service. A customer wrote a 
letter of appreciation to Applicant’s employer extolling the professional services that 
Applicant and his coworkers provided on a project.11 
                                                          
7 Tr. 51-54.  
8 GE 1.  
9 Tr. 45.  
10 Tr. 37-38, 45-47, 54-55; GE 1.  
11 AE A-F. 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy 
over an extended period. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;   
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s wife lost her job in 2005 and was unemployed for about two years. He 
established that he was the victim of identity theft when someone fraudulently obtained 
his 2012 income tax refund. He also claimed that unauthorized charges were made to 
his bank account and credit cards. He admitted that he owed some of the delinquent 
debts, but did not specifically identify the debts or amounts that he did not owe. While 
his wife’s unemployment and the identity theft involving his tax refund were conditions 
beyond his control, he failed to show that he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. No evidence was presented to show that he made any payments on the 
delinquent debts, that he contacted the creditors to make payment arrangements, or 
that he took any action to resolve the debts. No documentation was presented to 
establish that he disputed the debts. His financial problems remain ongoing, are 
significant, and cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
He failed to present evidence to show that his financial problems are under control or 
are unlikely to recur. None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. His delinquent debts 
remain a security concern.   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
8 
 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
Applicant stated that he disclosed his delinquent debts in a security clearance 
application in about 2005. The prior application was not offered into evidence. Of note, 
some of the alleged debts became delinquent well after 2005. He also stated that he 
became frustrated in filling out the e-QIP, thought that he had responded “Yes” to the 
pertinent financial questions, and tried to indicate that there was no change in the status 
of the debts from the prior security clearance application. I did not find Applicant’s 
testimony credible. Sufficient evidence was presented to establish that Applicant was 
aware of delinquent debts when his submitted the e-QIP and deliberately failed to 
disclose them. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
Four personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant intentionally omitted pertinent information about his delinquent debts on 
his e-QIP. This falsification is recent and significant. In falsifying his e-QIP, he seriously 
undermined the security clearance adjudication process. I find that none of the 
mitigating conditions apply to this falsification.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
9 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant served in the military for about seven years. He is an ordained deacon 
and a valued employee. Nonetheless, he failed to act responsibly in handling his 
financial problems and intentionally provided false information on his e-QIP. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant failed 
to mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
      Subparagraphs 1.a -1.d:  Against Applicant   
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
       Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
