 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00213    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
_____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Although he has addressed two of 
the debts alleged in the Statement of Reasons (SOR), Applicant’s mortgage remains 
$88,000 in arrears and is currently unresolved. He has not acted responsibly or in good 
faith to resolve his delinquent debts. Clearance is denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DOD Directive,1 on February 28, 
2014, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
The SOR detailed the basis for the action under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.     
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. The 
Government submitted its written case on June 30, 2014, and sent a complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM), which included a brief and eight documents, to 
Applicant. He received the FORM on July 15, 2014, and was afforded an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
concerns. Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM, nor did he object to the 
attachments, which are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. The case 
was assigned to me on October 8, 2014. I opened the record to allow the parties to 
submit additional information. Applicant submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through 
D,2 which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel offered an updated 
credit report, which is admitted as GE 9, without objection.3  
  
Evidentiary Issues 
 
 The Government’s brief presents information summarizing the Report of 
Investigation (ROI) completed as a result of Applicant’s background investigation. The 
ROI is not in the record.4 In a footnote of the brief, the Government directs Applicant to 
lodge any objection to the ROI summary in his reply to the Government’s brief.5 There is 
no indication that Applicant was provided a copy of the ROI, as required, which prevents 
him from authenticating or formulating his objection, if any, to the Government’s 
summary of its contents. Based on the Directive ¶ E3.1.20, the summarized ROI is 
inadmissible and will not be considered.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 52, works as an engineer test specialist for a federal contractor, 
Company A. Applicant began his career in this field with another federal contractor, 
Company B, in 2001. He remained with Company B until he was laid off in December 
2011. After five months of unemployment, Applicant began working with his current 
employer as a subcontractor in May 2012 and was hired as a Company A employee in 
September 2013. According to Applicant, he accepted a 22% decrease in salary when 
he began working for Company A. Divorced in 1993 after seven years of marriage, 
Applicant remains single. He is the father of two adult children.6 
 
 While working for Company B between 2001 and 2011, Applicant claims that his 
salary and overtime compensation placed him on solid financial footing. However, 
                                                          
2 AE A: Applicant’s Letter, undated; AE B: Creditor Letter re: SOR ¶ 1.a, dated October 20, 2014; AE C: 
Creditor Letter re: SOR ¶ 1.c, dated October 22, 2014; AE D: Loan Modification Status Letter re: SOR ¶ 
1.b, dated October 27, 2014.  
 
3 The parties responses regarding evidentiary issues and additional documentation is appended to the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
4 FORM at 4-6. 
 
5 FORM at 4.  
 
6 GE 4; AE A. 
 
3 
 
during Applicant’s last few years with Company B, he did not earn overtime, which 
caused him to experience financial problems. In January 2008, Applicant stopped 
paying the mortgage on the home he has owned since 2003. When Applicant was laid 
off in December 2011, he was in the process of obtaining a mortgage loan modification. 
According to Applicant, the lender denied the modification request upon learning of his 
unemployment. Applicant did not reapply for a loan modification until early 2014. The 
lender assigned his application to a Case Manager in March 2014. According to an 
October 27, 2014 letter, the lender has received Applicant’s financial package. 
However, the lender did not offer a timeline for the expected resolution of Applicant’s 
mortgage loan modification application. The most recent credit report in the record, 
dated October 17, 2014, shows that Applicant’s mortgage, which is $88,000 in arrears 
with an outstanding balance of approximately $167,000, is in foreclosure (SOR ¶1.b).7  
 
 In addition to the mortgage loan, Applicant has two other delinquent accounts 
totaling approximately $2,000. In January 2008, a creditor obtained a judgment against 
Applicant for $1,484 (SOR ¶1.a). In March 2014, Applicant made a $300 payment 
toward the account and agreed to pay the creditor $50 monthly until the judgment was 
satisfied. An October 2014 letter from the creditor confirms that Applicant has complied 
with the terms of the payment plan. The other delinquent account is for a $604 medical 
bill incurred in August 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.c).8 In October 2014, Applicant paid the debt in 
full.9  
 
 The record contains very little information about Applicant’s current finances.  In 
addition to his mortgage loan, Applicant has only two open consumer credit accounts. 
Each has a zero balance. There is nothing in the record regarding Applicant’s recurring 
financial obligations or any assets he may own.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
7 GE 3, 6, 9; AE A, D. 
 
8 The debt alleged in SOR ¶1.d is a duplicate of the debt alleged in ¶ 1.c. GE 5, 6, 9 show that the debt is 
identified by the same account number. Accordingly, I find in Applicant’s favor on allegation ¶ 1.d. 
 
9 GE 3; AE B - C.  
 
10 GE 5 – 6, 9. 
 
4 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”11 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to three creditors for 
approximately $90,000, the largest debt being a delinquent home mortgage, which 
Applicant has not paid since January 2008. The record contains sufficient evidence to 
establish the Government’s prima facie case, that Applicant has a history of being 
unable or unwilling to pay his debts.12  
                                                          
11  AG ¶ 18. 
 
12 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
5 
 
 Applicant claims that his financial problems were caused by events beyond his 
control and that he acted responsibly in light of them. However, Applicant’s assertions 
are not supported by the record.  While Applicant may have experienced a decrease in 
income with the loss of overtime pay while working for Company B, it does not follow 
that this prevented Applicant from paying his mortgage. Without overtime, Applicant 
continued to earn his full-time base pay. Furthermore, Applicant does not mention any 
other event that occurred in the years before or after he made his last mortgage 
payment that negatively impacted his ability to meet his financial obligations. According 
to Applicant’s credit reports, he does not have any other material recurring financial 
obligations or excessive consumer debt. Based on the record, Applicant’s failure to pay 
his mortgage for the past eight years is inexplicable. 
  
 Although Applicant receives credit for making payments toward the outstanding 
judgment (SOR ¶1.a) and paying his delinquent medical account (SOR ¶ 1.c), this is not 
enough to support a finding that Applicant has made a good-faith effort to resolve his 
delinquent debts.  Applicant did not take any steps to address his three delinquent 
accounts until threatened with the impending loss of his security clearance. Despite 
returning to work in May 2012, Applicant waited until after he received the February 
2014 SOR to reapply for a mortgage loan modification. He also waited until after 
receiving the SOR to make any arrangements to resolve his outstanding judgment. 
Applicant did not revisit the home modification or take steps to resolve the delinquent 
medical debt until October 2014, when I opened the record to receive additional 
documentation.  
 
  Absent evidence to the contrary, I find that his financial problems are recent and 
ongoing. Given the lack of information about Applicant’s current finances, I am unable to 
determine that Applicant’s finances are under control or that his financial problems are 
unlikely to recur. Consequently, Applicant’s unresolved delinquent mortgage and his  
years of inaction toward resolving it and his other delinquent debts continues to cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant failed to meet his burdens 
of production and persuasion. An applicant is expected to provide information regarding 
his finances.13 The paucity of information Applicant submitted about his finances, past 
and present, failed to mitigate the doubts and concerns his finances raise regarding his 
current security worthiness. Following Egan14 and the clearly-consistent standard, I 
resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
13 See ISCR Case No. 00-0104 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2001). 
 
14 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c - 1.d For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
