 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-00631 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be continued or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 23, 2014 and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated September 30, 2014, was provided to him by letter dated 
October 8, 2014. Applicant received the FORM on October 20, 2014. He was afforded a 
period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant submitted additional information within the allotted period of 30 
days after receipt of a copy of the FORM. On November 17, 2014, Department Counsel 
indicated that he had no objection to Applicant’s additional information. On November 
21, 2014, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a and denied SOR ¶ 1.b 
with explanations. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old supply technician, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since August 2013. He seeks a security clearance in conjunction 
with his current employment. (Item 5.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1984 and attended college from 
May 1994 to July 1994. He completed 23 years of active and reserve military service. 
Applicant served in the U.S. Army from 1984 to 1994 and in the Air Force Air National 
Guard of the United States (Air Force – ANGUS) from 1999 to 2012, with a period of 
active duty from 2007 to 2008. Applicant retired from the Air Force – ANGUS with 23 
years of qualifying service as a Technical Sergeant (pay grade E-6). (Items 5, 8, and 
FORM response.) 
 
Applicant was previously married from 1986 to 1996, and again from 1997 to 
1999. Both marriages ended by divorce. He married a third time in 2003. Applicant has 
three children, ages 28, 16, and 9, and two adult stepchildren. (Items 5, 8.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR contains two separate allegations: (1) a charged-off home 
equity line of credit (HELOC) account for $108,744 opened in 2003 that he used to pay 
credit card debts. Applicant defaulted on the HELOC along with his mortgage that 
resulted in foreclosure in 2010; and (2) a cable company collection account for $216 
that Applicant stated he does not recognize and will attempt to remove from his credit 
report. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, SOR answer, Item 8.) 
 
There is substantial evidence to support the SOR allegations and that Applicant 
has a history of financial problems. Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, and his November 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
2013 credit report documents both SOR debts. (SOR answer, Item 6.) Applicant 
attributes his financial difficulties to his inability to return to active duty and reverting 
back to Air Force ANGUS status, which resulted in a loss of income in the 2008 to 2010 
timeframe and “deterioration of the 2008 economy.” Applicant asserts that despite being 
underemployed, he managed to maintain payments on his automobiles and revolving 
accounts and that his other accounts are in good standing. He added that he disputes a 
debt on his credit report, presumably the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, and is “preparing a 
complaint to submit before the Federal Trade Commission.” (Item 8, FORM response.) 
 
As noted by Department Counsel in his FORM, there is no record evidence 
showing Applicant utilized credit counseling or assistance with budgeting, or attempted 
to negotiate and/or repay his debts once his financial situation stabilized. Although 
Applicant provided information in his FORM response regarding his loss of income and 
underemployment in the 2008 to 2010 timeframe, he failed to address the shortcomings 
of his case as noted by Department Counsel. Applicant has not provided any 
documentation showing that the two SOR debts are paid, settled, in a payment plan, 
cancelled, forgiven, or otherwise resolved. It is clear that Applicant remained employed 
in full time positions since at least 2007, and most notably he was able to maintain full 
time employment as a civilian contractor since 2013. (SOR answer, Item 8, FORM 
response.) 
 
In Applicant’s FORM response, he stated that he hoped his additional information 
“will present the fact that I am not a threat to our great nation and its interests but like 
our nation, I am trying to build a stronger financial future and create a promising well 
being that will promote a stronger economy with recovering possibilities not for just 
myself but for my family as well.” (FORM response.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports.  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,1 I conclude none of the five 
financial considerations mitigating conditions above are applicable or partially applicable 
                                                          
1
  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern. The available information shows 
that Applicant has taken little affirmative action to resolve his delinquent debts. 
 
With that said, a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts or 
enforcing tax laws.2 Rather the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness consistent with the security guidelines in the Directive. In 
evaluating F cases, the Appeal Board has established the following standard: 
 
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has 
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant 
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating 
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is not requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR.3 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He 
failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his 
past efforts to address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in 
relying on a scant paragraph of explanation, financial considerations security concerns 
remain. 
  
One additional comment is worthy of note. Applicant’s loyalty and patriotism are 
not at issue in these proceedings. Section 7 of the Executive Order 10865 specifically 
provides that industrial security decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
Security clearance decisions cover many characteristics of an applicant other than 
loyalty and patriotism. Nothing in this Decision should be considered to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied decision as to 
an applicant’s loyalty or patriotism.  
 
                                                          
2
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
3
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating 
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,4 I conclude Applicant did not present 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the Guideline F security concern. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
4
 AG ¶ 2(a) (1)-(9). 
 
