KEYWORD: Guideline D; Guideline E
DIGEST: Interrogatory questions alone are not evidence.  The questions are considered for
giving context to the answers, which are evidence. Applicant’s inconsistent statements regarding
his viewing of child pornography, and his encounters with child prostitutes undermine the
Judge’s favorable application of mitigating conditions.  Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 07-18324.a1
DATE: 03/11/2011
DATE: March 11, 2011
In Re:
------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-18324
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Joseph Testan, Esq.
1The Judge’s findings consist, in large measure, of summaries of the Government’s evidence and of Applicant’s
denials of misconduct.
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 27, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline D (Sexual Behavior) and Guideline
E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On October 28, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative
Judge Wilford H. Ross granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.   Department Counsel
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  Applicant filed a cross-appeal pursuant to
Directive ¶ E3.1.28.  
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his
application of the Guideline D and Guideline E mitigating conditions and whether the Judge’s
whole-person analysis was in error.  Applicant raised the following issue on cross appeal: whether
the Judge erred in admitting certain pieces of documentary evidence.  Consistent with the following
discussion, we reverse the decision of the Judge.
Facts
Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a Defense contractor.  He seeks to retain his security
clearance in connection with his employment.
Several of the Guideline D allegations refer to Government Exhibit (GE) 7, a Decision Letter
from another Government agency denying Applicant access to classified information.1  GE 7 was
signed by a Senior Adjudication Officer, and the Judge quoted it in pertinent part:
During your most recent security testing, you divulged information regarding your
viewing pornography of underage girls around 14 to 16 years old.  You mentioned
you had seen some pornography of girls as young as 11 years old, which you found
on foreign web sites.  You admitted that, although you believe your actions are
illegal, you have deliberately sought and viewed pornographic images of underage
girls for several years, and you continue to do so on an average of twice weekly; you
look at pornographic thumbnails of underage girls that appear interesting and
download them to a temporary file in your computer.  You also admitted that you
actively seek and view what you believe to be rapes of 15 or 16-year-old girls (in
some cases by multiple persons), and teenage females involved in sexual acts or
being molested; and, you sexually gratify yourself while viewing these images.
Additionally, you admitted that you have recurring rape fantasies and your greatest
interest involves the rape of 12-year-old girls.  You stated that during a work related
overseas trip you were involved in two sexual encounters with girls you believed to
be 15 or 16 years old; that it was your intention to do so prior to your trip; and, the
encounters enabled you to live out part of your sexual/rape fantasies with young girls
in a more permissive environment.
2The Judge also found that Applicant had denied SOR allegations to the effect that (1) he became physically
aroused when one of his daughter’s swim team members rubbed against him and (2) when his daughter’s high school
friends would stay overnight at his house, he could identify which of the girls wore bras.  Concerning the swim team
incidents, Applicant stated that the swimmers approached him and that he should have confronted them or had the team
captain talk to them about their behavior.  Concerning the sleepover allegation, he stated that the young girls “flaunted
their bodies as a tease.  I did not make any type of move or approach them in any way.”  Decision at 4-5.
3The information in question is contained in the Judge’s quotation from GE 7, above.
3
The Judge found that Applicant had denied deliberately seeking child pornography on the
internet, stating instead that he had accidentally viewed such material “once or twice” several years
prior to 2003.  Applicant stated that he had not viewed child pornography for over six years.  He
offered Government officials an opportunity to examine the hard drive of his computer.
Applicant claimed that two child prostitutes approached him in Taiwan on two different
nights, but he rebuffed their advances.  He denied ever having had sexual intercourse with the
prostitutes.
Applicant denied an allegation that he had masturbated in front of his prepubescent nephews
when he was 17 years old.  He stated that on one occasion 40 years prior his nephews had asked him
questions about masturbation.  “I simply showed them on myself.”2  Decision at 5.
Under Guideline E, the Judge found that Applicant had previously been disapproved for
additional access to classified information by another Government agency.  Applicant appealed the
decision, but it was affirmed.  He also found that Applicant’s security access was denied and his
clearance revoked because of information he provided the other Government agency.3
Applicant denied an allegation under Guideline E that he had falsified an affidavit during the
course of his security clearance investigation in 2008, specifically by stating that on one occasion
he had accidentally viewed “an inappropriate image,” deliberately leaving out the information
contained in GE 7.  
  The Judge found that the Government had presented no information to support an allegation
that he had provided a false answer to DOHA interrogatories on October 17, 2008, by stating that
he had never had an extramarital affair of any kind and had only talked to the two underage
prostitutes referenced above.
The Judge found that Applicant denied two other allegations of false statements contained
in interrogatories he executed on July 2, 2008.  The first of these alleged that he falsely denied that
he had had sexual intercourse with two underage prostitutes in Taiwan.  The second alleged that he
had falsely denied deliberately viewing child pornography.
Applicant enjoys a good reputation for trustworthiness, for his moral character, and his
professionalism.
4GE 7 was not prepared on letterhead stationary by the other agency.  Applicant contends that it lacks indicia
of authenticity.  However, in GE 1, Security Clearance Application (SCA), Applicant states that, in 2004, he was denied
access to classified information by a named Government agency.  GE 7 bears a date of February 2004.  GE 2,
Applicant’s appeal of the decision to deny him a clearance, was clearly prepared in reference to GE 7. Moreover, in GE
1, Applicant states that the denial by the other agency was “[c]urrently under appeal.”  Applicant’s appeal of the other
agency’s denial was finally decided in November 2006, after the date of his SCA.  Aside from this other Government
agency and DOHA, there is no evidence in the record of any other agency agency denying Applicant a clearance.
4
 Discussion   
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  The Appeal
Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong
presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913
F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After the Government presents
evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut or mitigate those
concerns.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and
whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the
particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light
of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20,
2006).
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are arbitrary or capricious, the Board
will review the Judge's decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails
to articulate a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of
judgment; it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision
that runs contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere
difference of opinion.  In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are contrary to law,
the Board will consider whether they are contrary to provisions of Executive Order 10865, the
Directive, or other applicable federal law.  See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2,
2006).
Cross-Appeal
Applicant contends that GE 7 was not admissible under the provisions of the Directive or
under the Federal Rules of Evidence.  As stated above, this exhibit is a Decision Statement by
another Government agency concerning the agency’s clearance investigation of Applicant.4 
Accordingly, the record supports a conclusion that GE 7 is the denial letter by the agency named by Applicant in GE
1.  The record provides no reasonable basis to deny the authenticity of GE 7.  
5
Directive ¶ E3.1.20 provides that 
[o]fficial records or evidence compiled or created in the regular course of business,
other than DoD personnel background reports of investigation (ROI), may be
received and considered by the Administrative Judge without authenticating
witnesses, provided that such information has been furnished by an investigative
agency pursuant to its responsibilities in connection with assisting the Secretary of
Defense, or the Department or Agency head concerned, to safeguard classified
information . . . An ROI may be received with an authenticating witness provided it
is otherwise admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence[.] (internal citations
omitted)   
We have recently held that a Clearance Decision Statement is admissible as substantive
evidence under this provision of the Directive.  Because a Clearance Decision Statement is not an
ROI, it may be admitted without an authenticating witness.  ISCR Case No. 08-06997 at 3 (App. Bd.
Mar. 1, 2011).  Accordingly, we conclude that the Judge did not err by admitting GE 7.  
Applicant also raises an issue concerning GE 4, which contains his answers to DOHA
interrogatories.  He draws attention to the following statement by the Judge in the Analysis portion
of the decision: “[GE] 4 . . . the DOHA interrogatories . . . are statements of fact, evidently drawn
from other documents.” Applicant contends that the Judge erred by considering the interrogatory
questions themselves as substantive evidence.  We agree with Applicant that the interrogatory
questions themselves are not evidence.  It is Applicant’s answers to those questions that constitute
evidence.  As Applicant notes, the “‘questions’ should be considered for the limited purpose of
giving context to [A]pplicant’s statements in response to the interrogatories.”  Applicant’s Cross-
Appeal Brief at 5.  To the extent that the Judge’s comment suggests that he considered the questions
themselves to be evidence, he erred.  However, in his findings of fact the Judge referenced transcript
testimony, Applicant’s answers to interrogatories, and other documents properly admitted.  His
material findings of security concern, therefore, were based upon admissible evidence.  Any error
implicated by the comment quoted above is harmless.
Government’s Appeal
The Judge properly concluded that the Government had met its burden of production under
Guideline D.   However, the Government contends that the Judge’s application of the mitigating
conditions was in error.  She argues that the Judge’s decision does not take into account significant
contrary record evidence.  This argument is persuasive.
The SOR alleged that Applicant had two sexual encounters in Taiwan with prostitutes he
believed to be 15 or 16 years old.  This allegation is supported by the final quoted sentence from GE
7, contained in the Findings section above.  GE 7 is a document prepared by a Government agency
5See, e.g., Rothstein, Federal Rules of Evidence, Advisory Committee’s Note to Rule 804(b)(3): “The
circumstantial guaranty of reliability for declarations against interest is the assumption that persons do not make
statements which are damaging to themselves unless satisfied for good reason that they are true.”   
6
in the ordinary course of business.  It reflects statements Applicant made during interviews
connected with polygraph examinations.  These statements are against his interest, which enhances
their credibility.5  Moreover, GE 8 and GE 9 are documents prepared by the same agency in
response to Applicant’s request for review.  GE 9 states, in pertinent part, “After reviewing the
information you provided in your appeal letters, as well as all information that led to the original
security decision, a panel of senior officers upheld the original security decision.”  Federal agencies
are entitled to a presumption of good faith and regularity in the performance of their responsibilities.
Sierra Club v. Costle, 657 F.2d 298, 334 (D.C. Cir. 1981).  Applicant presented no evidence to
demonstrate or suggest a motive for the agency to have misrepresented his statements to the
interviewer and then to have twice affirmed that decision.  He failed to rebut the presumption of
good faith and regularity.  
This allegation is further supported by GE 2, Applicant’s request for a review of the other
Government agency’s decision to deny him a clearance.  In this document, Applicant states:
The two encounters with the girls overseas were not preplanned.  They just
happened!  At the time they occurred, I also did not believe they were 15 or 16, they
just looked that young.  Since that time (January 1999), I have not had any type of
a relation with anyone other than my wife.
GE 2 corroborates the pertinent language of GE 7 to the effect that Applicant engaged in sexual
activity with underage girls while in a foreign country.  By contrast, Applicant’s presentation at the
hearing, which the Judge summarized in Findings of Fact, was inconsistent with his statement in GE
2, and a reasonable person could find it to be self-serving.  Applicant’s interrogatory answers and
hearing testimony clearly express an interest in sexual acts involving children, which tend to
corroborate GE 2 and 7.  Moreover, this incident bears a factual similarity to the allegations
addressed in footnote 2 above.  The Judge does not discuss the extent to which Applicant’s evidence
that he, a 55 year-old man, frequently has to ignore or rebuff sexual advances by underage girls may
be lacking in credibility.  The record does not support a conclusion that Applicant had mitigated
security concern arising from this incident.    
The SOR also alleged that Applicant had admitted to the other agency that he had sought and
viewed child pornography and that he had done so on an average of twice weekly.  It also alleged
that he had sought and viewed pornography depicting the rape and molestation of underage girls.
These allegations are supported by GE 7, which is corroborated to a certain extent by Applicant’s
own admission that he had actually viewed child pornography on his home computer, albeit
6“Q: So, you have viewed material with respect to 18-year olds and older being molested while you sexually
gratify yourself?  A: Fantasy, ma’am.  Role playing.  Q: How do you know the girls are 18? . . .  A:  Estimate.  Just
assumption.”  Tr. at 115. 
7
innocently.  It is also corroborated by Applicant’s testimony concerning his interest in material
depicting the molestation of young females.6  
The Judge appeared to have accepted Applicant’s denial of having purposely viewed child
pornography.  In evaluating Applicant’s credibility, the Judge stated that Applicant’s testimony
regarding Guideline D was consistent with his prior written statements.  Decision at 9.  However,
as Department Counsel states in her brief, Applicant’s denials actually contain significant
inconsistencies.  In GE 6, an affidavit by Applicant dated April 2008, he stated:  
Many years ago, I cannot recall the date, I was [learning] how to use the internet and
was on a news group.  These news groups are not moderated and anyone can post
anything they want.  I accidentally came across an inappropriate image.  I
immediately left the site and have never gone into any of those news groups.
  However, in GE 4, his Answers to Interrogatories, he stated that: 
while browsing through what appeared to be legal . . . adult pornographic material
residing on a U.S. Internet Service Provider . . . there were several occasions when
I inadvertently viewed material relating to underage girls. 
Applicant’s testimony at the Hearing is similar.  “I told them that I inadvertently viewed [child
pornography] several times on the internet.”  Tr. at 95.  Applicant’s various statements are
inconsistent both as to the frequency with which he viewed child pornography and as to the
underlying circumstances.  
Additionally, GE 4 contains the following interrogatory question: 
During an interview with another government agency in August 2003, you also
stated that you viewed internet videos involving young teens engaging in sexual acts
and that you masturbated to these videos.  Is this information correct?  
Applicant replied, “Yes.  Further Explanation: the video participants appeared to be underage, but
were in actuality 18 or more years in age.”  Applicant’s admission that he sought out internet sites
depicting sexual acts involving girls who appeared to be underage is not totally consistent with his
statement in GE 6 that he had viewed “an inappropriate image” only once by accident.  This
interrogatory answer most reasonably suggests purposeful activity occurring on more than one
occasion.  Moreover, this answer corroborates GE 7 to a substantial degree.  
Applicant’s inconsistent statements undermine the Judge’s favorable decision.  These
inconsistent statements buttress Department Counsel’s argument that the Judge substituted a
7Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 14(a): “the behavior occurred . . . during adolescence and there is no evidence of
subsequent conduct of a similar nature[.]”  
8
favorable impression of Applicant’s demeanor for record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-
23504 at 6 (App. Bd. Dec. 12, 2007).  Viewed as a whole, the record does not support the Judge’s
favorable application of the mitigating conditions to allegations that Applicant had purposely viewed
child pornography. 
Concerning the allegation that, as a teenager, Applicant had masturbated in front of his
young nephews, the Judge appears to have extended favorable application to mitigating condition
14(a).7  However, the record evidence of Applicant’s viewing child pornography and having sex
with underage prostitutes constitutes subsequent conduct of a similar nature, i.e., sexual acts
involving children.  The Judge’s favorable application of this mitigating condition, as well as his
treatment of the remaining allegations under Guideline D, are not sustainable.
Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged Applicant’s having been denied a clearance by the other
agency due to information he provided concerning his sexual activities.  In addition, the SOR alleged
false statements by Applicant.  One such statement was alleged to be contained in a set of DOHA
interrogatories dated October 2008.  As the Judge noted, there are no interrogatories with that date
contained in the file.  The Judge’s favorable decision regarding this allegation is sustainable.  
Otherwise, the SOR alleged false statements concerning Applicant’s viewing of child
pornography and his sexual acts with underage prostitutes.  These statements are found in GE 6,
Applicant’s affidavit, and GE 4, his July 2008 interrogatory answers.  The Judge concluded that
Applicant did not make false statements and, therefore, that the Government did not meet its burden
of production:    
[W]e are faced with the situation where the alleged false statements of the Applicant
are where he disagrees with factual conclusions in Government Exhibits 4 and 7.
Since, as discussed above, I cannot find with any degree of confidence that the
conclusions in the documents are accurate, the Applicant’s denials cannot be seen
as false.  Decision at 10.    
The Judge appears to conclude that the Government did not present substantial evidence of
deliberate falsifications by Applicant, insofar as the Judge viewed the pertinent portions of GE 7 as
conclusory in nature.  However, the statements attributed to Applicant in GE 7 do not appear to be
conclusions but, on the contrary, appear to be statements of  fact, representing what Applicant said
to interviewers during the course of his security clearance investigation.  Applicant’s alleged
falsifications concern the very same activity that formed the basis of several of the Guideline D
security concerns–Applicant’s having viewed child pornography and having engaged in sex acts
with child prostitutes.  As we concluded above, these allegations are supported by the record.
Indeed, the Judge’s statement that he has no confidence in the reliability of the Government’s
evidence is not consistent with his own previous conclusion under Guideline D that the allegations
were in fact founded upon substantial record evidence.  Moreover, despite the Judge’s
8Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).
9
characterization of Applicant’s denials, they are factually specific and cannot reasonably be
attributed to a mere difference of opinion.  For example, Applicant’s statement in GE 6, that he had
inadvertently come across an image of child pornography once by accident, is not a statement of
opinion.  Rather, it asserts purported facts.  Insofar as these purported facts are not consistent with
other evidence that Applicant sought out sexually provocative images of young girls on several
occasions, a reasonable person could conclude that the statement in GE 6 is neither an honest
mistake or difference of opinion but a deliberate falsification. 
In sum, the SOR alleges under Guideline E that Applicant specifically denied allegations of
sexual misconduct that were supported by record evidence.  Accordingly, the Government met its
burden of production under Guideline E that Applicant deliberately provided false information
concerning (1) his viewing of child pornography and (2) his sexual encounters with underage
prostitutes.  The record, viewed as a whole, does not support a conclusion that Applicant met his
burden of persuasion as to mitigation of the Guideline E security concerns.  The Judge’s favorable
decision under Guideline E is not sustainable.  
In light of the discussion above, we conclude that the Judge’s decision fails to consider an
important aspect of the case and offers an explanation for the decision that runs contrary to the
weight of the record evidence.  ISCR Case No. 03-22861, supra.  The record does not support the
Judge’s treatment of the mitigating conditions or the whole-person factors.  Considering the standard
set forth in Egan, supra, and the Directive’s requirement that any doubt concerning an Applicant’s
access to classified information be resolved in favor of national security,8 the Judge’s favorable
security clearance decision is not sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s favorable security clearance decision is REVERSED.       
   
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                  
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
10
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
