                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ADP Case No. 08-08759 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E 
(personal conduct) security concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a Public Trust Position Application (SF-85P) on January 29, 
2008. On April 29, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
2 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on May 4, 2010. He answered the SOR in writing on 
May 20, 2011, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 12, 2010, and I was assigned the case on 
July 16, 2010.  
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 22, 2010, scheduling the case for 
August 17, 2010. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 14, which were received without objection. 
Applicant did not offer any exhibits, but did testify on his own behalf. I held the record 
open until August 27, 2010 to afford him the opportunity to submit additional evidence. 
Applicant timely submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were received 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 25, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old customer service representative, who has been 
employed by a defense contractor since May 2005. He seeks to retain access to 
sensitive information in conjunction with a public trust position, which is a condition of 
his continued employment. (GE 1, Tr. 16-17, 19.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in May 2000. He attended three colleges 
for about two years after high school and is unsure how many college credit hours he 
has earned. He is unmarried and has no dependents. (GE 1, Tr. 17-19.)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems that began as early as 2002. At 
some point in 2002, he was fired by his then employer, was out of work for “three or four 
months,” and was then rehired by the employer who fired him. While he was 
unemployed, his car was repossessed when he was unable to make his car payments. 
(SOR ¶ 1f (charged off account for $10,213).) (Tr. 21-22.) In 2004, he purchased a 
second car and later returned it to the creditor as a “voluntary” repossession because 
he lost his license (SOR ¶ 2a9 (past-due account for $3,497).) (Tr. 22-25.) Applicant lost 
his license for failure to pay numerous outstanding traffic-related tickets.  
 
 In 2002, when he was not working, he attended school and, in order to pay bills 
and pay for school, he began withdrawing money from bank accounts with no funds 
available. (Tr. 28.) By 2005, Applicant had acquired a number of debts and looked into 
debt consolidation. In November 2008, he filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy listing $54,171 in 
unsecured debt. In March 2009, he was awarded a discharge. (SOR ¶ 1a) (GE 10, Tr. 
29-30.)  
 
3 
 
 The SOR alleges five debts approximating $39,000. (Tr. 10.) Three of the debts 
alleged in the SOR were included in Applicant’s March 2009 discharge. Those 
discharged debts are: (1) SOR ¶ 1d – collection account for $898 originally owed to a 
local court and assigned to a collection agency; (2) SOR ¶ 1e – collection account for 
$250 originally owed to a local check cashing company and assigned to collection 
agency; and (3) SOR ¶ 1f – charged-off account for balance owed of $10,213 to an 
automobile financing company after his vehicle was repossessed.  
 
 The two remaining unresolved SOR debts owed and not discharged are: (1) SOR 
¶ 1b - past-due account for $8,000 owed to a local court for traffic tickets, and (2) SOR ¶ 
1c – federal tax lien filed in November 2008 in favor of the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) in the amount $20,408 in taxes, penalties, and interest. Applicant attached a 
payment schedule from a local court reflecting that he owed $617. (SOR Response.) 
Applicant explained that this amount was “part of the $8,000 that I owe.” (Tr. 32.) The 
payment schedule requires Applicant to pay $165 per month; however, he testified that 
he can only pay $50 per month. He indicated at his hearing that he could provide proof 
of payment. (Tr. 33-34.) Applicant did not submit any proof of payment for his $617 
payment schedule or documentation that he was making any progress towards paying 
his $8,000 debt to the local court. Applicant does not currently have a driver’s license, 
and it is his understanding that he will not get his license back until he pays the $8,000 
in fines.  
 
 Applicant began accruing tickets when he was 16 and did not pay his fines 
because he “didn’t think it would be an issue.” (Tr. 34-35.) In 2002, he was arrested on 
an outstanding warrant for failure to pay his traffic tickets. He claims that he did not 
know that he owed traffic-related fines until he was arrested. His state department of 
motor vehicles revoked his driver’s license in 2003 for failure to pay outstanding traffic 
fines. Since his license was revoked, Applicant has been cited at least two times for 
driving-related offenses, the most recent offense being in 2009. (AE 13, Tr. 35-37.) 
Applicant testified that he has not driven since then and takes the bus as his primary 
means of transportation. (Tr. 37.) 
 
 The IRS lien for $20,408 stemmed from Applicant’s federal tax liabilities for years 
2006, 2007, and 2008. One month after his SOR was issued, the IRS began garnishing 
Applicant’s pay at the rate of $100 per pay period. According to the May 2010 IRS 
garnishment letter, the amount they are attempting to collect from the Applicant is 
$9,239.32. However, Applicant’s credit reports reflect an IRS lien for $20,408 filed in 
November 2008. Applicant was unable to explain this discrepancy. (SOR Response, GE 
4, GE 5, GE 6, AE B. Tr. 37-39.) Applicant stated that he did not file correct federal 
income tax returns because, “I was dumb, being young.” (Tr. 39.) He received notices 
from the IRS that he owed them money and disregarded them until May 2010 claiming 
he did not have the money to pay his taxes. (Tr. 39-40.)  
 
 During cross-examination, Applicant revealed that he fraudulently claimed he 
was the father of children not his when filing his income taxes. (Tr. 40-41.) Applicant 
further revealed that he had the same issues with his state income taxes; however, the 
state has not pursued him until recently. (Tr. 42-43.) Applicant’s August 2010 pay stub 
4 
 
reflects bimonthly gross pay of $1,426.80. His net pay after deductions $877.32. (AE B, 
Tr. 43.) His net monthly pay averages $1,755. Applicant does not have a budget per se, 
and pays bills “that are important to [him].” He acknowledged that his methodology is 
not financially responsible. (Tr. 48-49.) Applicant has no savings and claims his one 
credit card account is current. (Tr. 49-50.) Additionally, Applicant owes $33,157 in 
deferred student loans that were due in October 2010. He hoped to get another 
deferment based on financial hardship because he is unable to repay his student loans. 
(GE 5, Tr. 50-52.) 
 
Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to an undetermined period of 
unemployment in 2002, discussed supra, and a period of unemployment from May 2003 
to December 2003. (GE 1, Tr. 25-26.) He also mentioned that he provided occasional 
financial assistance to his mother. During cross-examination, Applicant was asked if he 
intended to make a budget for himself and he responded, “I want to.” (Tr. 49.) He later 
indicated that he intended on making a budget. (Tr. 52.) Applicant did not submit a 
budget in any of his post-hearing exhibits. I note that Applicant completed mandatory 
credit counseling in February 2008 in conjunction with his filing Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
(GE 10.) However, there is no evidence that his financial situation is resolved or under 
control. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
When Applicant completed his Public Trust Position Application (SF-85P) in 
January 2008, he failed to list any loans or financial obligations that were 180 days 
delinquent. Specifically, he failed to list delinquent debt itemized in his Chapter 7 
bankruptcy filed in November 2008. The SOR identified nine separate debts that 
Applicant failed to list that were included in his bankruptcy. Applicant certified by his 
signature when completing his SF-85P that the information he provided was true, 
complete, and correct to the best of his knowledge and belief and made in good faith. 
He further acknowledged that a knowing and willful false statement on his SF-85P can 
be punished by fine or imprisonment or both.  
 
Applicant admitted that he did not list any of his debts on his SF-85P claiming 
that he did not think he had to list those debts. He explained that he was in the process 
of filing for bankruptcy. He stated that he had previously submitted an SF-85P and the 
information was lost. When Applicant had submitted an SP-85P in May 2004, he also 
did not list any loans or financial obligations that were 180 days delinquent. He denied 
that he was trying to avoid disclosure of his debts to the Government when completing 
his SF-85P reiterating that, “I just didn’t think it was needed for my job.” (GE 14, Tr. 53-
57.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Post-hearing, Applicant submitted one reference letter and a letter that he wrote 
on his own behalf. The reference letter was from his immediate supervisor. His 
supervisor noted that she has worked with the Applicant for the last four years. She 
5 
 
provided favorable comments about the Applicant and noted that he would be missed if 
his clearance was not granted. (AE C.)  
 
Among the topics discussed in Applicant’s letter, he admitted “to withholding 
information, but this was not an intentional thing.” He claimed he provided what he 
“could remember at the time or what I thought would suffice.” He stated he is attempting 
to pay off his outstanding debts, but did not submit any documentation that he was 
making payments to the state for his outstanding traffic tickets. He requested a 
favorable decision regarding his application for a public trust position. (AE A.) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
6 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The Guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.  
Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated five debts approximating $39,000 
and filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in November 2008. His indebtedness began as early as 
2002 and has been ongoing. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
7 
 
                                                          
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there is 
more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. Therefore, 
his debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)).  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant receives partial credit because his unemployment in 
2002 and 2003 was largely beyond his control. However, to receive full credit under this 
mitigating condition, Applicant has to demonstrate that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. I note that his most recent unemployment occurred five years before he 
filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy and seven years before his SOR was issued. Applicant had 
a significant period of time to evaluate his financial situation and make adjustments in 
the five-plus years since his last unemployment. There is no evidence that Applicant 
remained in contact with his creditors or tried to make minimum payments during this 
time.1 Under these facts, I am unable to apply full credit under this mitigating condition. 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable. Although Applicant participated in the 
mandatory credit counseling required when he filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2008, it is 
clear that his financial situation is not resolved or is under control. Likewise, there is not 
sufficient evidence in the record to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).2 Despite 
1 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner 
when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he 
maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his debts 
current. 
 
2 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
having being employed full-time since May 2005, there is no evidence that Applicant 
has made much of an effort to repay his overdue creditors. He did not provide proof that 
he was making payments on his $8,000 traffic-related debt to his state and he recently 
started making $100 payments per pay period to the IRS through garnishment. AG ¶ 
20(e) is not applicable because Applicant does not dispute the validity of the debts 
alleged. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the concern is that conduct involving questionable judgment, 
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15.) 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately provided false information or omitted 
required information on his January 2008 SF-85P. Applicant’s explanation that he did 
not think such information was needed for his job is insufficient to overcome his 
obligations to tell the complete truth during the security clearance vetting process. Nor is 
he excused from providing required financial information because he was contemplating 
filing bankruptcy. 3 The Government established through the evidence presented the 
disqualifying condition in AG ¶¶ 16(a). 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option in order to 
claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
3 Deliberate and materially false answers on a security clearance application violate 18 U.S.C. § 1001. 
The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 (1995): as a 
statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of influencing, the decision making 
body to which it is addressed.” See also United States v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 2004). 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Six personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
A statement is false when it is made deliberately -- knowingly and willfully. An 
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely 
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely 
thought the information did not need to be reported. Here, Applicant knew of financial 
problems and chose not to disclose them. He certified his answers to be true and 
correct. Had Applicant’s information been relied upon without verification, he may well 
have successfully vetted for a public trust position. Regardless of the reason Applicant 
chose not to be forthcoming, the process does not allow for applicants to pick and 
choose which answers they will answer correctly. When applicants lie on their public 
trust position applications, they seriously undermine the process as Applicant did in this 
case. I find that none of the mitigating conditions fully apply.4  
 
Making a false statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony (the maximum potential 
sentence includes confinement for five years and a $10,000 fine).  
 
4 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. To Applicant’s credit, he seems to have found a niche 
in his current employment. His immediate supervisor provided favorable comments 
about him and his performance. However, I cannot overlook his history of financial 
irresponsibility and personal conduct. Collectively, these concerns show a pattern of 
behavior that is troubling. He demonstrated indifference in incurring and resolving 
numerous traffic tickets he accumulated over the years. His problems with the IRS were 
of his own doing when he chose to claim dependents that were not his.  
 
Applicant’s deliberate failure to disclose information on his public trust position 
applications is serious, recent, and not mitigated. Overall, I have concerns about his 
current ability and willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole-person, I conclude he has not mitigated security concerns 
pertaining to financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
11 
 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1a – 1g:  Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 2a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
