 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10735 
  )  
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John F. Mardula, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 24, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G, 
Alcohol Consumption. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 19, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2010. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 5, 2010, and the hearing was convened as 
 
2 
 
 
scheduled on October 27, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was 
marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  Applicant testified, called one witness, and offered 
exhibits (AE) A through X, which were admitted into evidence without objection.1 
Applicant’s exhibit list was marked as HE II. Additionally, Applicant submitted two post-
hearing exhibits that were admitted into evidence as AE Y and Z. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 5, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations except for a 
discrepancy related to SOR ¶ 1.e concerning the location of his treatment. I have 
adopted these admissions in my findings of fact, and after a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He is divorced and has two children. He contributes to 
both daughters’ college costs. He has worked as a software specialist for a defense 
contractor for 10 years. He has a high school diploma and some college credits. He has 
held a security clearance since 1996.2   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) consuming alcohol, to the 
point of intoxication, from about 1983 (when he was 16 years old) to 2009 (admitted); 
(2) an arrest in January 2008, for a second offense driving while intoxicated (DWI) 
charge (admitted); (3) receiving treatment for alcohol abuse from June 2008 through 
February 2009 from an alcohol treatment program (admitted); (4) an arrest for felony hit-
and-run and resulting guilty plea to reckless driving charge in November 2007 
(admitted); (5) receiving treatment for alcohol issues from April 2004 through September 
2004 from an alcohol treatment program (admitted); and (6) arrest and resulting guilty 
plea to DWI in January 2004 (admitted). 
  
 When Applicant was around 16 years old, he began consuming alcohol. Most of 
the time he drank beer, but sometimes he also drank liquor. He drank about three beers 
at weekend parties and other social events. This pattern of drinking continued up 
through the time his children were born. He stopped drinking completely when they 
were infants. He resumed drinking alcohol again in the mid-1990’s. During this time, 
Applicant’s drinking pattern included going to bars and nightclubs every other day, 
either alone or with friends, and consuming alcohol. He would drink alcohol at the rate 
of 1.5 drinks per hour. During football season, he would spend approximately 10 hours 
at the bar on weekends. He drank as much as 12 beers on at least one occasion. 
During the weekday, he would spend about three to four hours at the bar after work. He 
would drink four to six drinks, mostly beer and sometimes a shot of liquor, on these 
                                                          
1 AE A through L were also attached to Applicant’s answer to the SOR. 
 
2 Tr. at 20-23, 45; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
occasions. He would drive himself home after these drinking sessions. He was most 
likely over the legal limit when he drove home after these sessions.3  
 
 Sometime in January 2004, Applicant drove from work and stopped at a bar near 
his home. He spent three to four hours there and consumed about two mixed drinks and 
five or six beers. He left the bar around 9:30 or 10:00 pm and started home. 
Approximately 100 yards from the bar, he stopped at a red light. He fell asleep while 
stopped at the light, his foot slipped off the brake, and he rolled into and hit the car in 
front of him. The police were called. He was suspected of drunk driving and given field 
sobriety and breathalyzer tests. He failed the tests and was arrested for DWI. He pled 
guilty to DWI and was sentenced. As part of his sentence, he was required to complete 
the Alcohol Safety Action Program (ASAP). His driver’s license was also suspended for 
one year.4 
 
 In 2004, as part of his ASAP requirement, Applicant saw an alcohol-abuse 
counselor. He attended 17 or 18 group counseling sessions. He does not recall 
receiving a diagnosis and he did not see the final evaluation by the counselor. The 
counselor’s evaluation did not state a diagnosis for Applicant, but stated in his final 
report, he believed Applicant showed “good to fair” insight into his alcohol involvement.5   
  
 In November 2007, Applicant stopped at the same bar that he was at prior to his 
2004 DWI charge and had three beers and a shot of liquor over the course of two to 
three hours. He then left the bar and drove home. On his way home, he ran into some 
road construction. He then had a fender bender with another vehicle. He spoke to the 
other driver and thought they had worked out a settlement arrangement and then he left 
the scene. He did not give the other driver his insurance information. Several days later, 
he was arrested for felony hit-and-run. The charge was reduced and he pled guilty to 
reckless driving. Applicant admitted he left the scene before the police arrived because 
he had been drinking.6  
 
 In January 2008, Applicant went to his favorite bar after work, stayed for about 
three hours and consumed four beers, one shot of liquor, and one mixed drink while he 
was there. He then drove home. He was stopped by a police officer because he crossed 
a center line. His blood alcohol content registered a .16 on the breathalyzer machine. 
He was arrested for DWI (second within five years). He pled guilty and was sentenced. 
His sentence included three years of probation, through April 2011. His driver’s license 
was suspended for three years, although he was able to get a restricted license with an 
                                                          
3 GE 4. 
 
4 GE 4; Tr. at 48-49. 
 
5 GE 9; Tr. at 50, AE G. 
 
6 GE 4; 51-52, 72-73. 
 
 
4 
 
 
interlock device for his vehicles. Once again, he was ordered by the court to attend 
ASAP classes.7  
 
 Starting in June 2008, as part of his ASAP requirement, Applicant saw a licensed 
clinical social worker (LCSW) about his alcohol problem. He was diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser. He attended 16 individual counseling sessions ending in October 2008. 
His prognosis was noted as “guarded”. Even though he completed his ASAP 
requirement, he was still on probation. In December 2008, Applicant was called in by his 
probation officer to give a breath sample. One of the conditions of his probation was 
total abstinence from alcohol. He tested positive for alcohol in his system. He admitted 
to his probation officer to drinking three beers the night before in violation of his 
probation. He was sent back to the LCSW he had previously seen. He admitted to his 
counselor that he drank on several more occasions during his probation. He also 
attended five additional counseling sessions. In a session held on December 16, 2008, 
the LCSW wrote this note about Applicant: “I am not so sure how committed he is to 
making things be different than they are”. The last treatment update document in the 
record from the LCSW is dated December 29, 2009, and his prognosis was still 
“guarded”. In his last treatment session on January 12, 2009, the LCSW wrote this note 
about Applicant: “I talked to him directly about drinking—he says that he might continue 
to drink when he is off probation”. The LCSW also stated: “I have to admit, that I do not 
have any idea whether he is continuing to drink or not”.8  
 
 Applicant testified that he last drank alcohol on December 3, 2008, the night 
before he was called into his probation officer’s office to give a breath sample. However, 
in his affidavit dated February 3, 2009, Applicant stated that from November 2008 
through the holiday season of 2008, he consumed about three beers per week at bars 
and holiday parties. He further stated his consumption since January 9, 2009, was 
about one beer every two weeks. Finally, he stated his last drink was one beer on 
February 1, 2009. Applicant knew all of these drinking episodes were violations of his 
probation.9  
 
 Applicant admitted he is an alcoholic and is currently attending Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) meetings about two times per week. He is not working the AA steps 
and has never had an AA sponsor. He signed a statement of intent that he will not 
abuse alcohol or drink and drive in the future. His probation officer noted that he 
completed his substance abuse education and treatment. Applicant is supported by 
character testimony and several character letters attesting to his honesty, 
trustworthiness, and reliability. Applicant is viewed as a valued employee and loyal 
                                                          
7 GE 4; Tr. at 52-55. 
 
8 GE 10; See Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) IV 305.00. 
 
9 Tr. at 47, 83-85, 91-93; GE 4. 
 
 
5 
 
 
friend. He is also received numerous performance awards and excellent job appraisals 
from his employer.10 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 32-39, 60, 89-97; AE B, D, J-Z. 
 
 
6 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Several are applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from, such as driving while under the 
influence. . .regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependant; 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 Applicant’s DWI arrests in 2004 and 2008 and his 2007 reckless driving arrest 
were all alcohol related incidents away from work. His drinking habits of attending the 
same bar, drinking heavily, and repeatedly driving home while intoxicated show a 
pattern of habitual or binge consumption. In October 2008, Applicant was diagnosed by 
a licensed clinical social worker from the state’s ASAP program as an alcohol abuser. In 
December 2008 through February 2009, he continued to drink alcohol after completion 
of his alcohol treatment program and while he remained on probation. All the 
disqualifying conditions listed above apply.  
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Alcohol Consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and especially considered the following: 
 
7 
 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 Applicant’s last alcohol-related arrest was in 2008, however, his drinking 
continued through February 2009 in violation of his terms of probation. Although over 
two years have past since his last arrest, Applicant’s history of drinking while driving, 
failed alcohol counselling, and questionable credibility concerning when he stopped 
drinking cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 
23(a) does not apply. Applicant acknowledges his alcoholism and claims to have 
established a pattern of abstinence since December 3, 2008. That claim is contradicted 
by his earlier admissions of drinking beyond that time. I am not convinced Applicant has 
established a pattern of abstinence that is sufficient under these facts. AG ¶ 23(b) does 
not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant is currently undergoing counselling or 
treatment, but there is evidence that he has a history of previous treatment and relapse. 
AG ¶ 23(c) does not apply. Applicant completed outpatient alcohol counselling in 2004, 
relapsed, then re-entered counselling in 2008 where he was placed back in the program 
after initially completing it when he tested positive for alcohol use by his probation 
officer. His prognosis from his LCSW was “guarded”. Although he is currently attending 
AA and he successfully completed his alcohol treatment in August 2010, he was not 
given a favorable prognosis. AG ¶ 23(d) partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
8 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
I have considered Applicant’s outstanding service to his employer. I also 
considered the character evidence offered by his coworkers. I considered his alcohol 
recovery efforts and his current participation in AA. However, I am concerned with 
Applicant’s apparent inconsistency about when he stopped drinking and his admitted 
probation violations. I fail to see that Applicant has changed his lifestyle in any 
meaningful way so that future alcohol related incidents are less likely to occur. 
Applicant’s actions raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under the Alcohol 
Consumption guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:   Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
