  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11458 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a judgment and 11 charged-off accounts or accounts placed for 
collection, which totaled approximately $26,000. He failed to document that the 
accounts are paid or that he established repayment plans. Additionally, he failed to list 
his 2000 felony conviction when he completed a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions. 
Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the security concerns under financial 
considerations and personal conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 5, 2010, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations and personal conduct. 
  
 In an undated response, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On August 12, 2010, I was assigned the case. On August 25, 2010, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing for the hearing held on Sepember 16, 2010.  
 
 The Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 7, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits 
A through E, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant was given 
to October 1, 2010, to submit additional documentation. No documentation was 
received. On September 24, 2010, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
On August 2, 2010, before the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend 
the SOR by amending SOR ¶ 2.a, alleging Applicant falsified his response to the 
question in section 23 of his Electronic Questionnaires for National Security Positions 
(e-QIP), dated August 19, 2008. The original SOR stated he had failed to list a felony 
arrest and conviction. The amended SOR provides additional information stating he 
deliberately failed to disclose that he had been arrested on or about December 18, 
1999, and charged with Felony First Degree Forgery and Misdemeanor Taking. In his 
August 29, 2010 response to the proposed amendment, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations. At the hearing he did not object to the amendment. (Tr. 16) The motion was 
granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted the factual allegation of the debt 
listed in SOR ¶ 1.a and to filing a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2000 as alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b. He admitted the factual allegation of SOR ¶ 2.a as listed in the Amended SOR. He 
denies the remaining factual allegations. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations 
are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old computer information security manager who has 
worked for a defense contractor since November 2009, and is seeking to obtain a 
security clearance. (Tr. 46) Applicant received a letter of commendation for his duty 
performance from February 2008 through December 2008. The letter indicated his 
commitment was clearly demonstrated, his diligence, resourcefulness, and genuine 
passion for outstanding customer service was noted. (Ex. E) 
 
 In May 1993, while on active duty in the U.S. Navy, Applicant wrote three checks 
totaling over $1,500 on a closed credit union account. (Ex. 4) The credit union informed 
 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
him his account had a negative balance and if he did not deposit sufficient funds his 
account would be closed. Funds were not supplied and the account was closed. He 
admitted writing one check after learning the account was closed. He told his 
commander he had not written the other checks. He told his commander his driver’s 
license and some of his checks had been stolen. It was determined he wrote all of the 
checks. (Ex. 4) Applicant was taken to a special court-martial, convicted, and reduced in 
grade. In February 1994, Applicant was separated from the Navy with an “other than 
honorable.” His DD Form 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty, 
lists the reason as “Misconduct—Absent Without Leave (30 Days or More).” (Ex. B) 
Applicant has asked the Navy to review his discharge. In September 2010, the 
discharge went before a Navy review board. (Tr. 38) Applicant has not received a 
decision from the review board.  
 
 On December 18, 1999, Applicant was arrested for forgery – first degree (a 
felony) and theft by taking. (Ex. 5) In July 2000, the matter was adjudicated in state 
court and he was convicted. Having been found guilty, he had to pay a $300 fine and 
was sentenced to three years probation. (Id.) His company had a zero tolerance for 
felonies and he was immediately let go by his company. (Tr. 26)  
 
 In October 2000, Applicant filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 13, Wage Earner’s 
Plan. The plan required $400 monthly payments and was to last five years. (Tr. 26-28) 
However, after obtaining a new job, Applicant believed he was making enough money 
to pay his bills without the Chapter 13. He returned to the bankruptcy court and asked 
that the Chapter 13 be dismissed. (Tr. 27) He was with a company for nine months 
before moving from another state to take a job with a large energy company. (Tr. 28) In 
January 2001, when the company went bankrupt, his job ended. (Tr. 28) He returned to 
a previous employer and worked for them until June 2004, when he was again laid off. 
(Tr. 28, 29)  
 
 Applicant was employed by another employer until September 2008, when he 
moved to another state for one year to work for a previous employer. (Tr. 29) In 2009, 
he obtained a job with his present employer, which required him to move to his current 
location in another state. (Tr. 29) As of November 2009, Applicant’s annual salary 
increased from $72,000 to $85,000. (Ex. D) 
 
 In August 2008, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions, a 
Standard Form (SF) 86. (Ex. 2) He answered “no” to question 23A which asked if he 
had been charged with or convicted of any felony offense even though he had a July 
2000 felony conviction. In his response to the Amended SOR, he stated he did not know 
he was charged with a felony and was told all charges had been dropped and were not 
on his record. (Amended SOR Answer, Tr. 60) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant gave a different reason for answering “no” to question 
23A. He noted that a number of the questions on the SF 86 limit the scope of the 
question to seven years prior to the completion of the questionnaire. (Tr. 30) The 
question related to having been charged with or convicted of a felony offense is not so 
 
4 
limited in scope. Applicant asserted he had no intention to lie to the government, but 
thought the question was limited to the previous seven years and his 1999 felony arrest 
had occurred more than seven years before completing his 2008 e-QIP. (Tr. 30)  
 
 In 2007, Applicant incurred a $4,943 account for schooling (SOR ¶ 1.a). He 
asserts he paid the debt, but it appeared on his August 2008 credit bureau report (CBR) 
(Ex. 3) and April 2010 CBR (Ex. 7). However, it does not appear on his April 2009 CBR 
(Ex. 4) or his September 2009 CBR (Ex. A).He asserted, but did not document, he 
made payments every two months on this debt. He asserted he made two payments of 
$1,500 and one of $1,900. (Tr. 33) Applicant was informed of the importance of 
providing documentation establishing that debts had been paid, were being paid, or 
were not his debts. (Tr. 37) Applicant asserted he would provide documents following 
the hearing, related to payment of this debt. (Tr. 37) No information was received. 
 
In 2000, after losing his job, Applicant could not pay his rent and was evicted. A 
$1,911 judgment was obtained against him for past-due rent. Applicant asserted he had 
paid this judgment and would attempt to get documents showing it has been paid. (Tr. 
39) No documentation was received. 
 
Applicant did not remember the $400 debt (¶ 1.e), but believes he had paid it. 
(Tr. 39) He asserted the account for television service (¶ 1.f, $128) was in his wife’s 
name and has been paid. (Tr. 41) Applicant maintains utility service with the creditor 
listed in ¶ 1.g ($495). (Tr. 42) Applicant does not believe the two bank collection 
account debts (¶ 1.i, $813 and ¶ 1.f, $740) are his as he was unfamiliar with the names 
of the banks. (Tr. 43) 
 
Applicant owed for cable service. These debts are listed under three separate 
account numbers and are listed as three separate accounts (SOR ¶ 1.h, $782; ¶ 1.j, 
$920; and ¶ 1.l, $1,058). (Tr. 44) Applicant asserts his cable service account has been 
paid. Another television service account (SOR (¶ 1.f, $128) was also placed for 
collection.  
 
 In 2002 or 2003, Applicant purchased a 1996 Ford Explorer for $20,000. (Tr. 35) 
After six or seven months he came to believe the vehicle was a “lemon” and hired an 
attorney to assist him with the purchase. (Tr. 34) The vehicle had engine problems, 
electrical problems, and gave appearances that it had been in a flood. (Tr. 35) 
Discussions were held between his attorney and the creditor’s attorney. Following the 
advice of his counsel, Applicant voluntarily returned the vehicle to the creditor. (Tr. 36) 
This resulted in a $13,834 debt (¶ 1.d).  
 
 Applicant and his wife attended a two-week debt management course. (Tr. 54) 
He learned of the importance of establishing a savings account, living within his means, 
and paying his debts. (Tr. 54) He currently has two credit cards which he is using to 
rebuild his credit. He pays off the balance “about every month.” (Tr. 54) 
 
5 
 As of April 2009, Applicant’s current net monthly income was approximately 
$4,000. His monthly expenses were approximately $2,000 and payment of his monthly 
debts was approximately $1,500. His monthly net remainder (monthly income less 
expenses and debt payment) was $363. (Ex. 6) Although the personal financial 
statement lists no income for his spouse, she makes approximately $50,000 per year as 
a librarian. (Tr. 46) Applicant and his wife have no children.  
 
 Applicant’s September 2010 CBR lists no delinquent account or other derogatory 
information. (Ex. A) Applicant is current on his monthly $170 student loan payments. 
(Tr. 45) He is current on the $637 monthly payment on the 2006 Toyota Tundra and 
current on the $700 monthly payment on the 2006 Toyota Sequoia. (Tr. 45) He is 
current on his $1,600 monthly mortgage for a home purchased in 2005. The home was 
purchased for $175,000, has a fair market value of $210,000, and approximately 
$150,000 is owed on the home. (Tr. 47)  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s judgment, accounts charged off, and accounts placed 
for collection and their current status follows: 
  
 
 
Creditor 
 
Amount 
 
Current Status 
a Collection agency 
collecting for school debt 
received in 2007. 
 
 
 
$4,943 No documentation was received showing 
Applicant has paid this debt. He asserts 
he has paid this debt. (Tr. 31) It appeared 
on his August 2008 CBR (Ex. 3) and April 
2010 CBR (Ex. 7), but does not appear 
on his April 2009 CBR (Ex. 4) or his 
September 2009 CBR (Ex. A). (Tr. 31) 
b Chapter 13 Bankruptcy 
filed in October 2000. 
 
 
 Applicant was terminated from his job 
due to a felony arrest. He was unable to 
pay his debts and filed for bankruptcy 
protection. 
c Judgment filed in 2002 for 
unpaid rent. 
 
$1,911 
 
No documentation was received showing 
Applicant has paid this debt. He asserts 
he has paid this debt. (Tr. 39) 
d Collection agency 
collecting charged-off 
account. 
$13,834 Following his attorney’s advice he 
returned the vehicle to the lender. (Tr. 35)
e Collection agency 
collecting collecting a 
telephone account. 
 
$400 No documentation was received showing 
Applicant has paid this debt. He thinks he 
paid this debt, but does not remember 
what the debt was. (Tr. 39) 
f Collection agency 
collecting for television 
service. 
$128 No documentation was received showing 
Applicant has paid this debt. The cable 
account was in his wife’s name. (Tr. 41) 
 
6 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
g Collection agency 
collecting for a utility 
company. 
 
$495 No documentation was received 
showing Applicant has paid this debt. 
He asserts he has paid this debt. He 
currently receives service from this 
company. (Tr. 42) 
h Collection agency 
collecting cable television 
service. 
 
$782 No documentation was received 
showing Applicant has paid this debt. 
He asserts he has paid this debt. He 
currently receives service from this 
company. (Tr. 42) The same creditor is 
listed in SOR 1.j and SOR 1.l. 
i Bank account placed for 
collection. 
 
 
 
$813 Unpaid. Applicant has no idea as to the 
creditor’s identity, but believes the debt 
is not his. (Tr. 43) No documentation 
showing payment or dispute of the 
account was provided. 
j Collection agency 
collecting for a cable 
television service. 
$920 No documentation was received 
showing Applicant has paid this debt. 
He asserts he has paid this debt. (Tr. 
42) Same creditor is listed in SOR 1.h 
and SOR 1.l. 
k Bank collection account. $740 Unpaid. He has no idea who the creditor 
identity. (Tr. 43)  
l Collection agency 
collecting for a cable 
television service. 
$1,058 
 
No documentation was received 
showing Applicant has paid this debt. 
He asserts he has paid this debt. (Tr. 
42) Same creditor is listed in SOR 1.h 
and SOR 1.j. 
 Total debt listed in SOR $26,024  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
7 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
8 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant has an unpaid judgment 
for rent and has ten collection or charged-off accounts, which totaled approximately 
$26,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” 
and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
9 
The SOR past-due debts do not appear on Applicant’s August 2010 CBR but do 
appear on his August 2008 CBR and March 2010 CBR. He asserts he paid the debts, 
but provided no documentation showing payments. He was specifically asked to 
document the status of the SOR accounts. No documentation was received.  
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because he 
did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent debt. Because 
there is more than one delinquent debt, his financial problems are not isolated. There is 
no showing the delinquent accounts have been paid or resolved. Therefore, his debts 
are a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). His failure to show proof of payments of these debts casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), he receives partial mitigation because Applicant=s financial 
problems were contributed to by his unemployment and having to relocate to new states 
in search of work. However, he has been employed at his current job since November 
2009 and the debts remain unpaid.  
 
Applicant and his wife attended a two-week debt management course where he 
learned the importance of establishing a savings account, living within his means, and 
paying his debts. He is current on his two credit cards, but there is no documentation 
showing he has paid any of the SOR debts. It is too early to conclude his financial 
problems are under control. I find the mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 
20(d) do not apply.  
 
Applicant has three accounts with the same cable company, asserts they are 
duplications of each other, and asserts he currently has an account with the same cable 
company which establishes he does not owe the three debts. The debts all have 
different account numbers and he lived in various states. He did not show he was 
current on his cable account. He failed to establish that all the accounts are the same 
obligation and that the obligations have been paid.  
 
 The mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 20(e) do not apply. Applicant has disputed a 
number of the obligations stating they have been paid or are not his debts. However, for  
AG ¶ 20(e) to apply, he must provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue, neither of which he has 
done.  
 
 Because Applicant was unemployed he filed for bankruptcy protection in 2000. I 
do not find against him because of this. I find for him as to SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 15 articulates the security concerns relating to 
personal conduct: 
 
10 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition under AG ¶ 16 is 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 In August 2008, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he failed to indicate he had 
a felony arrest in 1999, which resulted in a felony conviction in 2000. His failure to 
disclose the felony arrest and conviction demonstrates a lack of candor required of 
individuals seeking a security clearance. The Government has an interest in examining 
all relevant and material adverse information about an Applicant before making a 
clearance decision. The Government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose adverse 
information in a timely fashion, not when it is perceived to be prudent or convenient. 
Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about himself provides 
some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent violations or other concerns in 
the future, something the Government relies on to perform damage assessments and 
limit the compromise of sensitive information.  
 
 The event was of such significance that he was fired from his company because 
of its felonious nature. He went to court, paid a $300 fine, and was placed on three 
years probation. He would have had to take actions in compliance with his probation. 
He first asserted he did not list it because he did not know it was a felony and was told 
the charge had been dropped. At hearing, he asserted he failed to list it because it 
occurred more than seven years before he completed the questionnaire. I am not 
persuaded by his reason for failing to reveal the felony.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions related to personal conduct apply. Applicant did 
not make a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts (AG ¶ 17(a)). The mitigating factors in 
AG ¶ 17(b) “the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused or 
significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of authorized personnel or 
legal counsel advising or instructing the individual specifically concerning the security 
clearance process. Upon being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide 
the information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully,” does not apply because 
there was no refusal, failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment caused by 
improper advice. 
 
11 
 The offense Applicant failed to list was a felony. AG ¶ 17(c) “the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” does not apply. Applicant 
has not acknowledged the bad behavior nor obtained counseling. AG ¶ 17(d) “the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur” does not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress” and AG ¶ 17(g) “association with 
persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or occurs under circumstances that do 
not cast doubt upon the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness 
to comply with rules and regulations,“ do not apply. AG ¶ 17(f) “the information was 
unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability” does not apply because the 
felony arrest and conviction was substantiated.  
 
 Applicant’s conduct suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of 
legitimate Government interests. I resolve Guideline E against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant asserts that some of the 
debts have been paid and others of the debts are not his. However, he failed to 
document this. His mere assertion is insufficient evidence to find these obligations have 
 
12 
been paid. There is no evidence the delinquent accounts have been paid or are not 
owed. Additionally, he was not truthful when he completed his SF 86. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant     
  Subparagraphs 1.c–1.l:  Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
