1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-06473
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco J. Mendez Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se       
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
that, dating back to 1988 and continuing until about 2007, he made a series of
deliberately false statements about his use of marijuana. In addition, he made
deliberately false statements about his security clearance history. His explanation, that
any such statements were not deliberately false and were inadvertent or due to
inattention, is simply belied by the extensive documentary evidence. Accordingly, as
explained below, this case is decided against Applicant.
 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Appellate Exhibit I. 2
2
 Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on June 29, 2010,1
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar
to a complaint, and it sets forth the factual basis for the action under the security
guidelines known as Guideline E for personal conduct and Guideline B for foreign
influence. The SOR also recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative
judge to decide whether to deny or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  
On July 15, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me September 13, 2010. The hearing took place pursuant to
written notice on October 15, 2010. The transcript (Tr.) was received October 22, 2010.
Procedural Matters
On September 28, 2010, Department Counsel withdrew the allegation in SOR ¶
1.k.  Accordingly, a formal  finding in Applicant’s favor will be entered. In addition,2
Department Counsel amended the falsification allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d by alleging that
Applicant falsified material facts in a 1999 security clearance application when he
denied using marijuana in the preceding seven years.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 42-year-old self-employed consultant. His employment history
includes active duty in the U.S. Navy from 1988 through 2002. In the Navy, he was
trained as a cryptologist and worked in the field of intelligence. He then worked for a
series of three federal contractors. He began consulting in 2004, and some of his
consulting work has overlapped his employment with the federal contractors.  
Concerning Applicant’s past use of marijuana, which is the factual predicate for
many of the falsification allegations, he used marijuana sporadically beginning in about
1983, when he was student, and ending in about October 1995, when he was serving in
the Navy. In other words, his marijuana use occurred both before and after his
enlistment in the Navy in 1988. Some of his marijuana use in the Navy took place in the
early 1990s while he was serving as a cryptologist with a top-secret security clearance
 Exhibits 1, 2, and A. 3
 Exhibit 3. 4
 Exhibits 4 and 5. 5
 Exhibit 4. 6
 Exhibit 6. 7
 Exhibits 7 and 8. 8
3
as well  access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI). Additional details about
his marijuana use are set forth below.
Applicant completed a security clearance application for the Navy in June 1988.3
He admitted a one-time use of marijuana in about May 1986. He also stated his
intention of no future use. Subsequently, the Navy granted him a security clearance. 
As part of a periodic reinvestigation, Applicant completed a security clearance
about five years later in October 1993.  In the application, he denied ever trying or using4
or possessing any narcotic, to include marijuana. Applicant was interviewed in May
1994 as part of his background investigation.  During that interview, he stated that he5
had used marijuana once with friends when he was about 15 years old, and that he had
no intention of using marijuana again.  Also, he explained his failure to list his marijuana6
use in October 1993 security clearance application was due to oversight. 
Another interview occurred in August 1994, when Applicant provided additional
details about his marijuana use.  In a signed and sworn statement, Applicant admitted7
using marijuana two to four times per month from 1983 to 1985, twice per month from
1985 to 1986, and on two or three occasions between 1986 and January 1988. He
denied any use since January 1988, which was some months before his initial
enlistment. He also admitted that he intentionally provided false information about his
marijuana use to the Navy when he enlisted and to interviewing officials. 
Applicant made another signed and sworn statement about his marijuana use in
October 1994.  He admitted being untruthful in his previous sworn statement because8
he had used marijuana twice after January 1988. He explained that he intentionally
withheld that information because he was concerned about his security clearance and
his Navy career. He reported that he smoked marijuana with friends during
October–November 1992 while on leave, and in June 1994 while on leave as well. He
also pledged to forgo using marijuana in the future:
I realize now that I cannot risk my chances of staying in the Navy and I
made a conscious decision in June 1994 never to smoke marijuana again.
My friends will have to understand that I cannot smoke marijuana with
 Exhibit 8 at 1. 9
 Exhibit 9. 10
 Exhibit 11. 11
 Exhibit 12. 12
 Exhibit 13. 13
 Exhibit 14. 14
 Exhibit 15. 15
4
them again. I can state with certainty and unequivocally that I do not
intend to smoke marijuana or use any other illegal drug in the future.9
As part of a periodic reinvestigation, Applicant completed a security clearance
application about five years later in September 1999.  In the application, he answered10
all three drug-related questions in the negative. In particular, he answered “No” to
Question 27, which asked if he had used any illegal drugs, including marijuana, within
the last seven years. And he answered “No” to Question 28, which asked if he had ever
illegally used a controlled substance while, in relevant part, possessing a security
clearance. The September 1999 security clearance application reveals no information
about his use of marijuana.
After his discharge from the Navy in 2002, Applicant was sponsored for SCI
access with another governmental agency. It denied him SCI access in August 1996
under the personal conduct and sexual behavior security guidelines.  Notification of11
that clearance decision took place in September 2006, when he was advised of his
eligibility to appeal the denial decision.  The decision became final in November 2006,12
when he chose not to appeal.13
Applicant completed a security clearance application a few months later in
January 2007, in order to retain a security clearance to work in the defense industry.  In14
the application, he answered “No” to Question 24b, which asked if he had ever illegally
used a controlled substance while, in relevant part, possessing a security clearance.
And he answered “No” to Question 26b, which asked, in relevant part, if, to his
knowledge, he had ever had a clearance or access authorization denied, suspended, or
revoked. 
As his application was pending, the Defense Security Service took the unusual
step of suspending Applicant’s security clearance.  The action was taken in February15
2007, and it was based upon notification of the decision to deny him SCI access in
2006. Applicant was advised of this action by letter in February 2007. 
Applicant was interviewed as part of his background investigation about five
months later in July 2007. The interview addressed multiple topics, including his security
 Exhibit 16. 16
 Exhibit 16 at 13. 17
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to18
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.19
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 20
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 21
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).22
5
clearance history.  He stated during the interview that he had been subject to an16
investigation every five years since about 1989. And he also stated that he had never
had a clearance or access authorization denied, suspended, or revoked.17
In his hearing testimony, Applicant contended that he has not made deliberately
false statements. Concerning the security clearance applications, he contended that the
mistakes were due to inadvertence or not paying attention to detail. On these points, I
found his testimony to be not worthy of belief. 
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As18
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt19
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An20
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  21
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.23
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.24
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.25
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 26
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).27
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.28
 AG ¶¶ 15, 16, and 17 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 29
6
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An23
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate24
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme25
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.26
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.27
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it28
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline E for personal conduct,  the suitability of an applicant may be29
questioned or put into doubt due to false statements and credible adverse information
that may not be enough to support action under any other guideline. The overall
concern under Guideline E is:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
 AG ¶ 15. 30
 AG ¶¶ 17(a)–(g). 31
 See 18 U.S.C. § 1001 (making a false statement within the jurisdiction of a federal agency is a felony).32
7
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  30
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An omission
of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about
it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the
information did not need to be reported. 
The gravamen of the SOR concerns the multiple allegations of Applicant making
deliberately false statements during the security clearance process. Rather than
analyzing each statement in a piecemeal fashion, it is proper to analyze them as a
whole as the evidence shows they are factually interrelated. The evidence establishes
that Applicant made at least eight deliberately false statements from 1988 to 2007.
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a,1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.n) While in the Navy, Applicant made false
statements about his marijuana use when completing security clearance applications in
1988 and 1993; when completing a sworn statement in 1994; and when completing a
security clearance application in 1999. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.e) His statements were false
because he intentionally failed to disclose the full extent of his pre- and post-enlistment
marijuana use. But his false statements did not end with his discharge from the Navy in
2002. After he was denied SCI access in 2006, he made false statements when
completing a security clearance application and during a background interview in 2007.
(SOR ¶¶ 1.l–1.n) His statements were false because he intentionally failed to disclose
his marijuana use while holding a security clearance as well as the 2006 denial of SCI
access. His contentions of making honest mistakes due to inadvertence or inattention
are simply belied by the extensive documentary evidence. Accordingly, on this basis,
the following disqualifying conditions under Guideline E apply against Applicant:
¶16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
¶16(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
I have considered all the mitigating conditions under Guideline E, and conclude
that none apply.  Making false statements to the federal government during the security31
clearance process is serious misconduct,  and it is not easily explained away,32
 Directive, ¶ 6.2. 33
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).34
 The matters of personal conduct alleged here are mitigated by the passage of time without recurrence.35
These matters are not discussed further in this decision. 
 In his Answer, Applicant denied the allegation of inappropriate sexual behavior, describing it as “totally36
inaccurate.” Department Counsel did not cross-examine Applicant on this allegation (Tr. 79–82), and did not
present witness testimony in support of this allegation. This matter is not discussed further in this decision.
 The matter of personal conduct alleged here is decided for Applicant because the evidence fails to show37
Applicant had a duty or requirement to disclose the information in SOR ¶ 1.h. This matter is not discussed
further in this decision. 
8
extenuated, or mitigated. Most troubling is the apparent pattern of Applicant making
deliberately false statements beginning in 1988, when he first applied for a security
clearance, and then continuing over a period of years despite being confronted with and
acknowledging his actions. But his false statements did not end in 2007, when his
security clearance was suspended. He continued to make false statements when trying
to reconcile his various statements during his hearing testimony. His mendacity militates
against a conclusion of reform and rehabilitation.  
To conclude, individuals seeking to obtain or retain a security clearance are
required to give full, frank, and truthful answers to relevant questions about their
background.  The evidence here shows Applicant fell far short of that standard. The33
facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s pattern of behavior and questionable
judgment justify current doubts about his suitability for a security clearance. Following
Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting
national security. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-
person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence. Applicant did not meet his34
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is
decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.f–1.g: For Applicant35
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant36
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant  37
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k: Withdrawn 
Subparagraphs 1.l–1.n: Against Applicant
 The foreign influence matter alleged here is mitigated by Applicant’s good-faith efforts to have his wife38
immigrate to the United States from Columbia, where she is a citizen resident. This matter is not discussed
further in this decision.  
9
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: For Applicant38
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.          
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
