                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-08065
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On July 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 5, 2010, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on September 20, 2010, and provided additional information within the
30 days permitted. The additional information consisted of documentation of Applicant’s
monthly payments on his student loan account since August 2009 and his enrollment in
a credit counseling program and payment of old credit card accounts. Applicant’s
2
submissions are admitted as Items 9 and 10.  Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated delinquent student loan
debts as follows: (a) the creditor identified in subparagraph 1.a in the amount of
$11,251; (b) the creditor identified in subparagraphs 1.b through 1.e in the respective
amounts of $7,424, $3,613, $7,323, and $2,972.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied each of the allegations of the SOR.
He claimed that all of the listed student loan debts covered by the SOR are included in
his repayment plan and attached documentation of his established repayment schedule
with one student loan creditor.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 40-year-old security officer for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
                                  
Applicant is single and has never been married. (Item 4).  He has some on-line
technical college credits (May 1996 to December 1997), and earned a diploma in
advanced lock-smithing in December 1997. (Item 4) He earned additional college
credits in the early 1990s. He has no military service to his credit.
Applicant accumulated a number of student loan debts while attending college in
the early 1990s. (Item 7) Credit reports reflect delinquent student loan debts totaling
approximately $32,500. (Items 5 and 6) Applicant is indebted to creditor 1.a in the
amount of $12,427. (Item 5). This loan was initiated with Sallie Mae and transferred to
creditor 1.a before being consolidated with another creditor in July and August 2009.
(Item 3) Applicant provided documentation of monthly payments of $203 to this
consolidated account since July 2009 (Items 3 and 10), and to Sallie Mae earlier for the
months of May 2008 through May 2009 prior to the consolidation with the current
creditor holding this student loan account. (Item 3) His supplemental submissions
document his scheduled monthly payments to creditor 1.a between August 2009 and
September 2010.  See Items 9 and 10.  
Besides his consolidated Sallie Mae student loan, Applicant had prior student
loans with creditor 1.b-e. These accounts total over $21,000 and have since been
consolidated with another education loan servicing firm. (Item 3) With his answer, he
documented his payments to this consolidated loan account in fulfillment of the
requirements established by DoE for returning the accounts to rehabilitation status.
(Items 3 and 8) Applicant also documented the consolidated creditor responsible for the
accounts covered by subparagraphs 1.c through 1.e. This creditor set up a monthly
installment account for him on his newly consolidated loans. (Items 3 and 8)  Prior to
consolidating his student loans with his new consolidated student loan creditor,
Applicant made payments to the creditor identified in subparagraphs 1.b through 1.e.
3
(Item 3) In a letter to Applicant in September 2009, this latter creditor confirmed that
Applicant’s consolidated loan accounts would then be transferred to a new lender and
his default status would be removed.  (Item 8)  
Applicant’s provided personal financial statement reports monthly net income of
$2,400 and monthly expenses of $1,886. (Item 8).  His reported monthly payments on
his student loan accounts total $418, leaving him a net monthly remainder of $96. (Item
8) Applicant’s most recent credit report confirmed Applicant is timely with all of his other
consumer accounts.  See Items 5 and 6.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” 
These AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is
to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
4
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
5
Analysis  
Applicant is a security officer for a defense contractor who accumulated a
number of student loan defaults over the past 10 years. His accumulation of these
delinquent debts and his past inability and unwillingness to address them warrant the
application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”
Applicant’s debts are attributable in part to some indicated layoffs and other
unexplained setbacks. His debts encompass multiple student loan accounts that he
has since restored to current status. 
Based on the documented materials in the FORM, some extenuating
circumstances are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay of or otherwise resolve
his debts. Under the circumstances presented, MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly,” applies.
Moreover, some judgment problems persist over Applicant’s unexplained
student loan delinquencies.  However, he has since cured the deficiencies on each of
his defaulted loan accounts, and they have all been returned to current status. See
ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
                                         
Evaluating all of his repayment efforts contextually, Applicant may be credited
with serious, good-faith efforts to resolve his student loan defaults and regain control
of his finances. He documents considerable progress to date in regaining control of
his finances and shows good promise for fulfilling his remaining student loan
obligations.
Based on his evidentiary showing, Applicant’s proofs are sufficient to establish
significant extenuating circumstances associated with his debt accumulations. As a
result, MC  ¶ 20(b) of the financial considerations guideline, “the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly),” applies in part to
Applicant’s circumstances. 
Applicant’s repayment efforts entitle him to mitigation credit under MC ¶ 20(d),
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts,” as well. Applicant has demonstrated credible resolve in addressing his
student loan accounts. These mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s situation,
considering his earnest repayment efforts. 
Based on a whole-person assessment, Applicant surmounts the judgment
questions raised by his accumulation of several student loan defaults in the past
several years. On balance, he has shown sufficient tangible effort in addressing his
6
student loan defaults to mitigate security concerns over these accumulated  debts and
demonstrate restored control over his finances. 
Taking into account all of the extenuating facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s student loan debt accumulations and the concerted steps taken to
address them, safe predictive judgments can be made about his ability and intentions
to repay his accrued debts and restore his finances to stable levels commensurate
with his holding a security clearance. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to
the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e.   
Whole-person assessment enables Applicant to surmount the judgment
questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent student loan debts. Overall,
clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the amount of information
available for consideration in this record enables him to establish judgment and trust
levels sufficient to overcome security concerns arising out of his accumulation of
delinquent student loan accounts.  
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, his explanations, and his documented corrective
steps to restore his defaulted student loans to eligible status, safe predictions can be
made about Applicant’s ability to repay his debts and restore his finances to stable
levels commensurate with the minimum requirements for holding a security clearance.
Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs. 1.a through 1e:      For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
7
                                        
  
