 
 1 
 
                                                              
                  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
   )     ISCR Case No. 09-08245 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a native U.S. citizen who was raised and educated in Greece. A  
resident of the United States since 2000, he did not register for the U.S. Selective Service 
because he was unaware of the requirement to do so until he was too old to register. He 
returned to Greece in November 2008 to serve two months of compulsory military service 
in the Greek army, and is the legal owner with his brother of two properties in Greece worth 
around $150,000 US. Applicant initiated the process to renounce his Greek citizenship in 
July 2010, but the foreign preference concerns are not fully mitigated. Clearance denied. 
                   
 Statement of the Case  
 
On May 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
C, Foreign Preference, Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, 
which provided the basis for its preliminary decision to deny him a security clearance. 
DOHA took the action under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
 
 2 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department 
of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 27, 2010, and he requested a hearing. On 
June 30, 2010, the case was assigned to me to consider whether it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. On July 2, 
2010, I scheduled a hearing for July 20, 2010. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Before the introduction of any evidence, I was 
notified that the Government had amended the SOR, in part to strike Guideline B, as set 
forth below. Three Government exhibits (Ex. 1-3) were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on July 29, 2010. 
 
At Applicant‟s request, I held the record open until August 10, 2010, for him to 
document actions to relinquish his foreign citizenship. On August 9, 2010, Applicant 
forwarded a letter addressed to the Consulate of Greece. In response, Department 
Counsel noted there was no proof the letter had been mailed, and she proposed reopening 
the record for Applicant to provide evidence of mailing. On August 30, 2010, Applicant 
forwarded a certified mail receipt of that date. Applicant was granted until September 10, 
2010, to clarify the record about the date he applied to renounce his foreign citizenship. On 
September 8, 2010, Applicant explained that he re-sent his application in response to the 
Government‟s concerns about mailing, and he submitted a letter from the Greek Consulate 
verifying receipt of his application to renounce his Greek citizenship. Department Counsel 
did not object to the admission of Applicant‟s letter of August 9, 2010 (Ex. A), the certified 
mail receipt (Ex. B), or his explanation with attached letter from the Greek Consulate (Ex. 
C), and the documents were entered into evidence.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 On June 16, 2010, the Government amended the SOR to delete Guideline B and 
allegations concerning the Greek citizenship and residency of family members and 
Applicant‟s travels to Greece; to allege under Guideline C those allegations previously 
under Guideline B concerning Applicant‟s ownership of property in Greece and 
maintenance of a bank account in Greece; and to renumber as ¶ 2.a the Guideline E 
concern related to failure to register with the U.S. Selective Service. Applicant responded 
to the SOR on June 24, 2010. Guideline C, ¶ 1 of the amended SOR, now reads as 
follows: 
 
a. You exercise dual citizenship with Greece and the United States by: 
 
 (1) Serving in the Greek Army from November 2008 to January 2009 
even though you are a United States citizen by reason of your birth in the 
United States and have resided in the United States since at least 2000. 
 
 (2) You own at least two properties in Greece for a total value of 
approximately $240,000.00. 
 
 
 3 
 (3) You maintain a bank account in Greece with a balance of 
approximately $5,000.00. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In addition to the Guideline C concerns, the amended SOR alleges under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct, that Applicant has not registered with the United State Selective 
Service System (SOR 2.a). In his response of June 24, 2010, Applicant admitted his 
service in the Greek Army (SOR 1.a(1)), but he denied SOR 1.a(2) and 1.a(3). Applicant 
did not respond to SOR 2.a, although he admitted in his May 27, 2010 response to the 
original SOR that he had not registered with the Selective Service because he was not 
made aware of the requirement until he was too old to register. 
 
After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old test engineer, who has worked for his current employer 
since May 2009. (Ex. 1.) He was granted an interim security clearance four or five months 
after he began his employment, and he held that clearance until May 2010. (Tr. 36.) 
 
Applicant was born in the United States in July 1977. His parents are both resident 
citizens of their native Greece, although his father also possesses dual citizenship with the 
United States (Ex. 1.), apparently through a previous marriage to a U.S. citizen. (Ex. 2.)  In 
1979, Applicant moved with his parents to Greece, where he was raised and educated. (Tr. 
35.) At age 18, he did not register with the United States Selective Service because he was 
living in Greece and not aware of any requirement to do so.
1 
He officially registered as a 
                                                 
1
 Under the Selective Service System (50 U.S.C. App. § 451 et seq.), it is the duty of every male citizen of the 
United States, and every other male person now or hereafter in the United States, who, on the day or days 
fixed for the first or any subsequent registration, is between the ages of eighteen and twenty-six, to present 
himself for and submit to registration at such time or times and place or places, and in such manner, as shall 
be determined by proclamation of the President and by rules and regulations prescribed hereunder. 50 U.S.C. 
App. § 453. Under 50 U.S.C. § 462(a), the knowing failure, neglect, or refusal to perform any duty required 
under the Selective Service Act is punishable by a term of imprisonment of up to five years and/or a fine of not 
more than $10,000, although indictment must be within five years after the last day before the male turns 26 or 
within five years after the last day before the male registers, whichever is first. In 1982, the Selective Service 
Act was amended under Public Law 97-252 to provide that those persons who fail to comply with the 
registration requirement are ineligible for any form of assistance or benefit (loans, grants, or work assistance) 
provided under Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 for instruction beginning after June 30, 1983 (50 
U.S.C. App. § 453(f)(1)). In November 1985, a statutory bar to employment with the executive branch of the 
federal government was enacted for those persons who were required to register under the Selective Service 
Act and who knowingly and willfully had not registered before the requirement terminated or became 
inapplicable to them (5 U.S.C. § 3328). In November 1986, pursuant to Public Law 99-661, the Selective 
Service Act was amended to make some non-registrants eligible for educational assistance and other federal 
benefits: 
 
(g) A person may not be denied a right, privilege, or benefit under Federal Law by reason of failure to present 
himself for and submit to registration under section 3 [section 453 of this Appendix] if-- 
(1) the requirement for the person to so register has terminated or become inapplicable to the person; and 
(2) the person shows by the preponderance of the evidence that the failure of the person to register was not a 
knowing and willful failure to register. 50 U.S.C. App. § 462(g). 
 
 4 
Greek citizen in Greece for the first time, to sit for national university examinations. He 
obtained his Greek passport in September 1996 for identification. It was valid for five years. 
(Ex. 1.) He was not sure whether he could use his U.S. passport for that purpose and did 
not want to take a chance that he would be denied the examinations. (Tr. 39-42.) Applicant 
received a free college education in Greece as a benefit available to permanent residents 
who pass the entrance examinations. (Ex. 39.)  
 
In early July 2000 Applicant came to the United States. (Tr. 35, 65.) He wanted to 
see the United States, and to improve his English so that he could pursue his graduate 
education here. He did not intend to remain in the United States permanently. (Tr. 38.) He 
returned to Greece in September 2000 to finish his degree, which was awarded to him in 
October 2000, and he returned to the United States in November 2000. (Tr. 65.) Applicant 
took a couple of courses at a public university in the United States starting in January 
2001, and worked part-time as a cook at a pizza restaurant from September 2002 to June 
2003. He then pursued his master‟s degree in engineering full-time, which was awarded to 
him in October 2005. (Ex. 1.) From October 2005 to June 2006, Applicant held an 
internship with a computer company in the United States. (Ex. 1; Tr. 37.) After his contract 
ended, he was unemployed for a couple of months. In August 2006, he started working as 
a test engineer in the United States. (Ex. 1.)  
 
Applicant traveled to Greece yearly for a two or three-week stay to visit his parents 
and to vacation. He had an educational deferment from compulsory military service for 
Greece until 2003. When the deferment ended and he failed to enlist, he was adjudged by 
a court in Greece as a “deserter” and not permitted to travel to Greece without completing 
his military service. (Tr. 82-83.) Around 2004, the law changed, and those male Greek 
citizens who had not served in the Greek military could visit Greece for up to one month. 
During a trip to Greece in 2005, Applicant was informed by a Greek official at the airport 
that he could not leave the country without fulfilling his one-year of compulsory military 
service. Applicant was allowed to depart Greece after he brought up the change in the law. 
In 2007, the military service requirement was reduced from one year to six months for 
those Greek citizens who had established permanent residency and employment abroad 
for seven years. And those persons could visit Greece for a stay up to six months. (Tr. 47-
51.) To be eligible, Applicant had to register his U.S. permanent residency status with the 
Greek Consulate every six months, which he apparently did. (Tr. 51-52.)  
 
  While Applicant‟s Greek passport was still valid, he took both his Greek and U.S. 
passports with him when he traveled to Greece. He presented his U.S. passport to access 
customs because the line was shorter than for those persons holding passports from 
European Union member nations. His current U.S. passport was issued to him in April 
2004. (Ex. 1; Tr. 44, 88-89, 91.) He usually brought funds with him from the United States 
to pay his expenses in Greece. For a three-week trip in 2007, he brought $5,000 into 
Greece. He did not change the currency into Euros because of a poor exchange rate for 
the dollar at the time, and his father gave him some Euros. Applicant opened a bank 
account in Greece in his and his brother‟s names into which he deposited the $5,000 
instead of bringing the money back into the United States so that he would have funds to 
spend in Greece in the future. (Tr. 66-67.) Applicant used his Greek identification card to 
 
 5 
open the account because it was easier than using his U.S. passport (“If you use the 
American passport, it takes more time and they give you a hard time”). (Tr. 68.) 
 
In September 2007, Applicant and his brother, who is a citizen of Greece with 
permanent residency in the United States, bought their current residence, a two-family 
home, in the United States. (Ex. 1; Tr. 69-70.) In September 2008, Applicant resigned from 
his employment and returned to Greece for family reasons. His mother was depressed 
because both of her sons were living in the United States, and so he went to see her. (Ex. 
1; Tr. 45-46.) Unemployed but looking to work in Greece or the United States (Tr. 53-54.), 
Applicant decided to fulfill the basic training component of his compulsory six-months of 
active duty military service for Greece. As a citizen of Greece, Applicant would be ineligible 
for employment in Greece if he did not fulfill his military obligation. He completed his basic 
training in the Greek Army from November 17, 2008 to January 12, 2009. (Ex. 1, 2; Tr. 31-
32, 46, 54.) 
 
Uncertain whether he would be able to land a job in Greece (Tr. 75.), Applicant 
returned to the United States in January 2009 because it offered better job opportunities 
and he did not like the crime or overcrowding in the Greek capital. He decided to make his 
permanent home in the United States. (Tr. 38-39, 47, 77-78.) Applicant understood that he 
could fulfill the four months remaining of his compulsory military service for Greece by 
paying a fee when he turns 35. The fee is now around 800 Euros for each month of service 
not completed. (Ex. 2; Tr. 32.) 
 
Applicant was unemployed until May 2009, when he began working for his present 
employer as a test engineer. He completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on July 15, 2009, on which he indicated that he had dual citizenship 
with Greece and the United States since October 1995. He responded “No” to whether he 
had registered with the U.S. Selective Service System and indicated, “I was not aware of 
the agency.”
2
 He disclosed his service at the enlisted rank in the Greek Army from 
November 2008 to January 2009, and added: 
 
All Greek citizens are obligated to serve army. If you are permanent resident 
abroad though, you serve a reduced time and you have the right to do it in 
different time frames. I served 2 months, which is the basic training, and I still 
owe 4 months which I have to do if I stay in Greece for more than six 
months. 
 
Applicant indicated that he was sharing his residence with his brother, a Greek citizen. 
Concerning any foreign activities, Applicant disclosed that he had $5,000 US on deposit in 
a foreign bank account, and that he “inherited” three apartments in Greece valued at 
$240,000 total. He indicated that he had previously held a Greek passport from September 
1996 to September 2001, and that he had made many short trips to Greece totaling 160 
days between August 2004 and January 2009. (Ex. 1.) 
                                                 
2 After being asked for his Selective Service registration number on the e-QIP, Applicant accessed the 
Selective Service System website, which understandably showed no record under his social security number 
since he had not registered. Applicant then attempted to register and discovered that he was ineligible to do so 
because he was older than 26. (Tr. 72-73.) 
 
 6 
 
 On October 20, 2009, Applicant was interviewed by a Government investigator. He 
indicated that he obtained a Greek passport (now expired) for educational benefits, but he 
never used it for travel and had relinquished it to his employer. He indicated that he would 
renounce his Greek citizenship if required to maintain a security clearance and believed 
renunciation would not affect his financial accounts or property in Greece. He denied any 
intent to fulfill the four months remaining of his compulsory foreign military service 
obligation because he intended to stay in the United States. Applicant admitted voting in 
two national elections for prime minister in Greece between 1995 and 2000. Applicant 
admitted that he had $5,000 US on deposit in a bank account in Greece, and that he owns 
two properties in Greece. Applicant denied receiving any income from these residences, 
although he would be taking possession on his parents‟ deaths. Applicant did not intend to 
relinquish ownership of the foreign properties without financial compensation. He denied 
any preference for Greece. (Ex. 2.)   
 
As of July 2010, Applicant planned to remain in the United States. He did not intend 
to pay the fee in lieu of completing his compulsory military service for Greece unless he 
moved back to Greece. (Tr. 55.) Applicant would consider returning to Greece if he won a 
million dollars or if he was “financially independent.” (Tr. 69.) 
 
Applicant co-owns with his brother two parcels of developed multi-family residential 
real estate in Greece that have a total value around $150,000 US. His father built a multi-
family home on the coast in 1995 that he put in Applicant‟s and his brother‟s names from 
the beginning to avoid transfer taxes. (Tr. 57-58.) In 2004, Applicant‟s father deeded a city 
property containing multiple apartments. (Ex. 2.) Because of a condition on the deeds, 
Applicant and his brother cannot sell the properties without the consent of their parents. 
(Tr. 98.) According to Applicant, taxes are not assessed annually on the real estate, but are 
levied on the income received in rent. To lower his own taxes on rental income, Applicant‟s 
father opened a tax account in Greece in Applicant‟s name using Applicant‟s Greek ID to 
open the account.
3
 (Tr. 92.) For tax purposes, Applicant is listed as the landlord entitled to 
the rental income from three apartments, one in the city building and two units at the coast. 
(Tr. 58-61.) Applicant allows his parents to keep the rental income that they collect from his 
apartments. His parents need the money to pay their living expenses. (Tr. 93-100.) 
Applicant does not believe that he needs to maintain Greek citizenship to hold property in 
Greece. He does not know if the tax rate is lower for Greek citizens than for foreigners. (Tr. 
101-02.) He reports only the rental income (around $5,000 to $6,000 yearly) on his tax 
forms for Greece and does not declare his income from U.S. sources. (Tr. 102-03.) 
Applicant does not list any foreign income on his U.S. taxes because he does not receive 
it. (Tr. 104.) Applicant intends to keep an apartment in Greece after his parents die for a 
place to stay when he travels to Greece. He intends to rent out the remaining property for 
extra income. (Tr. 62.)  
                                                 
3 
Applicant testified that the rental income split among his, his brother‟s, and his father‟s tax accounts in 
Greece totaled 18,000 Euros a year, and income of less than 12,000 Euros was not subject to taxation. “That‟s 
why they have split it in three different accounts.” (Tr. 104-05.) 
 
 7 
 
Applicant has not been to Greece since January 2009. He was considering but not 
decided on traveling to Greece in summer 2010 due to the expensive airfare. Should he 
again travel to Greece before he turns 35, he does not intend to stay any longer than six 
months unless he quits his job with the U.S. defense contractor. Applicant does not foresee 
moving back to Greece in the near future due to the economic situation in Greece (no jobs, 
Greek government almost bankrupt). (Tr. 106.) 
 
On August 9, 2010, Applicant sent a letter to the Consulate General of Greece 
expressing his desire to renounce his Greek citizenship. (Ex. A.) Applicant re-sent a copy 
of the letter to the Consulate by certified mail on August 30, 2010. (Ex. B, C.) As of 
September 3, 2010, the Consulate had received the documentation required to initiate the 
process for renunciation of Greek citizenship. (Ex. C.) 
  
Applicant‟s salary with the U.S. defense contractor is $65,000 annually. (Tr. 105.) 
Applicant and his brother‟s home in the United States is valued at around $320,000, and 
their mortgage is $200,000. (Tr. 69.) Their parents are retired and now spend half of the 
year with them in the United States, most recently in spring 2010. (Tr. 70-71.) Applicant 
has about $100,000 in U.S. accounts, including $35,000 in the equity market. (Tr. 79.) As 
of July 2010, he intended for him or his brother to close their bank account in Greece 
sometime that summer. (Tr. 92.) Applicant has close ties to some second cousins who are 
U.S. native citizens and live nearby. (Tr. 105.)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a „right‟ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant‟s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief, 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant‟s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
they are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge‟s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense 
decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number 
of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
 
 8 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion when seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See 
also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or 
sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern about foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way to indicate a preference for a foreign 
country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United 
States. 
 
 Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States from birth, and of Greece where he 
was raised. Given Applicant spent his formative years in Greece, his active exercise of 
Greek citizenship before he came to the United States in 2000 is to be expected. The 
salient concern in this case is whether Applicant actively exercised his Greek citizenship 
after he reached an age and established ties to his native U.S. to where exercise of Greek 
citizenship shows a foreign preference for Greece over the United States. With that in 
mind, AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege, or foreign citizenship after becoming a 
U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member,” applies. 
 
 AG 10(a)(1), “possession of a current foreign passport,” applies to a limited extent. 
Applicant acquired a Greek passport in September 1996 because he believed it was 
needed for identification to sit for university examinations in Greece. He did not know at the 
time that his U.S. passport would have sufficed for that purpose. Moreover, he did not use 
his Greek passport for foreign travel. Apparently, he had both his U.S. and Greek 
passports in his possession when he returned to Greece in September 2000 to finish his 
bachelor‟s degree. Albeit for convenience (the line was shorter), he presented his U.S. 
passport to enter Greece. And he made no effort to renew that passport, which expired in 
2001, and it has since been turned over to his employer. AG ¶ 10(a)(3), “accepting 
educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign 
 
 9 
country,” pertinent to his free university education in Greece, and AG ¶ 10(a)(7), “voting in 
a foreign election,” occurred while he was a young adult living in Greece and a U.S. citizen 
in name only. They no longer raise significant security concerns, even if AG ¶ 11(c), 
“exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship occurred before the 
individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor,” does not squarely 
apply. 
 
 As of July 2010, Applicant had a Greek ID card that was used by his father to open 
a tax account for the income from the rental of three apartments in Applicant‟s name in 
Greece. It is unclear when his father opened the tax account or when Applicant obtained 
the ID. Applicant indicated on his e-QIP that he held citizenship with Greece only since 
1995, when he would have been 17 or 18. Efforts to obtain recognition of Greek citizenship 
would implicate AG ¶ 10(b), “action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship 
by an American citizen.” But without evidence that Applicant was required to prove Greek 
citizenship to open the account or to maintain the account, AG ¶ 10(a)(5), “using foreign 
citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another country,” does not apply to 
the use of the Greek ID to open the tax account. In 2007, Applicant chose to use his Greek 
ID card to open a bank account in Greece because it would be easier for him. Again, 
absent proof that he would have been ineligible to open or maintain the bank account as a 
U.S. citizen, AG ¶ 10(a)(5) is not implicated. However, the Adjudicative Guidelines are not 
designed to enumerate every circumstance that might give rise to a security concern. 
Applicant‟s use of the ID card in 2007 was an active exercise of his Greek citizenship in 
knowing preference over his U.S. citizenship after he had established significant ties to the 
U.S., most notably employment and home ownership. Moreover, Applicant‟s completion of 
two months of the required six months of compulsory military service for Greece from 
November 2008 to January 2009 implicates AG ¶ 10(a)(2), “military service or a willingness 
to bear arms for a foreign country.” While he acted to preserve his option of living and 
working in Greece rather than out of a desire to bear arms for Greece, his decision to enlist 
raises significant concerns about whether he can be counted on to make decisions in the 
U.S. interest. 
 
 Based on the record evidence that indicates Applicant acted to acquire Greek 
citizenship in 1995, AG ¶ 11(a), “dual citizenship is based solely on parents‟ citizenship or 
birth in a foreign country,” is difficult to apply. AG ¶ 11(b), “the individual has expressed a 
willingness to renounce dual citizenship,” is established by his application to relinquish his 
Greek citizenship in late August 2010, after his hearing. And custody of his expired Greek 
passport was turned over to his employer before his October 20, 2009 interview (see AG ¶ 
11(e), “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or 
otherwise invalidated”). These actions are consistent with his United States citizenship, but 
are insufficient to fully mitigate the foreign preference concerns in this case. As of the 
record closure in this case, formal action had not been taken on his application to renounce 
his Greek citizenship. Assuming that his foreign citizenship is revoked, Applicant has not 
shown a persuasive preference for the United States. Although he testified that Greece 
and he had changed as of early 2009, he admitted that he would consider moving back to 
Greece if he was “financially independent.” Even while living in the U.S., he kept himself 
apprised of the changes in the laws in Greece concerning compulsory military service and 
limitations on length of stay in Greece for those expatriates who have not completed their 
 
 10 
service. At the same time, despite his U.S. citizenship from birth and continuous residency 
in the U.S. since 2000, he made no effort to determine by July 2009 whether he had a U.S. 
military or registration obligation in the United States. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual‟s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant did not register with the U.S. Selective Service System within 30 days of 
the date he turned 18. When he came to the United States in July 2000, he was 23 years 
old, of an eligible age to register, and he did not do so. The non-registrant can face criminal 
prosecution under 50 U.S.C. § 462, and may be ineligible for federal student loans or 
employment. Yet under 50 U.S.C. §451, a person may not be denied a right, privilege, or 
benefit under Federal law by reason of failure to register if the requirement for the person 
to register has terminated or become inapplicable to the person and the failure to register 
was not knowing and willful. Applicant testified credibly that he was not advised of the 
requirement to register by the U.S. Embassy in Greece when he obtained his first U.S. 
passport. (Tr. 34.) And there is no evidence showing that he knew of the requirement 
before he was given the e-QIP in July 2009. He made an effort at that time to verify 
whether he was somehow registered, and on discovering that he was not, he then 
attempted to register without success. Applicant‟s failure to register was not knowing and 
willful. Therefore, there are no personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant‟s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual‟s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 11 
Applicant‟s foreign preference concerns relate to Greece, a country with a 
democratic government and an ally of the United States. That said, the interests of even 
the best of allies may not always be aligned. The U.S. Government does encourage its 
citizens to remain dual nationals because of the complications that might ensue from 
obligations owed to the country of second nationality. Applicant‟s willingness to comply with 
his military service obligation in Greece, after eight years of residency in the United States 
and home ownership here, shows an equivocal commitment to the United States as 
recently as late 2008. Applicant‟s application to renounce his Greek citizenship, especially 
at the eleventh hour, is not sufficient to persuade me that he can be counted on to honor 
his fiduciary obligations to the U.S. government. Whether it be using his Greek ID card to 
open a bank account to avoid the hassles apparently given American citizens, or 
completing boot camp for Greece so that he can work in Greece in the future, he 
demonstrated a preference for Greece. He decided to stay in the United States because of 
more favorable job and security climates rather than out of a commitment to the United 
States. And he would consider returning to Greece if he could live there comfortably. 
Applicant is a law-abiding citizen of good character. But he failed to carry his burden of 
mitigating the foreign preference security concerns. 
 
 Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the amended 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a(1):  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.a(2):  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.a(3):  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
