 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-07179 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence.  Eligibility 
for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 29, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an e-QIP version of a Security Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) furnished her a set of 
interrogatories. She responded to the interrogatories on December 14, 2009. On April 
19, 2010, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and 
modified (Directive); and Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access 
to Classified Information (effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86, dated January 29, 2009). 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
2006) (AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive. The 
SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and detailed 
reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 24, 2010. In a sworn 
statement, dated April 30, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed on July 8, 2010, and the case was assigned to 
me on August 4, 2010. A Notice of Hearing was issued on August 23, 2010, and I 
convened the hearing, as scheduled, on September 22, 2010. 
 
During the hearing, 2 Government exhibits (GE 1-2) and 11 Applicant exhibits 
(AE A-I) were admitted into evidence, without objection. Applicant and one other 
witness testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on October 1, 2010. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take 
administrative notice of certain enumerated facts pertaining to Ukraine, appearing in 
four written submissions. Facts are proper for administrative notice when they are easily 
verifiable by an authorized source and relevant and material to the case. In this 
instance, the Government relied on source information regarding Ukraine in publications 
of the Department of State2 and the Congressional Research Service.3  
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 
201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,4 as set 
forth below under the Ukraine subsection. 
 
2 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, Background Note: Ukraine, dated 
May 24, 2010; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, 2009 Human Rights 
Reports: Ukraine, dated March 11, 2010; and U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Country Specific 
Information: Ukraine, dated April 8, 2010. 
 
3 Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, Ukraine: Current Issues and U.S. Policy, dated 
March 5, 2009. 
 
4 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice 
facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 
(Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may 
utilize authoritative information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 126 S.Ct. 2749 (2006) 
(citing internet sources for numerous documents). 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted both of the factual allegations in ¶¶ 
1.a. and 1.b. of the SOR. Those admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and she is seeking 
to obtain a security clearance, the level of which has not been specified.  She has been 
a self-employed freelance translator, interpreter, and language instructor since 1996,5 
and she has been employed as a translator and linguist by the same government 
contractor since January 2009.6  
 
Applicant was born in 1970 in Ukraine,7 at a time when Ukraine was still an 
integral part of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR).8 In June 1992, she 
received a master’s degree in German language and literature from a Ukrainian 
university.9 She has been certified as an English – Russian interpreter and translator by 
the U.S. Department of State, two states, and a professional organization.10 
 
In 1990, while still a student at the Ukrainian university, Applicant married her 
first husband, a native of Ukraine.11 They were divorced in 1994.12 Nine months later, 
she married her second husband, a native of the United States, who was serving as a 
missionary in Ukraine.13 Seeking better opportunity, Applicant emigrated from the 
Ukraine to the United States in October 1996.14 She became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in June 2001.15 She has two sons, born in 1995 in Ukraine and 1997 in the United 
States, respectively.16 Applicant and her second husband were divorced in 2004.17 
5 Applicant Exhibit D (Resume, undated), at 1. 
 
6 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
7 Id. at 6.  
 
8 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, Background Note: Ukraine, supra 
note 2, at 2. 
 
9 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 14-15. 
 
10 Applicant Exhibit D, supra note 5, at 1; Applicant Exhibit E (Certificate of Accreditation, dated August 26, 
2002); Applicant Exhibit F (Certificate of Qualification, dated May 5, 2005); Applicant Exhibit G-1 (Letter from U.S. 
Department of State, dated March 15, 2010); Applicant Exhibit G-2 (Letter from U.S. Department of State, dated 
February 22, 2010); Applicant Exhibit I (Court Interpreter Certification Board Certificate, dated August 20, 2010). 
 
11 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 26. 
 
12 Id. 
 
13 Id., at 25; Government Exhibit 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated March 25, 2009), at 1.  
 
14 Tr. at 45; Government Exhibit 2, at 1. 
 
15 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 8.  
 
16 Id. at 29. 
 
17 Id. at 25. 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
Applicant’s parents, both of whom were born in Ukraine at a time when Ukraine 
was still an integral part of the USSR, still reside in Ukraine.18 Her father has been 
retired for approximately a decade.19 Her mother writes software.20 Applicant has no 
siblings.21 Her parents have no political affiliation,22 and there is no evidence that they 
have current or continuing relationships with either the government or intelligence 
services of either the USSR or Ukraine. One or both of Applicant’s parents usually visit 
her in the United States on an annual basis,23 and she generally returns to Ukraine to 
visit them every other year for about one month each visit.24 They remain connected on 
a weekly or less frequent basis by telephone or e-mail.25 
 
Applicant voted in Ukraine on one occasion before she entered the United 
States, but since she became a U.S. citizen, she has only voted here.26 When she 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen, she took an oath of allegiance to the United States.  
That oath included the words:27 
 
I hereby declare, on oath, that I absolutely and entirely renounce and 
abjure all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or 
sovereignty, of whom or which I have heretofore been a subject or citizen. 
. . .  
 
Believing that she needed to take further action under Ukrainian law to renounce her 
Ukrainian citizenship, she contacted the Ukrainian Embassy by letter and telephone to 
do so, but she received no response.28 Now, it is her understanding that she 
automatically lost her Ukrainian citizenship when she became a U.S. citizen.29 She is 
correct, for one of the grounds for involuntary loss of Ukrainian citizenship is the 
18 Id., at 27-28; Some details pertaining to Applicant’s parents have not been included in order to protect 
Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
19 Tr. at 39, 41-42. 
 
20 Id. at 39, 42. 
 
21 Id. 
 
22 Id., at 40. 
 
23 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 13, at 1. 
 
24 Id. 
 
25 Id.; Tr. at 40. 
 
26 Tr. at 42-43. 
 
27 8 C.F.R. § 337.1(a) (1995). 
 
28 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 13, at 1. 
 
29 Id. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
voluntary acquisition of a foreign citizenship,30 an action taken when she became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. 
 
Applicant and her second husband went through a costly divorce and child 
custody battle. While she ultimately prevailed, with the court giving her full custody and 
assessing her ex-husband expenses, she has not yet received any money from him.31 
Nevertheless, she has been able to accumulate $900 in savings, has $7,000 in her 
checking account, and has paid for an automobile.32 She is currently renting a 
residence.33  
 
When Ukraine achieved independence with the dissolution of the USSR, the 
apartment34 in which Applicant, her oldest son, and her parents resided became 
privatized, and each registered occupant of the apartment was granted an equal 
ownership share in the property.35 In 2009, when she was interviewed by an 
investigator from OPM, Applicant estimated the value of the apartment to be 
approximately $75,000.36 In April 2010, the estimated value had decreased to about 
$40,000 to $50,000.37 On April 30, 2010, Applicant and her father signed a Deed of Gift 
of Immovable Property, under which Applicant turned over her one-quarter share of 
ownership in the apartment, with “all the right title, interest, use, possession whatsoever 
. . . to have and to hold.”38 By September 2010, the value of the apartment had 
decreased even further to about $40,000.39 Applicant’s son still owns his one-quarter 
share of the apartment, worth about $10,000 – a rather insignificant amount. 
 
Applicant’s entire life is now wrapped up in the United States. This is where her 
children are growing up, it is their home, and where they have school, friends, and 
involvement in sports.40 She has “built [her] life, career and a life for [her] children 
here.”41 
30 U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), Investigations Service, Citizenship Laws of the World (IS-
1), dated March 2001, at 206. 
 
31 Tr. at 44-45. 
 
32 Id. at 44. 
 
33 Id. 
 
34 The apartment, referred to as a condominium, has been described as having 270 square feet of living 
area. Applicant’s Response to the SOR, dated April 30, 2010, at 1. The structure was built in 1973-74, and has not 
been renovated for a long time. Tr. at 37-38. 
 
35 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 13, at 3. 
 
36 Id. 
 
37 Id. 
 
38 Deed of Gift of Immovable Property, dated April 30, 2010, attached to Applicant’s Response to the SOR. 
 
39 Tr. at 37. 
 
40 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 34, at 1. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Character References 
 
One friend, a neighbor since 1997 or 1998, who is an investigator for OPM and 
other federal agencies, with over 40 years of experience in law enforcement and private 
security, is fully supportive of Applicant’s application for a security clearance. He and his 
family have frequently interacted with Applicant, her children, and her visiting parents, 
and he has characterized her as trustworthy and reliable, with good judgment.42 
Another individual, the chair of a university department of world languages, initially had 
a professional relationship with her, commencing in about 2003, and it broadened into a 
social relationship as well. Based on his observations and knowledge, he has 
characterized her as honest, trustworthy, reliable, extremely intelligent, accomplished, 
and talented, possessing sound judgment.43 Another individual, a program officer with 
the U.S. Department of State, has known Applicant professionally since 2009. Based on 
her observations and knowledge, she has characterized Applicant as being extremely 
trustworthy, hard working, very intelligent, with excellent judgment.44 She noted that 
Applicant was chosen to serve as the interpreter when a U.S. Department of State-
sponsored group met with President Barack Obama.45 
 
Ukraine 
 
Ukraine has a parliamentary-presidential type of government since becoming 
independent of the Soviet Union in 1991. It is undergoing profound political and 
economic changes, as it moves toward a market economy and multi-party democracy. 
The first “free” elections were marred by government intimidation and electoral fraud. 
The 2004 presidential election was condemned by the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), as flawed by pervasive electoral fraud. The United 
States and Europe refused to accept the results. The then-opposition candidate, Viktor 
Yuschenko, was even poisoned with dioxin. Massive demonstrations helped to overturn 
the former regime’s electoral fraud, in what has been referred to as the “Orange 
Revolution,” so named after Viktor Yuschenko’s campaign color. Ukraine’s Supreme 
Rada—450-member unicameral parliament—passed a vote of “no confidence” in the 
government, and the Ukraine Supreme Court invalidated the election results. A re-vote 
was conducted, and, in January 2005, Yushchenko became Ukraine’s new President. 
Subsequent parliamentary and local elections in 2006 and 2007 complied with 
international standards.  
 
Having inherited a military force of 780,000 from the USSR, Ukraine is seeking to 
modernize with an eye toward achieving NATO, rather than the old Soviet, standards. 
Ukraine has been an active participant in six United Nation peacekeeping missions and 
 
41 Id. 
 
42 Applicant Exhibit A (Character reference, dated September 20, 2010); Tr. at 52-57. 
 
43 Applicant Exhibit B (Character reference, dated September 20, 2010). 
 
44 Applicant Exhibit C (Character reference, dated September 15, 2010). 
 
45 Id. 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
has a small number of troops serving in supporting roles with Coalition forces in Iraq. 
Ukraine’s initial foreign policy goals included membership in the World Trade 
Organization, the European Union, and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). 
However, under its new president, Ukraine adopted a “non-bloc” approach, but will 
pursue close practical cooperation with NATO. Ukraine has peaceful and constructive 
relations with all its neighbors. Relations with Russia are complicated by differing 
foreign policy priorities in the region, energy dependence, payment arrears, 
disagreement over stationing of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol, and some 
boundary disputes. Ukraine has consistently supported peaceful, negotiated settlements 
to disputes. The 2010 presidential campaign commenced with a feud between two 
former political colleagues, and the eventual election of Victor Yanukovych, the 
candidate Yushchenko had previously defeated.  
 
President Bush visited Ukraine on April 1, 2008, and praised Ukraine’s 
democratic and military reforms.  He noted:46 
 
Ukraine is contributing to every mission of the NATO Alliance, and 
honoring the ideals that unite the transatlantic community. This week, 
Ukraine seeks to strengthen its transatlantic ties through a NATO 
Membership Action Plan. The United States strongly supports your 
request. . . . [O]ur two nations share a common vision for the future. We 
seek to advance a cause of freedom, and help all peoples of Europe live 
together in security and peace. 
 
Domestically, although there remain some serious human rights concerns, with 
continuing investigations to root out and solve the problems, Ukraine is largely free of 
significant civil unrest or any organized anti-American domestic political movements. 
Additionally, freedom of speech and press are guaranteed by law and by the 
constitution, and authorities generally respect these rights. 
 
There is no evidence that Ukraine is an active participant in economic espionage, 
industrial espionage or trade secret theft, or violations of export-control regulations. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”47 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
46 White House Office of the Press Secretary, Press Release: President Bush and President Yushchenko of 
Ukraine Exchange Luncheon Toasts, Apr. 1, 2008, at www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2008/04/print/20080401-
4.html.  While this information was not included in Department Counsel’s request, I take Administrative Notice of 
these facts on my own initiative. 
 
47 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”48   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”49 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.50  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”51 
48 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
49 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
50 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
51 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”52 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.53 Applicant’s relationship with her parents in 
Ukraine are current security concerns for the Government. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
 
 
52 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
53 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                          
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information” may raise security concerns. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply in this case.  
However, the security significance of these identified conditions requires further 
examination of Applicant’s respective relationships with her family members, who are 
Ukrainian citizen-residents, to determine the degree of “heightened risk” or potential 
conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.” Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may 
apply where the evidence shows “there is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual's sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or 
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” Also, AG ¶ 8(f) 
may apply when “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.” In this instance, 
Applicant’s relationship with those family members is neither casual nor infrequent. 
Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply.  
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances, including the 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government, within the relevant foreign country. Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.54 In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”55 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the 
United States through the Applicant. It is reasonable to presume that although a friendly 
relationship, or the existence of a democratic government, is not determinative, it may 
54 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
55 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
11 
                                      
 
make it less likely that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen 
through relatives or associates in that foreign country. 
 
As noted above, since the breakup of the USSR, the United States and Ukraine 
have developed an increasingly warm and friendly relationship, making it unlikely that 
the Ukraine Government would attempt coercive means to obtain sensitive information.  
However, it does not eliminate the possibility that Ukraine would employ some non-
coercive measures in an attempt to exploit a relative. While Applicant’s parents still 
reside in Ukraine, there may be speculation as to “some risk,” but that speculation, in 
the abstract, does not, without more, establish sufficient evidence of a “heightened risk” 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify 
Applicant from holding a security clearance. There is no evidence that Applicant’s 
parents are, or have been, political activists, challenging the policies of the Ukrainian 
Government; that terrorists have approached or threatened Applicant or her parents for 
any reason; that the Ukrainian Government has approached Applicant; that her parents 
currently engage in activities that would bring attention to themselves; or that her 
parents are even aware of Applicant’s work. As such, there is a reduced possibility that 
they would be targets for coercion or exploitation by the Ukrainian Government, which 
may seek to quiet those who speak out against it. She has met her burden of showing 
there is little likelihood that those relationships could create a risk for foreign influence of 
exploitation. As to her parents in Ukraine, AG ¶ 8(a) applies.  
  
Applicant has been a resident of the United States since 1996. She became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen, and she and her two children reside in the United States. Now 
that she surrendered her ownership share in her parents’ apartment in Ukraine, she no 
longer has any foreign financial interests in Ukraine. She is fully involved in her 
children’s lives and activities. Applicant and her children have “such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that [they] can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”  AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
As noted above, when Ukraine achieved independence with the dissolution of the 
USSR, the apartment in which Applicant, her oldest son, and her parents resided 
became privatized, and each registered occupant of the apartment was granted an 
equal ownership share in the property. Applicant deeded her one-quarter interest to the 
apartment to her father. Her son still owns his one-quarter interest, worth about $10,000 
– a rather insignificant amount. That interest is too insignificant to be “used effectively to 
influence, manipulate, or pressure [Applicant].” 
 
It is true that, since becoming a U.S. citizen in 2001, Applicant has generally 
taken a trip to Ukraine once every two years to visit her parents. They, in turn, visit 
Applicant and their grandchildren in the United States every year, and those trips and 
frequent contact should have no current security interest.  
 
 
12 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant and her “closest family”—
her two children—reside in the U.S., and they are all U.S. citizens. As such, the children 
are not vulnerable to direct coercion or exploitation, and the realistic possibility of 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress with regard to them is low. While she might 
be susceptible to potential indirect pressures on her parents from Ukraine, under the 
present circumstances, that possibility is too remote to present a realistic heightened 
risk. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Ukraine must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in that country, as well as the potential dangers existing there. 
Ukraine is a rapidly developing, multi-party democracy, contributing to NATO Alliance 
missions. Ukraine previously had aligned itself with the West and applied for NATO 
membership, an action supported by the U.S. because both nations share a common 
vision for the future. Recently, Ukraine adopted a “non-bloc” approach, but will continue 
to pursue close practical cooperation with NATO. It is in Ukraine’s interests to maintain 
friendship with the U.S. to counterbalance Russia, and it is very unlikely Ukraine would 
forcefully attempt to coerce Applicant through her parents still residing in Ukraine. 
Furthermore, there is no evidence that Ukraine is an active participant in economic 
espionage, industrial espionage or trade secret theft, or violations of export-control 
regulations.   
 
As noted above, Applicant’s entire life is now wrapped up in the United States. 
This is where her children are growing up; it is their home; and it is where they have 
school, friends, and involvement in sports. She has built her life, career, and a life for 
her children here. She is well respected by her friends and colleagues for her honesty, 
integrity, and truthfulness. That she and her parents keep in close contact should not be 
 
13 
                                      
 
considered a negative factor for they freely come to the United States, without 
restrictions imposed by Ukraine, to visit her and their grandchildren. (See AG && 2(a)(1) 
through 2(a)(9).) 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her foreign influence 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
