 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05948 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Steven Goldberg, Esq. 
 
 
March 23, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 7, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines C, Foreign Preference and B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 23, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 22, 2010. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 8, 2010, and the hearing was convened 
 
2 
 
as scheduled on December 14, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GEs) 1 through 
4, which were admitted without objection. The Government also offered country 
information for administrative notice, marked GE 5. The Applicant offered Exhibit (AEs) 
A through D, a trial brief marked AE I, and testified. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted four post-hearing 
exhibits between December 23, 2010 and January 14, 2011, marked AE E through H, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on December 28, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In the SOR, DOHA alleges under Guideline C, Foreign Preference that Applicant 
exercises Tunisian citizenship by possessing a valid Tunisian passport (SOR 1.a.); that 
she used her Tunisian passport for travel after she was issued a U.S. passport in June 
2001 (SOR  1.b.); that she has exercised dual citizenship with France by possessing a 
valid French passport (SOR 1.c.1.) and by voting in French elections (SOR 1.c.2.); and 
that she has used her French passport for international travel (SOR 1.d.). DOHA alleges 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, that Applicant parents, brother, and sister are all 
dual citizens of France and Tunisia and reside in France (SOR 2.a. and 2.b.); that 
Applicant’s mother’s cousin is a General in the Tunisian military (SOR 2.c.); that 
Applicant possesses the inheritance rights for her family’s properties in France and 
Tunisia (SOR 2.d); that she traveled to Tunisia in 2004, 2006, and 2008 (SOR 2.e.); and 
that she traveled to France in 2004, 2005, 2007, 2008, and 2009 (SOR 2.f). Applicant 
admitted to all of the subparagraphs as stated in the SOR, with the exception of 1.c.2, 
which she denied. After considering the evidence of record, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 41 year old employee of a government contractor. She began 
working for the government contractor in 1997 and worked for the company for 12 
years. In 2008, she left the company to work for a solar energy start-up firm, but 
returned to the same government contractor in 2009. (Tr. 22, 31-32.) 
 
 Applicant was born in France to Tunisian parents. She was raised in France, and 
visited Tunisia as a child. She attended an engineering school in Paris. While she 
attended school, she completed two internships in the U.S. In 1995, she moved to the 
U.S. She became a U.S. citizen on May 25, 2001. Prior to becoming a U.S. citizen, 
Applicant voted in French elections, but she has not voted in a French election since 
becoming a U.S. citizen. In March 2002, she earned two master’s degrees from a U.S. 
school. She was married to a U.S. citizen from 1996 to 2004. She has a daughter, age 
7, who was born in the U.S. and is a citizen of the U.S. and France. Applicant’s 
daughter possesses a French passport, in addition to her U.S. passport. Applicant is 
actively involved in her daughter’s life, taking her to lessons and participating in the 
parent teacher association at her school. (GE 1; Tr. 23-30, 34, 36, 66.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother, father, brother, and sister, are all dual citizens of France and 
Tunisia, residing in France. Applicant’s parents are retired and live the majority of the 
time near Paris, France, where they own an apartment. The also own an apartment and 
 
3 
 
a beach house in Tunisia, and visit Tunisia frequently. Applicant’s brother works as 
consultant for a bank. Her sister has a business degree and is currently seeking 
employment. Applicant loves her parents and siblings. She keeps in close contact with 
them, calling them all on a weekly basis and e-mailing weekly, if not more frequently. 
She visits her family in France approximately twice annually. She usually visits France 
at Christmas time and in the summer. In summer, she visits her family in France and 
then travels to her family’s beach house in Tunisia. She testified she visited both France 
and Tunisia on a yearly basis since the early 2000s. Her last trip to France and Tunisia 
occurred in July or August 2010. (Tr. 34-36, 42-43, 55-59, 75.) 
 
 Applicant owns no property in France or Tunisia. She does not have any banking 
accounts outside of the U.S. While her parents own property in France and Tunisia, 
outlined above, she is unsure of her inheritance rights to the properties and has never 
seen her parents’ wills. She estimates that her parents’ properties in Tunisia are valued 
at less than $200,000. (Tr. 39-41, 60.) 
 
 Applicant learned from her mother this past September that her mother’s cousin 
is a General in the Tunisian military. Applicant knows little of this distant relative. She 
did attend his wedding in Tunisia in July or August 2010, but has not had contact with 
him since departing Tunisia. She does not communicate with him when she is in the 
U.S., but has seen him on occasion when she is in Tunisia. (Tr. 38-39.) 
 
 At the time of the hearing, Applicant possessed three valid passports: a U.S. 
passport, a Tunisian passport, and a French passport. Applicant’s U.S. passport was 
issued in June 2001. Applicant’s Tunisian passport was issued in 2008. She obtained it 
because she had experienced difficulties departing Tunisia. Applicant’s French passport 
was issued March 12, 2001 and expired March 11, 2011. Her French passport was valid 
at the close of the record. At hearing, Applicant explained that she used her French 
passport when she entered France and Tunisia. She used her Tunisian passport to exit 
Tunisia. She feels safer traveling on her French and Tunisian passports when overseas 
because they allow her to keep a low profile. She uses her U.S. passport to enter the 
U.S., upon return to the States. She indicated that she was unwilling to renounce her 
French and Tunisian citizenship and she intended to retain her French and Tunisian 
passports because she could not rule out the possibility that she would someday want 
to move to France or Tunisia. However, on January 14, 2011, Applicant surrendered her 
French and Tunisian passports to her Facility Security Officer. (Tr. 36-38, 46-49, 61-65, 
69-71, 77; AE F; AE G; AE H.) 
 
 Applicant testified that she is loyal to the United States and “love[s] it here.” As a 
little girl, she wanted to move to the U.S. and she took advantage of internship 
opportunities in the U.S. during her undergraduate education, as noted above. She 
moved to the U.S. in her mid-20s. She believes her roots are in the U.S. She is close to 
a cousin and her month-in-law, both of whom live with in the same county as Applicant. 
She admits some lingering loyalties to both France and Tunisia, but indicated she 
favored the U.S. (Tr. 43, 53, 61-63.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant denies that she would ever violate the obligations of a security 
clearance. She testified:  
 
I believe I can be trusted. I've worked for the company for 13 years. I just 
feel like they are my family. I know the people very well. I just feel very 
comfortable in the company. I have a sense of duty to the company and to 
this country . . . I'm sure I can be trusted with those secrets. (Tr. 52-53.) 
  
 Applicant also has the faith and trust of her former department manager, 
immediate supervisor, colleagues, and friends. Her supervisor noted that “she is both a 
trustworthy and loyal employee and citizen of the United States.” Her former department 
manager indicated that Applicant “conducts herself with a very high degree of 
professionalism and dignity and is a valuable member of the [company’s] team . . .” 
Further, her performance evaluations indicate Applicant is “honest, forthright and 
trustworthy.” (AE A; AE B; AE C; AE D; AE E.)  
 
 Concerning facts presented by Department Counsel for administrative notice, 
Tunisia is a republic with a strong presidential system. It has good relations with the 
West, including the United States. However, the U.S. Department of State warns of 
Tunisia’s open borders with Libya and Algeria, because of the terrorist presence in 
those countries. In 2002 and 2003 a number of tourists that crossed from Tunisia to 
Algeria were kidnapped. Further, the December 2007 sentencing of 30 Tunisian 
individuals for terrorist-related activity has potentially encouraged anti-Western 
sentiments. (GE 5.) 
 
 The administrative notice documents confirm Applicant’s testimony about the 
requirement to enter and leave Tunisia on a Tunisian passport. It notes that “if a 
Tunisian-American succeeds on entering using a U.S. passport, he or she will still have 
to present a Tunisian passport to exit the country.” (GE 5.) 
 
 Citizens of Tunisia are limited in political freedoms. Rights such as freedom of 
association, freedom of speech, and freedom of the press are limited. There are also 
human rights violations reported, including torture and extended pretrial detentions. (GE 
5.) 
 
 Additionally, I am taking notice of the political and social unrest in Tunisia that led 
to Tunisia’s 23-year president stepping down from power. Demonstrations have 
degenerated on several occasions into violent clashes between police and protesters, 
resulting in deaths, injuries, and extensive property damage. A travel alert, issued by 
the U.S. Department of State is still in effect. It warns U.S. citizens to defer non-
essential travel to the central, western, and southern regions of Tunisia. It also notes the 
situation has stabilized in the coastal touristic zone.1  
 
                                                          
1 Embassy of the United States Travel Alert-Tunisia, March 10, 2011. 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;  
(7) voting in a foreign election; and 
 
(d) Any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 Applicant has been a citizen of Tunisia and France from birth. She was raised in 
France and influenced by French culture. She has possessed both French and Tunisian 
passports since her childhood. In 1995, she chose to immigrate to the U.S. and became 
a U.S. citizen in 2001. Prior to becoming a U.S. citizen, she voted in French elections. 
Because her participation in the French elections occurred prior to Applicant becoming 
a U.S. citizen, no concern is raised under AG ¶ 10(a)(7). However, her possession of 
foreign passports raises concerns under AG ¶ 10(a)(1). Moreover, her unwillingness to 
renounce her Tunisian and French citizenships indicates she potentially has allegiance 
to a country other than the Unites States. AG ¶ 10(d) is also disqualifying.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. The following potentially applicable mitigating conditions have been 
considered: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
 
7 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶ 11(a) and 11(c) have only limited applicability. 
Applicant’s citizenships in France and Tunisia are the result of her birth to Tunisian 
parents in France. Therefore, AG ¶ 11(a) applies, regardless of her choice to exercise 
her dual citizenship by using her non-U.S. passports. However, evidence indicative of 
Applicant’s Foreign Preference may still be considered, despite the applicability of this 
mitigating condition. The Appeal Board has noted that the presence or absence of any 
given Adjudicative Guideline disqualifying or mitigating condition is not solely dispositive 
of a case.2 Further, the applicability of AG ¶ 11(a) “does not render irrelevant any other 
record evidence that might be indicative of a foreign preference under Guideline C.”3 
Applicant has exercised both her French and Tunisian citizenships by using her foreign 
passports, after becoming a U.S. citizen, making AG ¶ 11(c) inapplicable. Further, the 
inquiry about Applicant’s Foreign Preference must extend beyond whether she acquired 
her French and Tunisian citizenship and look at how she has demonstrated a 
preference for France and/or Tunisia through the use of her foreign passports.  
 
 Additionally, AG ¶ 11(b) does not apply. Applicant clearly stated that she is 
unwilling to renounce her citizenship with France and Tunisia.  
 
 While the U.S. government does not encourage its citizens to remain dual 
nationals because of the complications that might ensue from obligations owed to the 
country of second or third nationality, the Department of Defense does not require the 
renunciation of foreign citizenships in order to gain access.4 Yet, there must be 
adequate assurances that a dual citizen will not actively exercise or seek rights, 
benefits, or privileges of those foreign citizenships. In the instant case, Applicant 
established significant ties consistent with her U.S. citizenship since coming to the U.S. 
in 1995. As a child she wanted to come to the U.S. She achieved that dream by earning 
two internships in the U.S. during her undergraduate education. After college, she 
moved to the U.S. and has lived the majority of her adult life in the United States. She 
has worked over 13 years for a government contractor and feels strong ties to the 
company and to the U.S. Applicant has surrendered her Tunisian and French passports 
to her Facility Security Officer, invoking application of mitigating condition AG ¶ 11(e). 
She married a U.S. citizen, although they later divorced. She has chosen to raise her 
                                                          
2 ICSR Case No. 03-23806 at 5 (App. Bd. April 28, 2005.) 
3 Id.  
4 AG ¶ 11(b) provides that an expressed willingness to renounce a dual citizenship can be mitigating, but 
unwillingness to renounce a dual citizenship is not, in and of itself, a disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 
10. 
 
8 
 
daughter in the U.S. and is actively involved in her school and her extracurricular 
activities. Recent ties to Tunisia and France are limited to visits with family members 
once or twice a year, weekly telephone calls, and e-mails. Applicant has no bank 
accounts in Tunisia or France and owns no property in either country. At the hearing, 
Applicant expressed her affinity with the U.S. She is unlikely to act in preference to any 
other foreign country over the U.S.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for the Foreign Influence guideline is set out in AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 The guideline notes nine conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The Government raised concerns over possible foreign influence because of 
Applicant's close ties of affection to her mother, father, sister, and brother, who are 
residents and citizens of France and possess dual citizenship with Tunisia. Applicant 
travels twice annually to visit her family in both France and Tunisia. Applicant also has a 
distant cousin (her mother’s cousin), who is a General in the Tunisian military. Not only 
does disqualifying condition AG ¶ 7(a) require the presence of foreign contacts, it also 
requires that a heightened risk be present. Government Counsel failed to provide 
information establishing a heightened risk by Applicant’s immediate family members’ 
French residency and citizenship. However, it did introduce sufficient evidence on 
terrorist activities in Tunisia and the Tunisian government’s human rights abuses to 
establish a heightened risk relating to her immediate family member’s dual citizenship 
 
9 
 
with Tunisia, her mother’s cousin in Tunisia, and Applicant’s travel there. These 
contacts raise security concerns under AG ¶ 7(a).  
 
The Government also expressed concerned about Applicant’s hypothetical 
inheritance of properties in France and Tunisia. Her potential to inherit her parents’ 
property in Tunisia and France is too speculative at this point to raise a concern under 
AG ¶ 7(e). Her parents are both alive, Applicant has never seen their wills nor 
discussed their plans for their properties, and she has two siblings who could also 
potentially inherit the properties. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 and find that the following mitigate the concern 
under AG ¶ 7(a): 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these people are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant’s immediate family members live in France. Her parents own two 
properties in Tunisia and vacation there periodically. Her parents are retired. Applicant 
has traveled to Tunisia annually during her summer vacation to spend time with her 
family at their beach house. She also has a distant relative, her mother’s cousin, who is 
a General in the Tunisian military. Despite these facts, it is it is unlikely Applicant will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of her family or the 
Tunisian government and the interests of the U.S. because her contacts with Tunisia 
are infrequent and non-political, with the exception of the distant relative.  
 
 With respect to Applicant’s mother’s cousin, the contact and communication 
between Applicant and the General is infrequent and casual. Applicant does not 
communicate with this individual from the U.S. and only sees him at family events when 
she is in Tunisia. She was not even aware until this past September that he was in the 
military. AG ¶ 8(c) applies only to Applicant’s mother’s cousin. 
 
 
10 
 
 Additionally, Applicant has little loyalty to Tunisia, other than enjoying her travel 
there, but has developed deep and longstanding relationships in the U.S. After 
graduating from college, she chose to move to the U.S. She decided to marry a U.S. 
citizen. She chose to raise her daughter in the U.S. She has all of her assets in the U.S. 
She has dedicated her career to serving as a government contractor. She has made her 
life here, and is involved her daughter’s numerous extracurricular activities and 
schooling. She is close to her co-workers and considers them to be her “family.” While 
she does love her family members and enjoys traveling to Tunisia, Applicant has 
expressed strong sentiments toward the U.S. that are unparalleled by her remaining 
feelings towards vacationing in Tunisia with her family. Further, despite her apparent 
unwillingness to relinquish her Tunisian citizenship, she has relinquished her Tunisian 
passport to her FSO. This act demonstrates her loyalty to the U.S. and her willingness 
to comply with DoD requirements. While she acquired her Tunisian passport to try to 
keep a low profile when traveling abroad, she will now either have to forgo traveling to 
Tunisia entirely, or travel to Tunisia on her U.S. passport. She was forced to make a 
choice between retaining the Tunisian passport and the security concerns of the U.S. 
Government. She chose to satisfy the concerns of the Government. Similarly, she can 
be expected to resolve any potential future conflicts of interest in favor of the U.S. 
Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s letters of support and work performance evaluations show she is a 
valued employee. Her supervisors and colleagues, who have known Applicant for a 
 
11 
 
number of years, have no reservations about recommending her for a security 
clearance. She has shown herself to be honest and truthful about her ties to France and 
Tunisia, and at the same time, very capable of fulfilling her obligations of a clearance 
and U.S. citizenship. Based on the evidence before me, I conclude it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference and Foreign 
Influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.f.:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
