 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05493   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 2, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 20, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 14, 2010. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 11, 2011, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on February 2, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 16. 
 
2 
 
GE 1 through 6 and 8 through 16 were admitted without objection. Applicant objected to 
the admission of GE 7. The objection to the report of investigation (ROI) contained 
within GE 7 was sustained. The remainder of the exhibit was admitted. Applicant 
testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A through J, which were admitted without 
objection. The record was held open until March 15, 2011, for Applicant to submit 
additional information. Applicant timely submitted documents that were marked AE K 
through O and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum 
forwarding Applicant’s exhibits is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 10, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active 
duty in the United States military from 1975 until he was honorably discharged in 1979. 
He is applying for a security clearance. He held a security clearance in the past, but it 
lapsed. He has a bachelor’s degree, and he is attending school for a master’s degree. 
He has been married more than 30 years. He has four adult children.1 
  
 Applicant started a company in about 1998. The company was a limited liability 
company (LLC) in one state.2 He incorporated it as a Subchapter S corporation in 
another state in 2000.3 He owned 66% of the stock of the corporation. Applicant moved 
to dissolve the corporation at the end of 2001. Applicant stated that he paid the other 
shareholder in the corporation $35,000 to dissolve the corporation. He discovered 
afterward that the corporation owed state and federal taxes, including payroll taxes for 
its employees. The state sued him for $5,725 in unpaid taxes in 2002. He paid the taxes 
owed to the state in 2004. In February 2003, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed a 
federal tax lien of $33,459 against the corporation for taxes owed from tax year 2001. 
The IRS filed a federal tax lien of $7,255 against him in October 2003. Applicant paid 
the taxes related to the $7,255 lien, and it was released in March 2006.4  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 40-41, 71-72, 85; GE 1, 4; AE G. 
2 A limited liability company is a business structure allowed by state statute. LLCs are popular 
because, similar to a corporation, owners have limited personal liability for the debts and actions of the 
LLC. Other features of LLCs are more like a partnership, providing management flexibility and the benefit 
of pass-through taxation. . . .The federal government does not recognize an LLC as a classification for 
federal tax purposes. An LLC business entity must file as a corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship 
tax return. See www.irs.gov/businesses/small/article/0,,id=98277,00.html. 
3 S corporations are corporations that elect to pass corporate income, losses, deductions and 
credit through to their shareholders for federal tax purposes. Shareholders of S corporations report the 
flow-through of income and losses on their personal tax returns and are assessed tax at their individual 
income tax rates. This allows S corporations to avoid double taxation on the corporate income. S 
corporations are responsible for tax on certain built-in gains and passive income. See 
www.irs.gov/businesses/small/article/0,,id=98263,00.html. 
4 Tr. at 59-68, 70-71, 80-82; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3, 5, 11, 13-15; AE E, F. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant stated that he had difficulty, even with an accountant, contacting the 
IRS to settle the corporation tax debt. He stated he and his accountant went to an IRS 
office in about 2001 to resolve the debt, but could not find an agent assigned to his case 
who would handle the matter. He stated they called the IRS several times over the next 
few years attempting to resolve the matter to no avail. After that, he decided to wait until 
the IRS came after him for the taxes, but that never happened.5  
 
 Applicant learned in about 2003 that the IRS filed a tax lien against the 
corporation. He submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) in March 2004. He 
listed the $7,255 federal tax lien filed against him in October 2003.6 He wrote in the 
comments section: 
 
Lien was attached due to a failed business partnership (2000) for which I 
paid alot to get out of and am still making payment on the taxes. Since 
then I have paid ALL my taxes and continue too as a W-2 employee. 
(emphasis in original)7 
 
 Applicant provided a statement for his background investigation in February 
2005. He discussed his finances and the taxes owed from his company. He wrote that 
he was the “sole owner of the company.” He admitted owing the IRS for unpaid taxes 
from his company: 
 
I have been trying to make a settlement of this tax bill since September of 
2001. I have not had an IRS agent assigned to this case, and I have not 
been made aware of the steps to take to resolve this matter. I have made 
numerous personal phone calls with my accountant, [name, company, and 
phone number] and have not been made aware of the steps to take to 
resolve this issue. When I am made aware of the money I owe, I plan on 
refinancing my home again to pay off the tax lien in one lump sum.8 
 
 Applicant submitted a questionnaire for national security positions (SF 86) in 
August 2007. He listed a $3,800 state tax lien from “05/2005 (Estimated).” He added: 
“Failed company I started – taxes paid in full.”9 
 
 In October 2008, Applicant responded to DOHA inquiries about the federal tax 
lien. He wrote about his efforts in the early 2000s to have the IRS work with him and his 
accountant on settling the debt. He also wrote: 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 60-64, 77-78; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 11. 
 
6 Tr. at 75-76; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
7 GE 1. 
 
8 GE 3. 
 
9 GE 4. 
 
4 
 
In short, I’d be glad to discuss this further with your investigative service. 
But I am not contacting the IRS to request a solution. I tried that many 
times when the interest and penalties were much less and they wouldn’t 
assign anyone to it. Please note that this judgement is not against me, but 
the corporation. I have since filed all of my taxes and received back 
several personal tax refunds. My only action on this will possibly be that 
once the statute of limitation is up – to contact the IRS and then solicit a 
“donation to the treasury” for the unpaid taxes.10 
 
 In February 2009, Applicant sent a letter to DOHA stating: 
 
I certainly would authorize DOHA to contact the IRS. While I have no 
desire to wake the sleeping giant that wouldn’t awake when it was 
advantageous for me – I recognized when I applied for an updated 
clearance that I was giving any investigators full permission to look 
anywhere and everywhere into my past – that would include the IRS.11 
 
 In May 2010, Applicant sent a letter to the IRS, seeking to settle the debt from his 
company: 
 
[A] court settlement was initiated by the IRS without any discussion or 
negotiation with me. It is on the record to this day, I believe, as 
$33,459.00. I’d argue that the judgment should have been against the 
corporation, not me personally. But I would still feel that the fundamental 
taxes are my responsibility.  
 
I do not know the company’s tax ID any longer, but my SSN is [Applicant’s 
SSN]. I’d like to show due diligence in resolving the amount I was trying to 
pay back in 2001 – the actual principle due the IRS from [Corporation], 
had it been paid at the time it was due. 
 
Could I set up an appointment with a local IRS agent and see about 
getting a solution; then setting up a payment plan to pay it off.12 
 
Applicant wrote in his response to the SOR: 
 
I am personally not liable to the IRS. A company that I ran was – and that 
information is fully known by your office and that in fact has passed the 
statute of limitations and was never correctly placed against my person – 
as it was an S Corporation. But I do feel responsible and as such I 
contacted the IRS many times over the years and am still awaiting a reply.  
                                                          
10 GE 11. 
 
11 Id. 
 
12 Id. 
 
5 
 
 Applicant had not paid the federal tax as of the date of the hearing. He stated the 
IRS never responded to his May 2010 letter. He stated that he would like to wait until 
the debt passed the 10-year statute of limitations and then negotiate a reasonable 
settlement with the IRS before he pays it.13 He testified: 
 
I’m doing it because they didn’t come to me when it was convenient for me 
to make a resolution. And so now I’m going to go to them when it’s no 
longer convenient for them, is my position. Right or wrong. Whether you 
agree with it or not, that’s [what] my position has been.14 
 
 Applicant submitted IRS Form 656-L (Offer in Compromise (Doubt as to Liability)) 
on February 15, 2011. He offered to pay $4,500 to resolve his tax debt. The IRS has not 
responded. He stated in his post-hearing response that he is “in open discussion with 
the IRS to find a resolution to the [Corporation] tax liability. There is nothing contentious 
about the discussion – I will resolve it according to whatever agreement we reach.”15 
 
 In additional to the federal tax lien against Applicant’s corporation, the SOR 
alleges five delinquent debts and that Applicant was past due $2,042 on his mortgage. 
Applicant successfully disputed the five delinquent debts and the mortgage is now 
current.16 
 
 Except for his unpaid taxes, Applicant’s finances are sound. He earns a six-figure 
salary. He stated that he is not “financially overextended.” He can afford to pay the IRS 
for his back taxes but wants to pay it on his terms.17 
 
 Applicant submitted character letters attesting to his excellent job performance, 
work ethic, professionalism, honesty, trustworthiness, and moral character.18  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 64-66, 78-80; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 9. 
 
14 Tr. at 80. 
 
15 AE K, M. 
 
16 Tr. at 50-53, 56-58; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 11; AE I-L. 
 
17 Tr. at 48-54, 65-68, 72-74, 79-84; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE D, H. 
 
18 AE N, O. 
 
 
6 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
7 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has not paid his 2001 tax liability from his corporation. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. Applicant successfully disputed the 
other five delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, and his mortgage is now current. No 
disqualifying conditions are applicable to SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e and 1.g, and those 
allegations are concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant blamed the tax liability for his corporation on the minority shareholder. 
Actions by the minority shareholder may have been outside Applicant’s control. 
However, as a majority shareholder of an S corporation, in which tax liability flows 
through to the shareholders, Applicant was personally responsible for ensuring that his 
taxes were paid. In the early 2000s, Applicant and his accountant contacted the IRS on 
several occasions to attempt to resolve his tax debt. After that, he simply ignored the 
debt, waiting for the IRS to contact him. After several DOHA inquiries about the status 
of the tax debt, he sent the IRS a letter in May 2010. He took no other action until 
February 15, 2011, when he submitted an Offer in Compromise, seeking to settle the 
debt for $4,500. The IRS has not yet responded. I find that Applicant has not acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. His failure to resolve his tax liability casts doubt 
 
8 
 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. There are no applicable 
mitigating conditions to the concerns raised by Applicant’s unpaid taxes.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable service in this country in the U.S. military and 
his favorable character evidence. Applicant is not “financially overextended.” He has 
known since at least 2005 that his unpaid taxes have been a concern to the Department 
of Defense. He can afford to pay his taxes but has not done so.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
