                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07352 
  ) 
           ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s immaturity led to his questionable behavior. He was forthcoming and 
candid during the security clearance process. He received training about ethical 
behavior dealing with information technology (IT) and the handling of classified and 
proprietary information. He expressed sincere remorse for his past questionable 
behavior and understands that it could adversely impact on his ability to hold a security 
clearance. He has matured into a good husband and responsible employee. His 
questionable behavior is not recent, it is unlikely to recur, and it does not cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Applicant mitigated 
security concerns under Guideline E. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 19, 2009. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
On June 23, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), which 
specified the basis for its decision – security concerns under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations (undated) and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 23, 2010, 
to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on October 4, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on October 
15, 2010.  
 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified, and he presented exhibits (AE) 1 through 3, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 
22, 2010.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant agreed to his hearing date 15 days in advance of his hearing. At 
hearing, he also waived his right to 15 days notice of his hearing. (Tr. 15) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c, with explanations. He denied the factual 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.b(vi). His admissions are incorporated here as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, and having 
considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old computer engineer working for a large government 
contractor. He graduated from high school in 2000. Between 2000 and 2004, he 
attended a preeminent U.S. university and received a bachelor’s degree in computer 
engineering with a 3.5 grade point average (GPA). He completed his master’s degree in 
computer engineering in 2009, with a 4.0 GPA. He married his wife in 2009. They have 
no children. His wife works for a government agency. He testified she has access to 
classified information at the top secret level. 
 
While in college, during the summer of 2003, Applicant worked for a military 
agency and received access to classified information at the secret level. In late 2003, 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was hired while still at college by his current employer, a government 
contractor. He was detailed to work on a government agency’s contract and considered 
for access to classified information. Applicant’s request for access was denied in 2004 
because of his misuse of information technology systems and questionable personal 
conduct while in college.  
 
During 2004 background interviews with the agency, Applicant voluntarily 
disclosed that during his first year in college (age 18), he illegally downloaded software 
valued at about $500 for personal use. He also engaged in multiple infractions of the 
university’s computer network rules and regulations. Specifically, he sent a computer 
program to his roommate’s computer and another student’s computer in another 
university, to annoy them, monitor their keystrokes, and read their email 
correspondence. He used a program to intercept other people’s e-traffic 
communications and transferred that traffic to his computer where he gleaned other 
people’s passwords and private information. During 2003, he accessed school 
correspondence, and school department’s web pages with information on old tests and 
school projects not accessible to the general public. He also viewed pornography online 
that possibly depicted underage individuals.  
 
After his access was denied by the government agency in 2004, Applicant 
continued to work for the government contractor for two more years. Between February 
2006 and August 2006, Applicant worked for a military agency as a systems engineer. 
Unchallenged by the work, he returned to work for his first employer where he has 
remained until present. 
 
Applicant explained that while in college, he and a friend experimented with 
computers and what they were learning, and they tested programs and their own 
abilities. He acknowledged that his behavior was improper, and he took responsibility 
for his actions. He credibly testified that his actions were not intended to cause harm or 
to be malicious. He was young and immature and simply was not fully aware of the 
consequences of his actions. The program he sent to his roommate’s computer was 
intended as a prank. After a couple of jokes, the program was removed.  
 
After his interview with the agency and his access was denied in 2004, Applicant 
fully learned the consequences of his actions. He has not engaged in any questionable 
behavior concerning information technology systems or questionable personal conduct 
since 2003. His supervisors are aware of his past questionable behavior. As a result of 
his job for the government contractor, since 2004, he has received yearly training about 
computer ethics and the handling of classified and proprietary information.  
 
Applicant now understands that his questionable behavior was unethical and 
possibly illegal. Moreover, he understands that such behavior could adversely impact on 
his ability to hold a security clearance, to keep his current job, or to work in the 
information technology field. Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his past behavior. 
He has matured during the last eight years. He is now married and holds a full-time 
 
4 
 
 
position with his employer, a large government contractor. He is dedicated to his wife 
and his work.  
 
Applicant disclosed his questionable behavior on his 2009 SCA, and was candid 
during his 2009 background interviews. He also disclosed his past questionable 
behavior to his supervisors. Applicant presented numerous favorable character 
reference statements. He is considered to be honest, trustworthy, dependable, and 
reliable. Professionally, he is respected by co-workers and leaders for his technical 
expertise and skills. He has handled classified, proprietary, and sensitive information 
since 2004. He has established a reputation for following security policies and 
procedures, and for protecting sensitive information. All of his references recommend 
his access to classified information without reservations. He is considered to be a 
valuable employee with good performance. 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
 
5 
 
 
in whole or in part, on any expressed or implied determination about Applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996); and ISCR Case 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010).     
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
During his first year in college, Applicant illegally downloaded software and 
engaged in multiple infractions of the university’s computer network rules and 
regulations. He illegally uploaded programs into other students’ computers to annoy 
them, monitor their keystrokes, and read their email correspondence. He intercepted 
other people’s e-traffic communications and transferred that traffic to his computer 
where he accessed private information. During 2003, he accessed school 
correspondence, and school department’s web pages with information on old tests and 
school projects not accessible to the general public. He also viewed pornography online 
 
6 
 
 
that possibly depicted underage individuals. His actions trigger the applicability of the 
following disqualifying conditions: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative areas that 
is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations. 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal 
conduct security concerns:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
7 
 
 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s questionable behavior occurred while he was in college, and can be 
attributed, to a certain extent, to his immaturity and youthful exuberance. He voluntarily 
disclosed his questionable behavior during his 2004 background interviews, on his 2009 
SCA, and was candid during his 2009 background interviews. He stopped his 
questionable behavior in 2004, when he started working for his current employer, and 
disclosed his past questionable behavior to his supervisors. Since he started working for 
his current employer in 2004, he has received yearly training about his computer-related 
ethical responsibilities, and the proper handling of proprietary and classified information. 
He has handled classified, proprietary, and sensitive information since 2004. There is 
no evidence that he has compromised or caused others to compromise classified 
information, or that he has failed to follow his employer’s rules and regulations.  
 
Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his past behavior. He is now a 
responsible husband. He is considered to be a good worker and a valuable employee. 
Applicant has matured during the last eight years. He is dedicated to his wife and his 
work. He is considered to be a technically proficient, valuable employee. He now clearly 
understands that his past questionable behavior was unethical and illegal. Moreover, he 
also understands that such behavior could adversely affect on his ability to hold a 
security clearance. I find Applicant’s questionable behavior is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 
(e) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
8 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) were 
previously addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
Applicant’s questionable behavior is primarily attributed to his immaturity as a 
college student. He was forthcoming and candid during the security clearance process 
and at his hearing. He stopped his questionable behavior in 2004, when he started 
working for his current employer. He received yearly training about ethical behavior and 
the handling of classified and proprietary information. He understands that his past 
questionable behavior was unethical and illegal. Moreover, he clearly understands that 
such behavior could adversely affect his ability to hold a security clearance. 
 
Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his past behavior. He is now a 
responsible husband. He has held his full-time job since March 2008, and he is 
considered to be a good worker and a valuable employee. Applicant has matured during 
the last eight years. On balance, I find that Applicant’s questionable behavior is not 
recent, it is unlikely to recur, and it does not cast doubt on Applicant’s current judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
