1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------  ) ISCR Case No. 09-08385
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties, which are unresolved.
Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to overcome the security concerns raised
by his history of financial problems. Accordingly, as explained below, this case is
decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 2
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some3
of which are identified as exhibits in this decision.  
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on June 8, 2010,1
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar
to a complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security
guidelines known as Guideline F for financial considerations. The SOR also
recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether
to deny or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR. Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel
requested a hearing, and so, the case will be decided on the written record.2
On or about December 23, 2010, the Agency submitted its written case
consisting of all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.3
This so-called file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant and received by
him on or about January 16, 2011. He then had a 30-day period to submit a response
setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation. To date, he has
not replied. The case was assigned to me February 24, 2011.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He married for the
first time in 1998, and they separated in 2008. He has one child, a son, born in 2004.
His employment history is summarized as follows: (1) he worked as a real estate agent
from April 1997 to about December 2008; (2) for about two months in 2008, he worked
as a role player/interpreter for a federal contractor; (3) from December 2006 to
December 2008, he was self-employed in the discount cigarette business; (4) and from
December 2008 to present, he has worked as a linguist for a federal contractor. His job
duties require him to support the mission of the U.S. Army in operations overseas.  
 Answer to SOR. 4
 Exhibit 7. 5
 Exhibit 9. 6
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a7
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.8
3
Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties that are unresolved. In
his Answer to the SOR, he admitted the four delinquent debts. The first debt is a
charged-off credit card account for $8,209. The second is a charged-off credit card
account for $24,423. The third is a charged-off home-equity loan for $48,763. And the
fourth is a foreclosed mortgage loan (owed to the same creditor as the home-equity
loan) that had a high credit or balance of more than $500,000. Applicant has not taken
any action to resolve the four delinquent debts because he believes he cannot pay them
as the accounts are charged-off and no longer exist in the lender system.  He did not4
present any information showing that any of the debts were forgiven or cancelled.
Applicant attributes his financial problems to a downturn in the real estate market
that affected his ability to earn an income as a real estate agent. In turn, this resulted in
his home going into foreclosure. He then started his own business (discount cigarettes),
but it did not prosper. He tried to keep it afloat by using his credit cards, but that ended
badly. He is now earning a good income working as a linguist for a federal contractor. A
personal financial statement from February 2009 revealed a gross monthly income of
$5,500 with a net remainder of $1,430;  and a personal financial statement from5
November 2009 revealed a gross monthly income of $15,400 with a net remainder of
$7,050.  The later also shows what appears to be cash reserves of about $19,000.6
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As7
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt8
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 15
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).16
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.17
4
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An9
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  10
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting11
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An12
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate13
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme14
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.15
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.16
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it17
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 18
 See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an19
applicant is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness
or recurring financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  20
 AG ¶ 19(a).  21
 AG ¶ 19(c). 22
 AG ¶ 20(a)–(f). 23
5
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant18
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline19
F is: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  20
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information within the
defense industry.   
The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties, which are unresolved. With that said, it is probable that
Applicant does not owe a deficiency balance stemming from the foreclosure because it
took place in a state that has an antideficiency statute, which serves to limit the rights of
secured creditors to recover in excess of the security. (SOR ¶ 1.d) Still, the three
charged-off debts for about $80,000 raise security concerns because they indicate
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial21
obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.c) The facts are22
sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions.
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F.  Any of the23
following may mitigate security concerns:
 
¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
 See Exhibit 11(responses to interrogatories). 24
 Black’s Law Dictionary 266 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9  ed., W est 2009). 25 th
6
¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
¶ 20(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Of those mitigating conditions, the most pertinent here is ¶ 20(b). It is probable
that Applicant’s financial problems were caused, in part, by his separation from his wife
in 2008 and the downturn in the real estate market. These were circumstances largely
beyond his control. This is difficult to measure, however, because Applicant has
presented scant information tying these circumstances to his financial problems.
Accordingly, this mitigating condition receives limited weight.  
What is missing here is a plan or effort to resolve the three charged-off debts for
about $80,000. Applicant has taken no action in this regard, perhaps under the belief
that he no longer owes the debts because they are charged off.  His belief is mistaken.24
A charge off  is simply an action by a creditor to treat an account receivable as a loss25
or expense because payment is not likely. It is certainly an adverse factor on a credit
report because it indicates that a debtor has become seriously delinquent on a debt.
Although written off as a bad debt, the debt is still legally valid, and it may be collected
by the creditor for the amount in full as permitted by law of the particular jurisdiction.
Given the lack of a realistic plan or a serious effort to resolve the three charged-off
debts, it is difficult to predict if or when Applicant will resolve his indebtedness. 
To conclude, the evidence of Applicant’s financial problems, past and present,
justifies current doubts about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following
Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting
national security. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).26
7
person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence. Nevertheless, Applicant did not26
meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. Time
will tell if Applicant has both the ability and willingness to resolve his financial problems.
This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
