 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08104 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 3, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 19, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 2, 2010. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 16, 2010, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on November 30, 2010. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 
 
2 
 
1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department 
Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, called a 
witness, and offered exhibits (AE) A through C that were admitted into evidence. I held 
the record open after the hearing to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. 
Applicant submitted two sets of documents, AE D-1 through D-31 and AE E-1 through 
E-2. Government Counsel’s transmittal letters, posing no objection to Applicant’s 
documents, are marked HE II and III. All post-hearing documents were admitted into 
evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 8, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old deputy program mananger employed by a defense 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since March 2008. He is a high 
school graduate. He is married and has five children, four of whom live at home. He 
retired from the Navy in February 2008, after serving for 22 years. He was a limited duty 
officer (LDO) and served at the rank of lieutenant. Because he only had eight total 
commissioned years in the Navy, he retired at the pay grade of E-8. He has held a 
security clearance since 1984.1  
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts for about $107,201. The debts were listed 
on credit reports obtained on June 17, 2009, July 28, 2009, and August 17, 2007.  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties came to the forefront during the last year of his 
Navy career and carried on into his post-Navy employment. He was forced to retire from 
the Navy earlier than he intended when a Navy review board determined he could not 
meet the Navy’s weight standards. Prior to meeting the review board, Applicant was 
stationed overseas in a deployed area from October 2004 to August 2007. When he 
was deployed, he earned about $1,000 more a month in overseas entitlements. He met 
the review board while stationed overseas. Once the review board issued its decision, 
he was sent back to the United States in August 2007. He received $1,000 less income 
from August 2007 until his retirement in February 2008.2 
 
 Applicant’s retirement pay was also affected by the forced retirement. Another 
two years of active duty service would have allowed him to retire as an officer and result 
in more retirement pay. Shortly after his retirement, Applicant’s father passed away 
which caused an unexpected large family expense. He had to expend funds to fly his 
whole family to the west coast for the funeral. Applicant was unemployed for about three 
weeks before he started his defense contractor job. That job paid less than his Navy 
position. 
 
 The first debt listed in the SOR (¶ 1.a) is described as a delinquent medical 
account, but it was actually a homeowner’s association judgment against Applicant.  
                                                          
1 GE 1; Tr. at 36-37, 45. 
 
2 GE 5 (personal subject interview at 2); Tr. at 39-44. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant provided documentation showing the judgment was satisfied in October 2008. 
This debt is resolved.3  
 
 The second debt listed in the SOR (¶ 1.b) is a charged-off account for a 
consumer loan in the amount of $9,156. Applicant set up a payment plan beginning in 
June 2010. He provided documentation showing he made the monthly payments of 
$329 through December 2010. This debt is under control.4    
 
 The third debt listed in the SOR (¶ 1.c) is a collection account in the amount of 
$484 for a consumer debt. Applicant provided documentation showing the debt was 
satisfied in May 2010. This debt is resolved.5 
 
 The fourth debt listed in the SOR (¶ 1.d) is charged-off account on a second 
mortgage in the amount of $96,000. The loan was originally for $80,000, but increased 
due to accrued interest and penalties for non-payment. Applicant provided 
documentation that he settled this debt with a lump-sum payment of $15,000 in January 
2011. This debt is resolved.6 
 
 The last debt listed in the SOR (¶ 1.e) is a charged-off consumer account in the 
amount of $1,331. Applicant set up a payment plan beginning in December 2009. He 
provided documentation showing he made the required payments to date. This debt is 
under control.7    
 
 Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant testified that he had gotten behind on 
his first mortgage and it was in a foreclosure status. He further stated that he worked 
out a repayment arrangement with the mortgage holder. He provided documentation 
showing steady mortgage payments from March 2010 through December 2010. He also 
testified that he had not filed his 2009 state income tax return at that time. He later 
provided documentation showing that he filed and paid his 2009 state taxes.8  
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation is stable, although he admits that they often 
live paycheck-to-paycheck. He does not use credit cards. He recently paid off two car 
loans so he will have about $800 more disposable income per month. Applicant’s 
friends and family members attest to his honesty, trustworthiness and overall integrity.9   
 
                                                          
3 GE 5; Tr. at 50. 
 
4 AE D-13, D-14; Tr. at 51-52. 
 
5 AE D-11, D-12; Tr. at 53. 
 
6 AE D-5, E-1; Tr. at 54-56. 
 
7 AE D-3, D-4; Tr. at 60. 
 
8 AE D-3, D-4; Tr. at 60. 
 
9 AE A-C; Tr. 30-35, 61-62, 70. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had five delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy that 
are documented by the credit reports in evidence. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant’s payments to satisfy the debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d 
demonstrate clear indications that the problem is being resolved. They also amount to 
good-faith efforts to repay overdue creditors. Additionally, by setting up payment plans 
for the remaining two debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e) and establishing a track record of 
payment, he has shown good faith toward resolving those debts.10 Applicant met his 
                                                          
10 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
Applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the Applicant’s debts. The 
 
6 
 
burden to establish sufficient mitigation evidence under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) on the 
debts listed in the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s 22 years of honorable service to this country, his 
character references, and his family situation. Applicant paid or settled three of the 
debts, including the largest, and he set up reasonable payment plans to resolve the 
remaining two debts. Applicant convinced me that he now has a grasp on his finances, 
after going through his involuntary retirement, and that his finances no longer pose a 
security concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an Applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
