 
 
1 
 
 
                                                      
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                                      )  ISCR Case No. 09-05556 
                                                                      )  
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on April 20, 2009. On October 29, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
    
 Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR on November 20, 2010. He requested 
that his case be adjudicated on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government 
compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on December 29, 2010. The FORM 
contained documents identified as Items 1 through 11. By letter dated January 4, 2011, 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any 
additional information or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file 
on February 9, 2011. His response was due on March 11, 2011. By letter dated 
February 9, 2011, he filed a two-page letter, which he identified as his “final response” 
to the FORM and DOHA’s transmittal letter of January 4, 2011. On February 28, 2011, 
the case was assigned to me for a decision. Without objection, I marked Applicant’s 
two-page response to the FORM as his Exhibit (Ex.) A and admitted it to the record.  
 
                                                      Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 15 allegations raising security concerns under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.o.). Two allegations recite Chapter 13 
bankruptcies, one filed in 2002 and dismissed in 2004, and the other filed in 2004 and 
dismissed in 2009 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.). Thirteen additional allegations recite financial 
delinquencies totalling approximately $108,835 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c. through 1.o.) In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all 15 allegations. Applicant’s admissions are 
entered as findings of fact.  (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant, who is 55 years old and a college graduate, is employed as a program 
manager by a government contractor. He married in 1976 and divorced in 2005. He is 
the father of three adult sons. He was first awarded a security clearance in 1980. (Item 
5.) 
 
 In 2000, Applicant and his wife were laid off from their jobs for an unspecified 
time. They were then unable to pay their mortgage and utility bills. In November 2002, 
Applicant and his wife filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. The Chapter 13 bankruptcy was 
dismissed without prejudice on September 23, 2004. (Item 6 at 3; Item 7 at 47, 59.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife refiled the Chapter 13 bankruptcy on November 3, 2004. 
They listed total assets of $176,600 and total liabilities of $153,490. In March 2009, their 
Chapter 13 trustee filed a certificate of default, claiming that Applicant was 
approximately $17,368 in arrears in his monthly payments.1 Applicant’s second Chapter 
13 bankruptcy was dismissed without prejudice in June 2009. (Item 6 at 5; Item 7 at 1, 
5, 13.) 
 
 Applicant admitted all 13 allegations of financial delinquency on the SOR. Of 
those debts, five were for amounts of $100 or less (SOR ¶ 1.e., 1.f., 1.i., 1.j., and 1.k.). 
Two of the debts admitted by Applicant were for amounts between $100 and $235. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.d. and 1.g.). Applicant also admitted five additional financial delinquencies 
alleged in the SOR. Those delinquencies are: SOR ¶ 1.c.: $1,438; SOR ¶ 1.l.: $9,082; 
SOR ¶ 1.m.: $1,820; SOR ¶ 1.n.: $1,808; and SOR ¶ 1.o.: $1,800. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant admitted that he was over 120 days past due on payments of his 
$92,172 home mortgage. (SOR ¶ 1.h.) In his response to DOHA interrogatories, 
 
1 At the time the certificate of default was filed, Applicant’s monthly payments were $3,045. (Item 7 at 1.) 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant provided a letter from the mortgage holder, dated January 12, 2010, denying 
his request for hardship assistance. In response to the FORM, dated February 9, 2011, 
he stated that he was “still in the middle of resolving the house foreclosure process.” He 
further stated that he would persevere and resolve his financial delinquencies at some 
unspecified time in the future. (Item 4; Item 6 at 24; Ex. A.) 
  
 In a May 2009, interview with an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM), Applicant attributed his two bankruptcies and current 
financial delinquencies to being laid off on five separate occasions. The record reflects 
that Applicant was laid off in 2000 for an unspecified time. He was laid off for five 
months in 2004, and one month in 2005. In October 2006, he was fired from a job and 
unemployed for one month. In November 2008, he was laid off for five months. He has 
worked for his present employer since April 2009. (Item 5; Item 6 at 3-4.) 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant stated that he found the process of 
explaining his financial situation “exasperating and futile.” He denied that his financial 
delinquencies raised security concerns. He attributed his current financial situation in 
general terms to “unemployment, medical bills, marital problems culminating in divorce, 
not to mention college bills, my mother’s dementia and strokes and placement in a 
nursing home, and all sorts of repairs on my aging house.”  He failed to specify how 
these events impacted his ability to satisfy his financial obligations. (Ex. A.) 
 
 Applicant failed to provide documentation to establish that he had paid or had 
payment plans in place for the 13 delinquent debts he admitted. Moreover, he failed to 
provide documentation to establish that any of the debts alleged in the SOR had been 
settled or otherwise satisfied. (Item 4; Item 6; Ex. A.) 
Burden of Proof 
 The Government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the Government's case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the 
applicant carries the burden of persuasion. The "clearly consistent with the national 
interest" standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant's 
suitability for access to classified information in favor of protecting national security. 
  
          Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
 
4 
 
 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. For several years, Applicant has accumulated delinquent debt which 
has not been paid. This evidence is sufficient to raise potentially disqualifying conditions 
under Guideline F. 
 
The guideline also recites conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions could apply to the 
security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. Unresolved financial 
delinquency might be mitigated if “it happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” (AG ¶ 20(a)). 
Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the conditions that 
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control,” such as 
“loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” 
(AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might be applicable include 
evidence “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” (AG ¶ 
20(c) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  Finally, security concerns related to financial 
delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
   
While Applicant’s 13 unresolved delinquent debts total approximately $108,835, 
five of his delinquent debts are for amounts under $100 and two are for amounts 
between $100 and $235. His history of financial delinquencies dates to at least 2002, 
when he and his wife filed their first Chapter 13 bankruptcy. The delinquencies alleged 
on the SOR remain unpaid and have occurred under circumstances that are likely to 
 
6 
 
 
recur. Applicant has failed to demonstrate that his financial problems are resolved or are 
under control. Moreover, he lacks a clear and timely strategy for resolving his delinquent 
debts.   
 
Applicant has been employed by his present employer since April 2009. The 
record shows that Applicant experienced short-term unemployment five times. 
Moreover, he claimed that certain life events overwhelmed his ability to satisfy his 
debts. He did not specify how these events---unemployment, a divorce, his mother’s 
illness---used financial resources that he might otherwise have used to pay his 
delinquent debt. He failed to provide documentation to establish that he acted 
reasonably when confronted with financial problems. He failed to show that he had 
made good faith efforts to resolve his delinquent debts. 
 
 In May 2009, Applicant told an OPM investigator that he intended to pay his 
delinquent debts in the future. Almost two years later, however, all of his financial 
delinquencies remain unresolved. In determining an individual's security worthiness, the 
Government cannot rely on the possibility that an applicant might resolve his or her 
outstanding debts at some future date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 
1999). It is also well settled that failure to resolve debts over a period of time constitutes 
a continuing course of conduct that raises concerns about an applicant’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. ISCR Case No 07-10575 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul 3, 2008). Accordingly, I 
conclude that none of the Guideline F mitigating conditions fully applies to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. In the 
 
7 
 
 
last ten years, he has experienced five brief periods of unemployment. He was divorced 
in 2005. He filed two Chapter 13 bankruptcies, both of which were dismissed when he 
failed to make required payments. He has been steadily employed at his present 
position since about April 2009. In a May 2009, interview with an OPM investigator, he 
stated he would take action to pay or otherwise satisfy his delinquent debts. However, 
his 13 delinquent debts remain unaddressed. Despite nearly two years of steady 
employment, Applicant has failed to satisfy his delinquent debts, several of which are for 
relatively small amounts of money. His failure to satisfy his creditors raises security 
concerns about his judgment and reliability. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
delinquencies.     
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.o.:            Against Applicant 
 
                    Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
