 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06386 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esq. 
 
March 30, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Personal Conduct security concerns related to his 
missionary work in China while possessing a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 27, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 24, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge of the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals. The case 
was assigned to me on November 17, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
November 18, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 15, 
 
2 
 
2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GEs) 1 through 3, which were admitted without 
objection. Additionally, the Government offered documents relating to China for 
administrative notice marked I. Notice was taken, over the objection of Applicant’s 
counsel. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AEs) A through E, which were admitted without 
objection, called six witnesses, and testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 3, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a. through 1.c., and 1.e. through 1.g. He 
denies allegation 1.d. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
  
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor since 2004. He has 
held a security clearance since 2004. He has been married 27 years and has two 
children, ages 24 and 19. He has had no violations of U.S. laws, other than minor traffic 
infractions. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 72-73.) 
 
 From 1997 through May 2010, Applicant engaged in missionary trips to China. 
He traveled to China approximately annually, for about three weeks each trip. However, 
in 2003, he was unemployed and was able to take three missionary trips to China. 
Seven of his trips to China occurred after he became employed in his present position. 
Most recently, he traveled to China in May 2010. Each trip was reported to his facility 
security officer prior to travel. He also clearly disclosed each trip on his security 
clearance application and indicated he was performing “short-term missions trip[s]” and 
that he was taking “Bibles and other Christian materials to house churches in China” on 
his applications. He underwent security briefings conducted by his security office on 
China prior to his most recent two trips. He openly told the person conducting the 
briefing of his missionary work in China. After his return from his two most recent trips, 
he completed a debriefing. He was never cautioned that his missionary work could 
create a security concern by his security office. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 73-100.) 
 
 The purpose of his trips was to smuggle bibles and other religious materials into 
China for their distribution to underground evangelical churches. Applicant noted that 
bibles are not per se illegal in China, and are sold in official government churches. 
However, they are too costly for many Chinese nationals and were unavailable to 
Chinese nationals living outside major Chinese cities. On the other hand, he 
acknowledged that bringing religious materials into China was in violation of customs 
regulations. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 73-100.) 
 
 On each trip, Applicant traveled from the U.S. to Hong Kong, where he would 
acquire bibles, and other Christian materials from publishers. Christian materials are 
legal in Hong Kong. Applicant had a bank account in Hong Kong to facilitate his 
purchases. He would discuss his plans with a friend in Hong Kong that traveled to China 
frequently, and his friend would advise him of the easiest places to cross into China with 
Christian contraband. A team from Applicant’s church would then arrive in Hong Kong 
approximately a week after Applicant’s arrival, and Applicant would lead them across 
 
3 
 
the border into China. Applicant traveled into China on a tourist visa. As a result of his 
missionary work, he maintained contact with Chinese nationals that he would see on his 
annual missionary trips. (AE D; Tr. 76, 89-90.) 
 
 On occasion, Applicant and/or his fellow travelers would be stopped and 
searched as they tried to enter China. When the religious materials were discovered, 
the materials would be confiscated and a receipt would be issued. The materials could 
be reclaimed upon exit. In some instances, members of Applicant’s group would 
immediately go back through customs, retrieve the religious materials, and re-enter 
China with the religious materials. Witnesses indicated that no other repercussions were 
ever taken by Chinese customs officials as a result of attempting to smuggle religious 
materials into China. Applicant acknowledged that deportation and confiscation of the 
materials was possible, but he indicated such actions never occurred. (GE 3; Tr. 42-54, 
75.) 
  
 During a personal subject interview conducted by an agent of the Office of 
Personnel Management in October 2008, Applicant indicated that he intended to 
continue his missionary work in China. However, now that he understands the 
Government’s concern, he has discontinued his missionary work in China. He has 
informed the pastors in writing at his church that he will no longer participate in the trips 
to China. Since his May 2010 trip, he has closed his bank account in Hong Kong and no 
longer has contact with Chinese citizens. (GE 3; AE D; AE E; Tr. 57-62, 67-70, 76, 79.) 
 
 Applicant presented 40 letters of recommendation and called six witnesses to 
testify to his trustworthiness. His colleagues and supervisors see Applicant as a man of 
integrity and high ethical standards. Applicant is seen as a role model and has the trust 
of each colleague, friend, pastor, and supervisor that wrote or testified on his behalf. 
Additionally, his talents and work performance are praised by his supervisors and co-
workers. His performance evaluations reflect he performs satisfactorily in his position at 
work and note that he is an excellent employee. (AE A; AE B; AE C; Tr. 28-70.) 
 
 Administrative notice documents, presented by Department Counsel, establish 
that the People’s Republic of China is a large and economically powerful country, with a 
population of over a billion people and an economy growing at about 10% per year. 
China has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. 
China has a poor record with respect to human rights, including failure to respect 
freedom of speech and the press; failure to respect academic and artistic freedom; 
severe restrictions on peaceful assembly and associations; restrictions on freedom of 
association; and restrictions on the freedom of religion. (I.) 
 
China is one of the most aggressive countries in seeking sensitive and protected 
U.S. technology and economic intelligence. It targets the United States with active 
intelligence gathering programs, both legal and illegal. As a result, it is a growing threat 
to U.S. national security. In China, authorities routinely monitor telephone 
conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, and internet 
communications. Authorities open and censor mail. Its security services have entered 
personal residences and offices to gain access to computers, telephones, and fax 
 
4 
 
machines. All major hotels have a sizable internal security presence, and hotel 
guestrooms are sometimes bugged and searched for sensitive or proprietary materials. 
There are several recent cases involving actual or attempted espionage and the illegal 
export of information to China. (I.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another country, 
engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that 
country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group.  
 
 Applicant admits that his missionary actions in China were in violations of 
Chinese laws. His actions in distributing bibles and other religious materials in China 
created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress. Thus AG ¶ 16(e) is 
disqualifying. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant acknowledges that his behavior in China was illegal and carried 
security risks. He now understands the security significance of his missionary work in 
 
6 
 
China. He has vowed not to return to missionary work while possessing a security 
clearance. He showed that he has taken steps to end his missionary work in China by 
informing his church pastors of his decision. His decision to cease further missionary 
work in China is a positive step that alleviates future risk. As attested to by his character 
witnesses and through numerous character letters, Applicant is an honest man of his 
word and can be expected to follow through on this promise. AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant's has performed successfully at work, receiving good ratings. He is well 
respected by his friends, colleagues, supervisors, and pastors. He has ceased his 
missionary work in China. While his last trip was relatively recent, he is a man of his 
word, as attested to by his witnesses, and can be expected to follow through on his 
promise not to take future missionary trips to China.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
