                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06975 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
On November 1, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines E and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant provided an undated response to the SOR. She later requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 8, 
2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 9, 2011. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on March 9, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified on her behalf and 
did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 16, 
2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. She earned a bachelor’s degree in business 
management in 1990. She was married from 1989 to 2005. She remarried her former 
husband in 2007. She has two children from the marriage, ages 22 and 16. The 
younger child lives at home. Applicant has worked for her current employer, a defense 
contractor, since May 2009. She held a top secret security clearance from about 2005 
to 2006.1 
 
 In 1995, Applicant worked for the federal government as a supply technician. She 
and a friend were arrested by the police for disorderly conduct because they were 
taking items that had been donated to a charity store. Applicant pled guilty, and was 
ordered to pay a fine and costs, which she did.2  
 
 Applicant completed a Declaration of Federal Employment in June 1996, a 
security clearance application (SCA) in April 1998, and another Declaration of Federal 
Employment in December 2002. On each document she failed to list her disorderly 
conduct offense.3 She stated she did not think she was arrested, but only thought she 
received a citation, so did not list it. In 2003, Applicant was interviewed for her 
background investigation and intentionally provided false information to investigators by 
failing to disclose her 1995 arrest. She repeatedly denied ever being arrested. She 
claimed she was out of town at the time the arrest occurred. She stated she had no idea 
who the person in the arrest and court records might have been and she asserted that 
she was not the person identified in the court records. She further denied that she 
provided fraudulent information on her SCA and Declaration of Federal Employment 
documents. She indicated she was willing to submit to a polygraph to resolve the 
matter.4  
 
 Applicant submitted to a polygraph on November 14, 2003, and during the pre-
interview she continued to deny the 1995 arrest. During the post-polygraph interview 
Applicant finally divulged the 1995 arrest. Applicant acknowledged at the time she failed 
to disclose the arrest on her SCA, sworn statements, and interviews because she had 
1 Tr. 26-28. 
 
2 Tr. 29-31. 
 
3 Apparently, it took from 1998 to 2005 for Applicant’s security clearance application to be adjudicated.  
 
4 Tr. 29-37. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
just begun a new career and was afraid she would not be granted a security clearance 
and she needed the job. She worked for this agency from June 2003 until September 
2006.5 
 
 On August 8, 2005, Applicant received a letter from the adjudication facility that 
stated:  
 
You have a pattern of deliberately falsifying official government documents 
and intentionally providing false information to investigators. However, the 
arrest information that you repeatedly lied about is mitigated due to the 
time that has elapsed. Your personal conduct raises the concern of your 
reliability and judgment, however, the fact that the arrest information itself 
is considered mitigated provides mitigation for your lack of candor. Our 
favorable decision in this matter should not be considered as minimization 
of the seriousness of your behavior. You are expected to provide complete 
and accurate information on all official documents and be truthful during 
the investigative process.  
 
* * * 
 
[I]t has been decided that the information does not warrant a 
recommendation of revocation of your eligibility to occupy a sensitive 
position and/or access to classified information. 
 
* * * 
 
Should information surface in the future that you have failed to provide 
complete and accurate information on official documents or to an 
investigator, this information may be used to justify a determination to 
revoke your eligibility for retention in a sensitive position and/or access to 
classified information.6 
 
 Applicant’s regional director was directed to hand deliver the documents notifying 
Applicant that a conditional security clearance was granted. He was directed to verbally 
advise her of its contents and the ramifications for her failure to meet any of the 
conditions. Applicant stated that her supervisor told her that he had gone through a lot 
to help her get her security clearance. She was told that in the future she needed to 
inform investigators about her past. She was granted a security clearance in August 
2005. Her job involved ensuring government contractors were in compliance with 
security requirements. She was given government credentials as a special agent for the 
agency where she worked.7  
5 Tr. 29-37. 
 
6 GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. 24-26, 37-39. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 In July 2006, on at least two occasions, Applicant falsely pretended to be a 
special agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) upon entering a defense 
agency building. On at least three occasions in July 2006, Applicant falsely pretended to 
be a special agent of the FBI when making telephone calls to other federal government 
agencies, and in at least one of those telephone calls, she falsely indicated that she was 
working for the Department of Defense Hotline complaint.8  
 
 Applicant explained that in July 2006 she was dating a man employed by a 
defense agency. She believed he was seeing another woman, who had been calling her 
to tell her to stop seeing the man. Applicant determined who the woman was and that 
she worked for the federal government. She went to a defense agency’s headquarters 
building, showed her special agent credentials, and identified herself as Special Agent X 
from the FBI. She signed and logged herself into the building as Special Agent X from 
the FBI. The name was a fake. She gained entry to the building and proceeded to use 
the telephone in the building. She contacted the operator where the woman worked, 
identified herself as a special agent of the FBI, and asked for the woman’s supervisor. 
She left a message for the supervisor, identifying herself Special Agent X from the FBI, 
and advising the supervisor that she was calling in regard to this woman. In the 
message, she told the supervisor she would call back. Later she went back to the same 
building, again misused her government credentials, claiming she was Special Agent X, 
from the FBI. She again signed and logged into the building using the fake name. She 
again used the defense agency’s telephone to call the woman’s supervisor. She 
identified herself as Special Agent X from the FBI. This time she spoke with the 
supervisor and told her she was investigating a Defense Department hotline complaint 
about the woman. Applicant stated she did not recall the supervisor’s response. 
Applicant admitted she also called this woman at her home directly on two occasions. 
The woman was not home and Applicant did not leave a message. In her answer to the 
SOR, Applicant indicated she took these actions because she wanted to get the 
woman’s attention and get her to “back-off.”9  
 
 Applicant violated Title 18, United States Code, Section 912, a felony, by 
impersonating a Special Agent of the FBI.10  
 
 Applicant’s access to classified information and assignment to sensitive duties 
were suspended on September 1, 2006, by her employer because she had 
impersonated an FBI special agent. The regional director of her agency told her that the 
situation was grave because of her conduct. He gave her the opportunity to resign from 
the agency and told her that she would not be permitted to withdraw her resignation. On 
8 Tr. 39-49. 
 
9 Tr. 39-57; Answer to SOR; GE 4. 
 
10 GE 9; Title 18 U.S.C § 912 states: “Whoever falsely assumes or pretends to be an officer or employee 
acting under the authority of the United States or any department, agency or officer thereof, and acts as 
such, or in such pretended character demands or obtains any money, paper, document, or things of 
value, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than three years, or both.”  
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
August 31, 2006, Applicant submitted her resignation and stopped working at the 
agency. Because she was permitted to use her remaining leave, her last official day at 
the agency was September 22, 2006. Later, Applicant received notification, in the mail, 
that her security clearance was suspended pending final resolution of the above 
mentioned matter.11 
 
 Applicant was unemployed for a few months after she resigned. She then worked 
as a substitute teacher part-time.12 
 
 Applicant began working for a federal contractor in May 2009. She did not tell her 
new employer the reasons she resigned from her government job. She stated she did 
not tell them because they did not ask. She completed a SCA on June 26, 2009. Under 
Section 13C: Employment Record, Applicant was asked if in the last seven years she 
had been fired from a job, quit a job after being told she would be fired, left a job by 
mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct, left a job by mutual 
agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance; left a job for other reasons 
under unfavorable circumstances, or was laid off from a job by her employer. Applicant 
responded “no.” She failed to disclose she left her federal agency job and her security 
clearance was suspended, after she was suspected of impersonating an FBI special 
agent.13  
 
 In her SCA, Applicant was asked if she had received a written warning, been 
officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in the workplace. She 
responded “no.” Applicant failed to disclose that in August 2005, she had received a 
warning letter from her federal government employer that stated:  
 
Should information surface in the future that you have failed to provide 
complete and accurate information on official documents or to an 
investigator, this information may be used to justify a determination to 
revoke your eligibility for retention in a sensitive position and/or access to 
classified information.14  
 
 In her SCA, Section 25 asked: “to your knowledge, have you EVER had a 
clearance or access authorization denied, suspended, or revoked; or been debarred 
from government employment.” If the answer was yes, the question asked the dates of 
such actions and the circumstances. It also explained that an administrative downgrade 
or termination of a security clearance was not a revocation. Applicant responded “no” to 
the question.15  
11 Tr. 57-61; GE 5, 6. 
 
12 Tr. 60-61.  
 
13 Tr. 28, 61; GE 7.  
 
14 GE 2. 
 
15 Tr. 66. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 Applicant’s explanation for why she failed to provide truthful answers was that 
she did not see where her situation was applicable because she was told to resign. She 
stated she would not have quit her job. She stated she left because she was told to do 
so by her regional director. She stated she did not disclose her conditional security 
clearance or warning letter because “it was an oversight.”16 She did not list that her 
security clearance had been suspended because she stated she checked the Joint 
Personnel Adjudication System and her clearance was not listed as suspended. When 
asked why she did not inquire about this discrepancy, she did not have an answer.17  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in July 2009. During her interview she told the investigator that she 
did not have any problems when she was employed by the federal government and she 
did not receive any disciplinary action. She told the investigator she voluntarily left the 
government because of personal reasons and was told by her supervisor it would be in 
her best interest to resign for personal issues. She did not provide the investigator any 
additional information and stated she could not recall the name of the supervisor at the 
federal agency, and she did not list him on her case papers. At her hearing, she stated 
she voluntarily left her employment because she did not have any problems or receive 
any disciplinary actions. She stated she asked the investigator what the definition of 
“disciplinary actions” was and was told it was if she had ever been written up. She 
considered her resignation as voluntarily leaving her employment for personal reasons. 
Applicant’s testimony was not believable.18 
 
 Applicant has been consistently untruthful and dishonest about her past actions 
dating as far back as 1998. She continued to be deceptive and dishonest after she was 
granted a conditional security clearance. Applicant again lied on her most recent SCA 
and to the OPM investigator. Her testimony at her hearing was not credible, lacked 
candor, and was deceptive.  
 
 Applicant repeatedly violated Title 18, United States Code, Section 1001, a 
felony, by knowingly making false statements to government officials. 
 
 Applicant indicated that when she first applied for a security clearance she was 
going through a stressful time in her life. Her mother had passed away and she had a 
great deal of emotional issues and pressures in her life. She claimed that while she was 
working for the federal government she had no issues and was a good worker. She 
indicated she was not charged criminally for her actions when she impersonated an FBI 
special agent. She stated she is not very happy with her decisions, but attributed them 
 
 
16 Tr. 65. 
 
17 Tr. 24-26, 61-67. 
 
18 Tr. 67-77; GE 8. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
to the stress in her life. She stated she recently started counseling, but did not provide 
specific information about it.19  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
19 Tr. 23. 
 
8 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that are not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
9 
 
 
Applicant has a long history and pattern of deliberately and intentionally lying to 
government investigators and on government documents, which include SCA and 
Declarations for Federal Employment. She has deliberately provided false and 
misleading information concerning relevant facts to government investigators when 
interviewed. Her dishonesty and falsifications date back to 1998, when she intentionally 
provided false information to government investigators. In 2006, she pretended to be 
special agent of the FBI on two occasions, and on three other occasions she pretended 
to be a special agent of the FBI when making telephone calls. Her security clearance 
was suspended and she was told to resign from her job in 2006. She applied for a job 
with a defense contractor in 2009. On her 2009 SCA, she did not disclose that she had 
received a written warning from the federal agency where she was previously employed 
and that she was granted a conditional security clearance. She provided false 
statements to the OPM investigator during her background interview by falsely stating 
that she did not have problems when she was previously employed by a federal agency 
and left for personal reasons. She failed to disclose her security clearance was 
suspended. Her conduct, if publicly known, may affect her standing in the community 
and create a vulnerability to coercion. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply to 
Applicant’s personal conduct and false statements.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
 
10 
 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with person involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
Applicant has been lying about her past since 1998, when she denied she had 
ever been arrested for disorderly conduct, going so far as to claim she was not in the 
area at the time, and claiming it was another person. It was not until her post-polygraph 
interview that she finally disclosed her conduct. Despite her false statements, she was 
granted a conditional security clearance with clear warnings about her future 
misconduct. A year later, Applicant pretended to be an FBI special agent to gain access 
to a federal agency’s building where she used their telephone in an obvious attempt to 
intimidate a woman. Applicant was told to resign from her job and she was notified that 
her security clearance was suspended. In 2009, she applied for a security clearance 
and failed to disclose any of her past transgressions. Applicant did not make a prompt, 
good-faith effort to correct her omissions, concealments, or falsifications. To the 
contrary, she continued to conceal her misconduct. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. There is 
no evidence that her omissions or concealment was caused by improper advice. AG ¶ 
17(b) does not apply. Applicant’s offenses are not minor. Her repeated falsifications 
were not infrequent and did not happen under unique circumstances. Her repeated 
actions cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find AG 
¶17(c) does not apply. Applicant has acknowledged she made mistakes, but was not 
entirely forthcoming when answering questions about her past actions. She stated she 
has begun some type of counseling, but did not provide specific information. I find AG ¶ 
17(d) partially and marginally applies. Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to 
conclude she has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability. She did not 
disclose her past transgressions to her employer. I find AG ¶ 17(e) does not apply. 
Applicant’s testimony lacked candor and was not credible. There was no evidence to 
support the application of AG ¶¶ 17(f) or 17(g).  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offense; and 
 
 
11 
 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
Applicant repeatedly, deliberately, and intentionally omitted relevant information 
and provided false information to government investigators and in government 
documents, to include her SCA. These are felony violations, under Title 18 U.S.C. § 
1001. In 2006, she impersonated an FBI special agent on several occasions. These are 
felony violations, under Title 18 U.S.C. § 912. I find the above disqualifying conditions 
apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
 Applicant repeatedly omitted, concealed, and falsified relevant information on 
government documents, on her SCA, and during security interviews. Her behavior 
began in 1998 and continued to 2009. Her testimony at her hearing lacked candor and 
was not credible. Her pattern of omissions and false statements cast doubt on her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Her repeated and recent behavior in 
concealing her past conduct and failure to be truthful during this security clearance 
process, beginning in July 2009, is a serious concern. Other than expressing some 
remorse for her behavior, I find there is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant is 
successfully rehabilitated. There is no evidence she was coerced, pressured, or did not 
commit the offenses. I find none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
12 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is married and the mother of two children. She is a college graduate. 
Applicant repeatedly lied about her 1995 disorderly conduct offense until her post-
polygraph interview. Despite her actions, she was given a written warning and a 
conditional security clearance. Less than a year later, in 2006, she impersonated a 
special agent of the FBI on several occasions and abused her position of trust by 
misusing her credentials. She was permitted to resign and received a letter advising her 
that her security clearance was suspended. In 2009, she secured employment with a 
federal contractor. She did not disclose her past transgressions to her new employer. 
She applied for a security clearance and intentionally failed to disclose her employment 
history and criminal conduct. She misled government investigators by deliberately 
providing false information. Applicant’s testimony at her hearing was not credible. 
Applicant has a long history of lying to government investigators and in official 
government documents. Applicant’s repeated wrongful and criminal behavior creates 
serious doubts as to her reliability, good judgment, and trustworthiness. Applicant failed 
to meet her burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the guidelines for Personal Conduct and Criminal Conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
