                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-06691 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Marc Laverdiere, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David Price, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 6, 2007, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86)(e-QIP). On June 25, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 1, 2010. He answered the 
SOR in writing on July 6, 2010, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
DOHA received the request on July 9, 2010. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on August 25, 2010, and I received the case assignment on August 31, 2010, 
after it was reassigned from another administrative judge because of caseload 
considerations.  
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on September 8, 2010, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on October 6, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 
17, which were received without objection. Applicant testified, as did a character 
witness, and he submitted Exhibits A through D, each of which contained from seven to 
ten subparts, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
October 14, 2010. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding ¶ 2.c, alleging the 
following:  
 
“That you omitted, during the completion of your SF-86, on or about 
August 6, 2007, the fact that you had been terminated by Applied 
Methods, i.e., Hydro-Acoustics, a Maryland tax lien, and a judgment in 
Baltimore County District Court, for a debt to Discover Card in 2006.”  
 
Applicant’s counsel objected to the motion, arguing that Department Counsel had 
not shown good cause for failing to raise the allegation sooner. After consideration of 
both counsel’s arguments, I granted the motion to amend the SOR. (Tr. 158-160) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.f, of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b to 1.e of 
the SOR. He denied ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. Applicant did not enter a formal denial or admission 
to ¶¶ 2.c. that was amended into the SOR at the end of the hearing. He also provided 
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 57 years old, unmarried, and works for a defense contractor. He 
graduated from college in 1972 with a Bachelor of Arts degree with highest honors and 
distinction in physics. Applicant graduated from a foreign university with a master’s 
degree in June 1973. He then attained a doctor of philosophy degree in August 1976 
from another foreign university in the field of theoretical physics. Applicant has lived in 
his home for 27 years and has a mortgage balance of $233,000 as of May 2010. His 
current mortgage payment is $2,084 monthly. He refinanced his home on occasion over 
the years to lower the interest rate and avoid taking out equity from the real estate. 
Applicant testified his main interests are wine, food, fine arts, literature, antiques, and 
martial arts. Applicant claims to have a collection of sound recordings valued at 
$600,000. Other than his mortgage, his monthly expenses total $871. (Tr. 44, 60, 61, 
67, 69, 105, 152; Exhibits 4, B, D) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 After Applicant’s graduation in 1976, he taught in Europe for a year and then 
returned to the United States. He obtained employment in the defense industry, where 
he has worked since. He had a security clearance for 32 years from July 1978 until 
December 2008. (Tr. 44-54, 141, 142; Exhibits B.1 to B.8) 
 
 Applicant’s work history is summarized as follows: 
 
 1. Applicant resigned from his first employer in 1983 because of 
personality conflicts.  
 
 2. He was laid off from one of his employers in 1990 in a large 
corporate downsizing. He admitted personality conflicts were also present 
between him and another employee.  
 
 3. In 1992, Applicant was terminated from another employer 
because of personality conflicts.  
 
 4. In 1996, after writing a proposal for another company for which 
he was hired, he was terminated when the proposal was finished.  
 
 5. From June 1997 to November 1998, Applicant worked as a 
scientist for a defense contractor.  
 
 6. Then, from November 1998 until January 2001, he worked for a 
large defense contractor as the manager of business development.  
 
 7. He was unemployed from January 2001 to August 2001.  
 
 8. Next, Applicant worked for a company in a scientific capacity 
until August 2002. He managed a contract until it was completed and was 
then terminated.  
 
 9. Again, he was unemployed from August 2002 until March 2004. 
Applicant worked from March 2004 until September 16, 2004, for a 
company from which he was terminated when his supervisor alleged he 
missed an important meeting and failed to follow instructions the 
supervisor gave him. Applicant considered the supervisor to be 
intellectually and educationally inferior to him, causing a conflict between 
the two men. He denied receiving a termination letter. (SOR Paragraph 
2.a) 
 
 10. Applicant was unemployed from September 2004 to February 
2005.  
 
 11. Then, he worked at a university as a physicist from February 
2005 to December 2005. Applicant admitted personality conflicts with the 
 
4 
 
 
supervisor caused that termination with the reason given as unsatisfactory 
performance in a computer coding function and other assigned tasks. 
Applicant also did not like the size of his office. (SOR Paragraph 2.b) 
 
 12. From December 2005 to August 2006, Applicant operated his 
own consulting company.  
 
 13. From August 2006 to October 2006, he worked for another 
company and was terminated because of cultural differences.  
 
 14. Applicant again worked for his own consulting company from 
October 2006 to March 2007.  
 
 15. From March 2007 until June 2008, he worked for a company as 
the lead engineer. He was terminated from that company for 
unsatisfactory performance.  
 
 16. Later in 2008, he was hired by a company that terminated him 
in June 2009 because he no longer had a security clearance.  
 
 17. In April 2010, he was hired by his current employer who gave 
him 10 months to obtain a security clearance, otherwise he would be 
terminated. (Tr. 49-56, 70-78, 104-137, 140-143; Exhibits 1, 11) 
 
 In summary, Applicant had several periods of unemployment in the past decade. 
He was unemployed from January 2001 to August 2001, from August 2002 until March 
2004, again from September 2004 until February 2005, then from October 2006 to 
March 2007, June 2008 until a date uncertain in late 2008, and from June 2009 until 
April 2010 when he obtained his most recent employment. (Tr. 55, 102-105; Exhibits 1-
3, 11-17) 
 
 Applicant has five delinquent debts listed in the SOR. They total $21,193.  
Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in October 1993 to delay foreclosure on his 
mortgage while he was unemployed. After he obtained a job in March 1994, he 
withdrew the bankruptcy petition.  The remaining delinquent debts listed in the SOR are: 
 
 1. A credit card debt for $5,708 (SOR Paragraph 1.b) that appears 
on the 2009 and 2010 credit reports submitted as exhibits. Applicant 
researched the debt that was first reported to the credit agency in April 
2010. The card issuer sent Applicant a letter dated August 31, 2010, 
stating the account would be deleted from his record. However, the 
account numbers on the credit report and the letter do not match. This 
account is unresolved and unpaid. 
 
 2. Applicant owes $484 to a collector (SOR Paragraph 1.c) on a 
department store account that has been delinquent since 2004. He 
 
5 
 
 
admitted he knew he owed a debt to the department store. He also stated 
he had not shopped there for eight years. Applicant wrote to the collector 
and received information in return showing his last payment was in 2003 
and that payment in full was demanded. Applicant refuses to pay the debt 
based on his state law statute of limitations of three years for civil lawsuits. 
The debt remains unresolved and unpaid. 
 
 3. Applicant owes a collector $2,414 on a credit card debt (SOR 
Paragraph 1.d). Applicant’s last payment on this account was in 2003. The 
collector provided him with proof of the debt including an affidavit signed 
by an authorized agent for the collector detailing the debt. Applicant 
refuses to pay this debt based on his state’s statute of limitations. The 
debt is unresolved and unpaid.  
 
 4. Applicant owes $2,167 to a collector (SOR Paragraph 1.e). 
Applicant has not paid this debt. This debt is unresolved.  
 
 5. Applicant admits he owes $10,420 in arrearages on his $229,000 
mortgage (SOR Paragraph 1.f). The payments were delayed when he lost 
his job in December 2009. He then was re-employed in April 2010 and is 
working to resolve this delinquency with his bank which holds the 
mortgage. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 63-65, 85-101; Exhibits 2-10, D) 
 
 Applicant completed his electronic SF-86 (e-QIP) on August 6, 2007. Question 
22 of that form asked Applicant if he left a job under unfavorable circumstances in the 
previous seven years. He answered “yes” and listed two such departures, one in 2006 
and another in 2005. He did not list his September 2004 termination. He attributed it to a 
“simple omission.” This explanation is not credible when viewed in the total factual 
history. (SOR Paragraph 2.c) (Tr. 70-73, 107-114, 120, 158; Exhibit 1)  
 
 Applicant did not disclose on his SF-86 in answer to Question 27 that he had a 
state tax lien placed on file for $2,000 in 2003, nor that a credit card company obtained 
a judgment against him for $4,000 in 1996 that was not satisfied by Applicant until 2006. 
Applicant claims both non-disclosures were “simple omissions.” Both the lien and the 
judgment satisfaction were paid within four years of Applicant’s completion of the SF-86. 
(SOR Paragraph 2.c) His explanation is not credible when viewed in the total factual 
history. (Tr. 137-139; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant submitted seven character and professional reference letters. A 
personal friend wrote and testified about Applicant’s integrity and appreciation of wine 
and the better things in life. Another friend for 48 years stated in his letter that Applicant 
“is an exceptionally bright man with a very strong personality.” Applicant is well-
regarded by his peers for his mathematical acumen and scholarly abilities. His candor is 
also noted as a favorable quality. Applicant is regarded as a “first-rate theoretical 
physicist” by a former university research colleague. (Exhibit A) 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant provided copies of his curriculum vitae, his diplomas, and other 
academic documents to show his degrees and work history. Applicant submitted 10 
documents pertaining to his charitable activities and martial arts prowess. (Exhibit C) 
 
 During his testimony, Applicant displayed impatience while being questioned 
about his work history. At times, he was argumentative and evasive. (Tr. 114, 120, 132, 
134, 140) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
7 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated $21,193 in five delinquent debts from 2004 to the present 
time that remain unpaid.  These delinquent debts are listed in the SOR.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. One condition may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
8 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
  
Applicant refuses to pay his debts which have been delinquent for several years. 
He now seeks to use his state’s civil statue of limitations to protect himself from his 
responsibility to pay these debts. He uses his demands for information about each debt 
to defer further payment on them. He received the information he sought on one debt, 
including an affidavit from the collector, but continued to refuse to pay that debt.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) has partial application. Applicant experienced about 40 months of 
unemployment in the past decade. The lack of employment during those months 
affected his ability to pay his debts, and may have been circumstances beyond his 
control.  
 
However, Applicant did not demonstrate that he acted responsibly in handling his 
delinquent debts during that period. He had assets that could have been used to resolve 
the debts, the experience of unemployment that should have made him save his income 
when he was working so he could pay his debts, and sufficient income at the time the 
debts were incurred to pay them instead of allowing them to languish for several years 
in an unpaid status. Furthermore, Applicant has lived in his house for 27 years, yet has 
a $229,000 mortgage. He denies taking equity from the home and contends he only 
refinanced his mortgage over the years to obtain a lower interest rate. However, the 
mortgage balance remains high. The facts seem to belie his assertion about his 
mortgage refinancings.  
 
Finally, Applicant admits he has an asset, a collection of sound recordings worth 
about $600,000. He provided no evidence that he used that asset to satisfy his unpaid 
mortgage, tax debts, or his credit card debts.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
9 
 
 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or administrative 
termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
 (a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate with 
security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security investigator for 
subject interview, completing security forms or releases, and cooperation with medical 
or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
 (b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in connection with a 
personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 contains two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
10 
 
 
 
 (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
 (2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
 (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
 (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.  
 
 The evidence supports the application of AG ¶ 16 (a). Applicant did not disclose 
his 2003 state tax lien on his SF-86 completed in 2007.  Nor did he disclose a credit 
card judgment against him, which he did not satisfy until 2006. Finally, Applicant failed 
to disclose a September 2004 job termination in addition to the two job departures 
under unfavorable circumstances he did list in his SF-86.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 (d) is applicable. Applicant has been fired many times as a result of 
personality conflicts with supervisors and co-workers and performance problems with a 
series of employers throughout his career since 1983 and in particular in the previous 
decade. These situations are not explicitly covered under another guideline, but do raise 
serious questions about Applicant’s judgment and unwillingness to comply with his 
employers’ rules, regulations, and procedures.   
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. None of them 
apply to Applicant:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
 
11 
 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
 Applicant did not correct the falsification of his SF-86 before being confronted 
with the facts. His statement that the absence of this information is a “simple omission” 
is not credible. The falsification is not mitigated. AG ¶ 17 (a) does not apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 (b) is not supported by any facts on the record. 
 
 The falsification and adverse information about Applicant’s work performance 
and personality conflicts are not minor offenses. They continued to the present into 
2010. There are no unique circumstances that make it clear this pattern will not occur 
again. The totality of the facts and the Applicant’s history cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17 (c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant does not acknowledge his fault in any of these terminations or the 
deliberate falsification. He has not obtained counseling or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the factors that caused the untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior in the workplace, and in completing the SF-86, to ensure such conduct will not 
occur in the future. AG ¶ 17 (d) does not apply.   
 
 
12 
 
 
 Applicant has not taken any positive steps to reduce his vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress to retain any current or future employment. His 
history of short-term employments and unemployment would reasonably make him 
desire to retain future employments to avoid his past financial and employment 
problems, thereby making him vulnerable. AG ¶ 17 (e) does not apply. 
 
 The information about Applicant and his work history and falsification was 
substantiated and supported by the evidence. AG ¶ 17 (f) does not apply.  
 
 Finally, the Mitigating Condition pertaining to association with criminals is not 
relevant because there is no evidence concerning such activity. AG ¶ 17 (g) does not 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a well-educated 
physicist, who is highly intelligent. However, he has an attitudinal problem that has 
made him unable to retain employment in several companies since 1983. He admitted 
there were repeated “personality conflicts” with his supervisors during that time. 
Applicant displayed that attitude during the hearing. 
 
Applicant has not paid his delinquent debts. He ignored them for years and then 
wants to use a state statute of limitations to protect himself from paying those debts. For 
security clearance purposes, the state laws are an element to consider in an applicant’s 
financial history but are not determinative. A person’s attitude and willingness to resolve 
his financial obligations are important factors to consider in a determination of 
 
13 
 
 
Applicant’s judgment and trustworthiness. Any changes in his financial history tending to 
show that his past financial difficulties are not likely to occur again are an important 
element to consider in the “whole-person” concept.  Applicant obviously has no desire to 
pay his debts, and intends to ignore them.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations 
and personal conduct. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
