                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06508 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On May 28, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 28, 2010, and November 30, 2010, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
January 13, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 9, 2011. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled on March 3, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6. Applicant did not object and they were admitted into evidence. Applicant 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
testified on her own behalf and offered Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted 
into evidence without objections. The record was held open until March 10, 2011, to 
allow Applicant to provide additional documents. She timely offered AE H, which was 
admitted into evidence without objection.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
March 9, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR except ¶ 1.e. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. She is not married and has no children. She graduated 
from college in 2001, earning a bachelor’s degree. After college, she returned home and 
lived there until about 2003, when she moved to a new state. She was unemployed 
initially for about two to three months. She worked consistently until February 2009, 
when she was laid off. She remained unemployed until May 2009, at which time she 
was hired by her present employer. During her unemployment, she exhausted her 
savings and received unemployment benefits. Applicant stated that until she started 
with her present employer, she was underemployed.2 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($29,904) is for Applicant’s student loans. She incurred 
student loan debts while attending college from 1997 to 2001. She began making 
payments on them in 2002. She made consistent payments on them during 2002 and 
2003, while she was living at home. Sometime in 2003, she moved to a new state and 
her income was drastically reduced and her salary was used to pay living expenses. 
From 2003 to 2008, Applicant made payments on her student loans, but they were 
inconsistent and dependent on the amount of her other expenses. She estimated that 
she likely made about half of the payments each year. She later contacted the student 
loan creditor and entered a rehabilitation program, which she completed in April 2010. 
She was then required to make payments of $202 a month. She admitted she made the 
payments through September 2010, when she stopped and did not make the monthly 
payment for October, November, December, and January. She had car problems and 
used the money to repair her car. She resumed making the monthly payments in 
February. Applicant intends on making consistent monthly payments until the debt is 
satisfied.3  
 
 Applicant decided to pay her smaller delinquent debts first and then make 
consistent monthly payments on the student loan debt. She paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a 
1 Department Counsel did not object to AE H. Hearing Exhibit I is the memorandum submitted.  
 
2 Tr. 48-52, 66-70. 
 
3 Tr. 19-20, 32-43, 57; AE G, H. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
($97). She stated she did not pay it earlier because she was unaware of it. She 
provided proof of payment.4 
 
 Applicant contacted the creditor for the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($509) and 
made a payment arrangement to pay $150 twice a month to pay the debt in full. Her first 
payment was due in March 2011.5  
 
 Applicant provided documented proof that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d was an error. 
The creditor has acknowledged the error and has advised the credit bureaus.6 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,553) is a credit card debt. Applicant stated that she 
defaulted on the debt around 2005 or 2006. She was underemployed at the time. She 
made sporadic payments on the debt when she was financially able. She contacted the 
creditor in June 2009 and made consistent payments to pay the debt. It has been paid.7 
 
 Applicant admitted she was immature and inexperienced in handling her finances 
after she moved and was living on her own. She was underemployed and it was difficult 
for her to pay her bills. She was not living beyond her means, but her earnings were low 
and she was unfamiliar with the daily expenses that are incurred when living on her 
own. She is now more financially stable. She chose to pay the smaller debts first and 
then the larger ones. She does not have any other delinquent debts. She started a 
budget in 2009 and tracks everything she spends. She has not had financial counseling. 
She keeps one credit card for business travel, but occasionally uses it for personal 
expenses. Now that her smaller debts are paid, she intends to make consistent monthly 
payments toward her student loan debt. She believes she is now in a better financial 
position to do so. She received notice from her employer that she will be receiving a 
merit increase in pay on March 22, 2011, which will help her financially.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
4 Tr. 22-24; AE C. 
 
5 Tr. 29-32. 
 
6 Tr. 28-29; AE D. 
 
7 Tr. 24-28, 55;AE E 
 
8 Tr. 45-47, 58-65; AE H. 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
 
Applicant has debts that became delinquent and remained unpaid for a 
significant period of time. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise this disqualifying 
condition.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant was inexperienced in handling her finances. She was paying her 
student loans for a period of time. She moved to a new state and was underemployed 
and unemployed for a period of time. She had difficulty making her monthly student loan 
payments and paying her monthly bills. Her payments on her student loans became 
sporadic, she fell behind in paying other bills, and some of her debts became 
delinquent. The behavior is recent because she still has a delinquent debt to resolve. I 
find AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant experienced periods of underemployment and unemployment that 
significantly affected her ability to pay her ongoing debts and financial obligations. She 
was inexperienced in handling her financial matters. She made inconsistent payments 
on her student loans and incurred other debts that became delinquent. She is now 
consistently repaying her student loans and has resolved all but one debt, for which she 
has a payment agreement with the creditor. Applicant has a budget and has not 
incurred any new delinquent debts. I find AG ¶ 20(b) applies because her 
underemployment and unemployment were conditions beyond her control. She has 
acted responsibly by paying her delinquent debts and resuming her student loan 
payments, as soon as financially practicable.  
 
 I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply because Applicant has made good-faith efforts 
to repay her creditors and there are clear indications the problems are under control. 
Other than her student loans, she has one debt that she has not paid, but is being 
resolved through a payment plan with the creditor. Applicant maintains a budget and, 
with her projected pay increase, she will be in a better financial situation. Applicant 
disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e because it was not her debt. The creditor acknowledged 
its error and provided verification of it. I find AG ¶ 20(e) applies.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but others warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant was inexperienced in handling her finances when she moved out of her 
family home and some of her bills became delinquent. She was young and immature 
 
7 
 
 
and did not grasp the importance of being diligent in paying her bills. When she moved 
to a new state, the cost of living was higher and Applicant was unemployed and 
underemployed. She sporadically paid her student loans while attempting to pay her 
living expenses. She has a payment plan for her one remaining delinquent debt and has 
resumed paying her student loans. She has a budget to keep track of her expenses. 
Applicant has learned from this experience and is now acting responsibly and ensuring 
her finances are in order. I find Applicant was a credible witness. Applicant has met her 
burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
