                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-07241
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
 
Statement of Case
On July 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs), implemented by
the  Department of Defense for SORs on September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 13, 2010, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on November 3, 2010, and submitted additional information for
2
consideration on December 3, 2010, within the 30 days permitted. Applicant’s
submissions were identified as AE’s 1 through 9 and admitted. The case was assigned
to me on December 23, 2010.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) accumulated 16 delinquent debts
exceeding $23,000; (b) failed to file federal and state tax returns for tax years 2007 and
2008; and (c) had his wages garnished in 2010 by his state’s franchise tax board in the
amount of $200 a month.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations.  He
failed to respond to six of the allegations (subparagraphs 1.d, 1.e, and 1.l through 1.o),
and these allegations are deemed denied. Applicant claimed he never received any
documented proof of any of the six debts he declined to respond to and feared theft of
his credit card from a car break-in.  He claimed a loss of income due to a contentious
divorce, the failure of his estranged spouse to bear responsibility for her share of the
community debts they accrued during their marriage.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year-old defense market manager for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
                                  
Applicant served as an officer in the U.S. Army between April 2003 and January
2007 and received an honorable discharge. (Item 4) He married his spouse in
September 1990 and initially separated in 2006. (Item 4).  He has two children (ages 12
and 10) from this marriage. (Item 4)
In August 2006, Applicant’s wife petitioned for divorce. (AE 4). While her petition
was pending, Applicant’s wife lived in their family home.  Her petition was dismissed in
March 2007. (AE 1)  One month later (in September 2006), Applicant was involved in
an auto accident and suffered back and neck injuries.  His injuries limited his ability to
work and earn income.  In November 2006, he was ordered to pay spousal support. 
Shortly after his wife’s divorce petition, Applicant moved back into the family
home and tried reconciling with his wife. (AE 1) He and his wife refinanced their home
and paid off most of their debts with the equity withdrawals they made.
Between September 2007 and January 2008, Applicant and his spouse
continued to live in their refinanced home.  Still, his wife refused to help him with any of
their joint debts, and declined to sign or approve any paperwork required to refinance or
obtain a loan modification on their home.  In March 2008, Applicant’s spouse refiled for
divorce. (AEs 1 and 7) The proceedings are ongoing, and the last noted entry in the
furnished case docket scheduled a mandatory settlement conference for October 2010.
(AE 1)
3
Unable to take care of all of their joint obligations while estranged and living
separate lives, Applicant and his spouse accumulated a number of delinquent debts.
Because his wife declined to pay her share of the debts, legal responsibility for the
debts fell to Applicant. With his limited income and family support responsibilities,
Applicant encountered great difficulty in simultaneously supporting his family and
addressing his old debts. (AE 1). His wife remained in the home until October 2008
before vacating the premises entirely. Applicant continued to finance the mortgage and
pay his heavy legal bills while struggling to stay up with his other bills. Once his divorce
is finalized, he plans to petition for bankruptcy to discharge his other debts.  
Between 2003 and 2007, Applicant accumulated over $23,000 in delinquent
debts (16 in all) that are listed in his credit reports. (Items 5 through 9) Applicant
admitted most of these debts as marital debts.  Both Applicant and his wife became
jointly and severally responsible for their payment. The listed debts that Applicant did
not acknowledge as marital debts are reported in his credit reports and provide
presumptive proof that they belong to Applicant. Further, Applicant provided no
documentation of disputes with any of the creditors he currently questions. Without any
documented proof of asserted disputes against any of the creditors Applicant
questioned, the validity of these debts cannot be properly assessed and verified.  
Applicant attributes most of his admitted debts to the costs of his divorce and his
wife’s unwillingness to cover her portions of the listed marital debts. His submissions
provide no details of his earnings and expenses during these reported years.  Without
more financial information from Applicant about himself and his spouse during the
pertinent period of reported debt delinquencies, his monetary circumstances cannot be
properly evaluated.  
Addressing his taxes, Applicant admitted failing to file federal and state tax
returns for tax years 2007 and 2008. He attributed his filing failures to his inability to
obtain a court order to compel his wife to turn over necessary documents to complete
his taxes. (Item 7)  In his OPM interview, he admitted to having his wages garnished in
2008 for back taxes owed. (Item 7) And his wages continue to be garnished by his
state’s franchise tax board at the rate of $200 a month in 2010 to cover unpaid taxes
owed the state.  
In his response to the SOR, Applicant cited his past contributions as an eagle
scout, a U.S. Army officer, and a Master Mason. (Item 3)  However, he provided no
endorsements or performance evaluations on his behalf. Nor did he provide any proof
of community and civic contributions, or service-related awards and commendations.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
4
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
5
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a defense market manager of a defense contractor who
accumulated a number of delinquent debts during an extended period of marital
estrangement and contentious divorce proceedings. He also failed to file federal and
state tax returns in 2007 and 2008 and has had his wages garnished by the state
taxing authority responsible for enforcing his state tax liability.  
Applicant’s pleading admissions of the debts, tax filing lapses, and state
garnishment action covered in the SOR negate the need for any independent proof
(see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)).  Each of Applicant’s listed debts
are documented in his latest credit reports and provide corroboration of his debts.  His
accumulation of delinquent debts, his past inability and unwillingness to address these
debts, and his failure to file pertinent federal and state tax returns warrant the
application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial
obligations,” and ¶19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax
returns as required . . .”
Moreover, some judgment problems persist over Applicant’s unexplained
delinquencies and his failure to demonstrate he acted responsibly in addressing his
listed debts and filing his federal and state tax returns with the resources available to
him. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). Not only are his listed
6
debt delinquencies and tax filing failures still outstanding, but he has failed to address
them in any good-faith manner. Resolution of a debt through garnishment (as is the
case with creditor 1.u) rather than through voluntary repayment efforts carries much
less mitigating force, and doesn’t afford Applicant any cognizable mitigation credit for
his state tax payments to date. See ISCR Case No. 04-07360 (App. Bd. Sept. 26,
2006).  
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980).
Failure of the applicant to make concerted efforts to pay or resolve his debts and tax
filing obligations when able to do so raises security-significant concerns about
whether the applicant has demonstrated the trust and judgment necessary to
safeguard classified information.
 
Applicant’s debts are attributable in part to his lengthy separation and recurrent
divorce proceedings which deprived him of the joint spousal income he historically
relied on to satisfy his marital bills. All of the listed debts in the SOR are either unpaid
or unresolved. His tax return filing lapses are in part attributable to his inability to
obtain relevant financial data from his estranged spouse. His explanations do not
account, however, for his failure to provide a meaningful record of communication
exchanges between himself and the relevant taxing authorities. Nor did he indicate
why he could not have filed separate returns with the IRS and pertinent state taxing
authority.  
Based on the documented materials in the FORM, some extenuating
circumstances are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay of or otherwise resolve
his debts. Available to Applicant in part is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in
the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation, and the individual acted responsibly.”
                                     
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent debts and failure to file
his 2007 and 2008 federal and state tax returns. Resolution of his delinquent
accounts and filing his pertinent tax returns are critical prerequisites to his regaining
control of his  finances.
While ongoing divorce proceedings and the absence of spousal cooperation in
addressing his debts and tax returns might have played a considerable role in his
accumulation of so many debts and tax filing delays, his continuing failure to take any
action on his admitted debts and tax filing obligations is a source of security concern.
Endorsements and performance evaluations might have been helpful, too, in making
a whole-person assessment of his overall clearance eligibility, but were not provided.
7
Overall, clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited amount of
information available for consideration in this record does not enable him to establish
judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome security concerns arising out of his
accumulation of delinquent debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, his lack of any acceptable explanations for his
dedications to address his delinquent debts and file his back tax returns long after his
wife declined to help him with their debts and tax returns, it is still too soon to make
safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s ability to repay his debts, file his back tax
returns, and restore his finances to stable levels commensurate with the minimum
requirements for holding a security clearance. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.u.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs. 1.a through 1.u:                 Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
