                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07382 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, Applicant failed to provide 
adequate information to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
On November 9, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for his employment with 
a defense contractor. (Item 5) On October 27, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant timely answered the SOR. He denied the five factual allegations with 
explanation. Applicant elected to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 4) 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case which is dated January 
6, 2010.1 On January 21, 2011, Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
(FORM), and was provided the opportunity to file objections, and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. He did not provide any 
additional information in response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on 
March 10, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 41 years old, and has worked in information technology for a defense 
contractor for over 12 years. He is a college graduate. He is married with one child. 
There is no information in the case file to show his monthly income and expenses. (Item 
5)  
 
Credit reports (Item 7, dated September 9, 2010, and Item 8, dated November 
20, 2009) show the following delinquent debts for Applicant totaling over $109,000 with 
nationally recognized credit card companies: $32,014 in collection for credit card 
company A (SOR 1.a); $11,632 in collection for credit card company A (SOR 1.b); 
$21,577 charged off by credit card company B (SOR 1.c); $19,414 in collection for 
credit card company C (SOR 1.d); and $24,854 in collection for credit card company D 
(SOR 1.e). In his response to the SOR, Applicant states he has never entered a 
business relationship with the collection agencies collecting the debts at SOR 1.a, 1.b, 
1d, and 1.e. He admits to revolving credit accounts with credit card companies B, C, 
and D, but only an automobile loan with credit card company A. (Item 4 and Item 6) 
 
Prior to the fall of 2004, Applicant claims his credit card accounts were 
maintained in accordance with his agreement with the creditors, his payments were on 
time, and more than the minimum amount due was paid. He had a balance of $13,000 
on his credit card company B card, and $9,000 on his credit card company C card. In 
late 2004, the creditors raised the interest rates on the accounts from approximately 
13% to 24%. Applicant withheld payment on the credit card bills because of what he 
classifies as the creditors' predator lending practices. Applicant claims the interest rates 
were raised because of his high income to debt ratio. He further claims that this practice 
was not in accord with his agreement with the creditors. 
 
Applicant contacted each creditor by telephone requesting an explanation for the 
interest rate increase and a return to the original interest rate. He did not receive a reply 
from credit card company B, so he refused to make any payment on the debt. He called 
credit card company B again in 2007 to have the interest rate lowered without success. 
The answer he allegedly received was to either agree to the new rate, or stop using the 
card and pay the amount due. Applicant stopped using the credit card, but refused to 
1 The date on the FORM is a mistake. The date should have been January 6, 2011. 
 
3 
 
 
pay the amount requested until the amount of the debt was validated. Credit card 
company C responded that the rate would not be lowered and that they would take legal 
action to collect the debt. No legal action was ever taken. Applicant provided no 
information on his credit card company D account. Since he denied he had a credit 
account with Bank of America, he did not provide information on the two credit card 
company A accounts. Applicant agreed to pay only what he considered he was legally 
obligated to pay. Applicant also pointed out that the statute of limitations had run on the 
ability to collect on the debts. (Item 4 and Item 6)  
 
Applicant has not presented documentation concerning any payments made on 
the debts, He has not presented any documentation concerning any action taken, legal 
or otherwise, to challenge the alleged "Predatory Lending Practices" of the creditors. 
His communications with the creditors all seem to be telephonic and not written.  
 
Policy 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
4 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations. Applicant’s delinquent debts as listed in credit reports and partially admitted 
by Applicant raise Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 
19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations). Credit reports show five significant credit card debts. 
Applicant admits to three of the credit card accounts. He stated his refusal to pay the 
accounts because he did not agree with the creditors' business practices. The credit 
reports and Applicant's statement establish these three delinquent accounts. The credit 
report alone is sufficient to establish the other two delinquent debts owed to the same 
creditor.  
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence to establish the disqualifying 
conditions as required in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). The burden shifts to Applicant to 
produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns under 
financial considerations. An applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation 
or prove a mitigating condition, and the burden to prove or disprove it never shifts to the 
Government. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) 
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the conditions 
that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., 
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce, or separations) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances); 
FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control); 
and FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts). These mitigating conditions do not apply. The 
behavior is current and ongoing because Applicant refuses to pay the credit card debt. 
His refusal is well within his ability to control and is ongoing. He did not present any 
evidence of any counseling or even attempts to contact experts to verify the correctness 
of his understanding of his legal obligations concerning the debts. He did not present 
any evidence to show payment of the debt, good-faith or otherwise. His access to 
discretionary funds to pay debts each month is not relevant because he stated he does 
not intend to pay the debts. Applicant has not presented adequate evidence to show he 
is resolving or intends to resolve his delinquent debts. Applicant's lack of action to 
resolve his delinquent debts is significant. He has not shown he is or will act reasonably 
under the circumstances to resolve his delinquent debts. Based on the delinquent debts 
presented by the Government in credit reports, which Applicant partially acknowledges, 
Applicant has not acted responsibly towards his debts and finances. Applicant has not 
presented sufficient information to mitigate security concerns for financial 
considerations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 
6 
 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not established a 
meaningful track record of paying his delinquent debts. He has not provided sufficient 
credible documentary information to show he acted reasonably and responsibly to 
address his financial problems. Applicant has not demonstrated responsible 
management of his finances. The lack of responsible management of financial 
obligations indicates he may not be concerned or responsible in regard to classified 
information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his 
suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial situation. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:  Against Applicant  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
