 
 
 
 
1
                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE   
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
                       
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case: 10-00362 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Darin M. Groteboer, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
On October 17, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing 
security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline D (Sexual 
Behavior). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on or about July 1, 2010, and requested a hearing.  
DOHA assigned the case to another administrative judge on October 12, 2010, and 
reassigned it to me on November 4, 2010. It issued a Notice of Hearing on November 
12, 2010. The case was heard on December 9, 2010, as scheduled.  Department 
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 12 in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and called one witness. The record remained open until December 
 
 
 
 
2
30, 2010, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit exhibits. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 17, 2010.   
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Ruling 
 
Applicant timely submitted five exhibits that I marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through E. AE A, B and D were admitted without objection from Department Counsel. 
AE C and E are admitted over the Department Counsel’s objections. Department 
Counsel objected to AE C, a December 2010 letter from a Commanding Officer, 
because it did not include the documents Applicant submitted to the Commanding 
Officer on September 10, 2010, and referenced in the exhibit. That objection goes to the 
weight of the evidence and not admissibility.  
 
Department Counsel also objected to the introduction of AE E, a December 2010 
letter from a complaining witness, on the basis of hearsay. That witness did not testify, 
but her statements to an Army investigator were admitted into evidence as part of the 
Army’s investigative file that supported an Administrative Order entered against 
Applicant, and subsequently raised security concerns. In that exhibit, the complaining 
witness did not retract her previous allegations against Applicant, but instead provided 
statements about her current relationship with him in mitigation of the security concerns. 
Given the admission of her statements in the investigative file into this record, her letter 
is admissible.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations contained in Paragraph 1.a and Paragraph 2.a 
of the SOR. Those admissions are incorporated herein. 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He has been married to his wife for 37 years. They 
have three adult children. In December 1974, he joined the U.S. Army. In February 
2001, he retired as a full Colonel and was honorably discharged from active duty. 
During his career, he served as a base Commander and Chief of Staff. He has held a 
security clearance for 35 years. Since retiring, Applicant has been self-employed in a 
small business that provides support services to the Army at a base where he served.  
 
 In early 2009, the U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Command (CID) investigated 
Applicant for the offense of Abusive Sexual Contact and Simple Assault involving four 
female employees on different occasions. As part of that investigation, the CID took 
detailed statements from each complaining witness. On April 27, 2009, the 
Commanding Officer, a Major General, issued an Administrative Order permanently 
barring Applicant from the base, except for the limited purposes of: (1) using the 
Commissary, (2) using the Post Exchange; and (3) using the Health Clinic. (GE 4.) The 
Commanding Officer’s Bar Letter summarized the four witnesses’ statements as follows: 
 
1. On April 7, 2000, [Applicant] committed the offenses of Abusive 
Sexual Contact and Assault Consummated by a Battery when 
 
 
 
 
3
[Applicant] intentionally, wrongfully pulled the top of a female’s dress 
away from her body and asked “do you have any tan lines?” or words 
to that effect. The touching of this female employee was unwanted and 
unwarranted. This incident occurred at the workplace on [base]. 
 
2. In the late summer of 2008, [Applicant] committed the offenses of 
Abusive Sexual Contact and Assault Consummated by a Battery by 
intentionally, wrongfully pulling open a female employee’s blouse “to 
see if she was wearing a sexy bra.” This incident occurred at the 
workplace on [base], and [Applicant’s] touching of the female 
employee was unwanted and unwarranted. 
 
3. On diverse occasions during the months of July, August, and 
September 2008, [Applicant] committed the offenses of Abusive 
Sexual Contact and Assault Consummated by a Battery against a 
female employee by unlawfully and wrongfully rubbing her inner thigh 
and the top of her thigh; by rubbing and patting her leg, from her thigh 
to her knee; and by rubbing her back. The touching of this female was 
unwanted and unwarranted. Each incident occurred at the workplace 
on the [base]. 
 
4. On diverse occasions during the months of October, November, and 
December 2008, [Applicant] committed the same two offenses against 
another female employee by unlawfully and wrongfully rubbing her 
thighs and shoulders. The touching of this female was also unwanted 
and unwarranted. Each incident occurred at the workplace on [base]. 
 
Applicant does not know the name of the complaining witness listed in Number 1 
above and was unfamiliar with the allegation until confronted with it during the 2009 
investigation. (Tr. 24.) Applicant denied the allegation. (Tr. 25.) Applicant does not know 
the name of the complaining witness listed in Number 2. He denied the allegation. (Tr.     
26; GE 5.)  When asked, during the investigation, what could have caused him to 
expose the woman’s bra, he said he did not know, maybe he was “goofing around.” (GE 
3 at 52.)  
 
 Applicant knows the complaining witness referenced in Number 3. He apologized 
to her for his conduct that made her feel uncomfortable. (Tr. 29.) Applicant maintains 
contact with this woman and is helping her start a business. (Tr. 30.) She wrote a letter 
in which she accepted Applicant’s “apology and believe[d] that these incidents have 
been fully resolved.” (AE E.) She fully supports his efforts to obtain a security clearance. 
(Id.)  
 
 Applicant knows the complaining witness referenced in Number 4. He apologized 
to her for his conduct, if it made her uncomfortable. (Tr. 31.) She resigned her position 
in February 2009. He asserted that she had performance problems. (Tr. 32.) She filed a 
complaint with a state agency regarding his conduct that was later dismissed. (Tr. 33.) 
 
 
 
 
4
 On June 4, 2009, a psychologist evaluated Applicant using the Minnesota 
Multiphasic Inventory (MMPI) the Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory (MCMI), and the 
Historical Clinical Risk-2) (HCR-20). The conclusions cited from the MMPI suggest 
proclivity to initiate social contact, insensitivity to the feelings of others, and a lack of 
insight and introspection into their own behavior. Also suggested is a presentation of 
openness despite difficulty expressing emotion. The MCMI results confirmed attention 
to appearance without insight. These results raise concerns about Applicant, in that they 
find as enduring personality traits the initiation of social contact, the absence of insight, 
and presenting oneself favorably. These attributes underlie the episodes of concern. 
The HCR-20 findings are not relevant, as violence has never been posited as an issue 
in this case. (AE D.)  
 
 On June 30, 2009, Applicant submitted a request to the Commanding Officer for 
reinstatement of base access rights. Applicant submitted documentation of rehabilitative 
steps that he had taken since the Administrative Order was entered. (GE 7.) He 
included the following: 
 
 1. Certificate of completion of a Sexual Harassment Training course on 
February 13, 2009. (GE 11, Enc. 3A.) 
 
 2. Certificate of completion of a two-hour course on Illegal Harassment on 
June 11, 2009. (GE 11, Enc. 4.) 
 
 3. Certificate of completion of course on Preventing Harassment in the 
Workplace on June 16, 2009. (GE 11, Enc. 5.) 
 
 4. Notification that his company updated a section of its Security 
Handbook regarding improper conduct for personnel. 
 
 5. A letter from Applicant’s wife, indicating her awareness of the 
allegations and discussions with her husband about the incidents.  (GE 
11, Enc. 8.) 
 
 6. The June  2009 letter from the psychologist described above. (AE D.)    
 
 On August 13, 2009, the Commanding Officer denied Applicant’s request, stating 
that he did not submit sufficient evidence that Applicant appreciated the wrongfulness of 
his actions or took full responsibility for them. He discounted the psychologist’s 
evaluation because it did not address the likelihood of a recurrence. The Commanding 
Officer wrote: 
 
In the absence of any professional assessment of your likelihood to 
reoffend and in light of your continued assertions that your actions were 
merely misinterpreted by your victims, I am not convinced you appreciate 
the wrongfulness of your behavior. An acceptance of responsibility, as well 
as a demonstrated commitment to a rigorous and on-going treatment plan, 
 
 
 
 
5
would be good first steps toward both your recovery and your return to the 
[base] community. (GE 8.)  
 
On August 21, 2009, Applicant met with a licensed clinical social worker to 
develop a treatment plan. The social worker recommended four to six treatment 
sessions, over four to six month, which would focus on monitoring his physical 
interactions in the workplace. (AE 11, Inc. 1.)  
 
 On August 30, 2009, Applicant sent the Commanding Officer a lengthy letter, 
stressing his acceptance of responsibility for his conduct. He wrote, “I sincerely 
apologize to anyone who feels that I have engaged inappropriate conduct and I 
sincerely apologize to you and the United States Army, for which I have great respect.” 
(GE 9.) He mentioned that he was participating in both psychological and pastoral 
counseling. He requested reinstatement of his access rights. The Commanding Officer 
denied his request on September 1, 2009, again stating that it was premature for him to 
grant the request given Applicant’s therapist’s recommendation that he participate in 
therapy for four to six months. (GE 10, 11.) 
 
 On November 5, 2009, Applicant’s therapist drafted a Summary Report of her 
treatment observations. She noted that Applicant learned to monitor his professional 
boundary behaviors and recognized how others might misperceive his manner of 
interacting. During therapy, Applicant discussed his upbringing and physically 
demonstrative habits of interacting with people, which he asserted underlie the 
accusations. The therapist opined that he was “unlikely to engage in any of these 
behaviors in the future.” (GE 11, Encl. 1.)  
 
 On November 30, 2009, Applicant’s pastor and counselor wrote a letter on his 
behalf. The pastor began seeing Applicant in August 2009 and met with him twice a 
month thereafter to discuss Applicant’s interactions with female employees and their 
claims of sexual harassment. “It is clearly [Applicant’s] desire to avoid any perception of 
inappropriate contact in the future.” (GE 11, Encl. 2.) The pastor noted that Applicant 
was fulfilling their counseling/treatment plan, which included Applicant’s personal 
acceptance of responsibility for the situation, and Applicant’s request for an ongoing 
accountability relationship with him. The pastor did not believe that Applicant would 
offend in the future. (GE 11, Encl. 2.)  Applicant stated that he has continued to see his 
pastor once a month since November 2009.  
 
 On December 4, 2009, Applicant submitted another request for access to the 
base for purposes of conducting business. Attached to that request were eight 
documents, including the above letters from his therapist and pastor, a letter from his 
Communications Director, a woman with whom Applicant worked in various community 
activities, and his wife’s letter. In his cover letter, Applicant listed eight not-for-profit 
community organizations or boards on which he serves. (GE 11.) 
 
 
 
 
 
6
 On January 22, 2010, the Commanding Officer restored Applicant’s access to the 
base “for purposes of conducting contract business related to” Applicant’s business 
whenever requested by an agent of the U.S. Government. (GE 12.)  
 
 On September 6, 2010, Applicant submitted another request that his base 
access privileges be fully restored. On December 13, 2010, the Commanding Officer 
rescinded the Administrative Order of April 27, 2009, restoring full access rights to 
Applicant “conditioned upon [Applicant’s] good behavior.”  (AE C.)  
 
 Applicant’s Communications Director testified.1 She has worked for Applicant 
since March 2009. She is familiar with the allegations of Applicant’s inappropriate 
sexual misconduct with four women. (Tr. 85-86.) Applicant has never acted 
inappropriately with her. (Tr. 90-91.) She has no reservations about recommending 
other females to work for him. She considers Applicant to be a fair and professional 
supervisor. (Tr. 93.) She knows the complaining witness, referenced as Number 4 
above, and has been present when she has visited Applicant at the office. She never 
witnessed any inappropriate conduct and observed a cordial and friendly relationship 
between them. (Tr. 87-88.)  
 
  Applicant testified. He vehemently denies that he ever acted sexually 
inappropriately or harassed the four complaining witnesses. (Tr. 36-38, 49, 56.) He 
considers himself to be a “touchy-feely” person, meaning that he is physically 
demonstrative during his interactions with people. (Tr. 35.) He believes that the 
allegations grew out of the women’s misconstruing his personal style and not wrongful 
sexual misconduct. (Tr. 36, 48, 57.) He recognizes that his actions caused the women 
to feel uncomfortable. (Tr. 54.) Prior to the CID investigation, he had no reason to 
believe that his personal style was inappropriate because he had not encountered 
problems during his Army career. (Tr. 31.) He stated, “I’m more aware of how 
something innocent on my part, where I thought I was either being friendly or 
concerned, I guess, as an employer, was taken out of context and was taken as 
something sexual.” (Tr. 40.) He no longer touches female employees. (Tr. 38.)  His 
security officer, business partners, and wife are aware of these allegations. (Tr. 75.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                            
 1She is also the author of GE 11, Enclosure 6.  
  
 
 
 
 
7
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the 
government to present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by an applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a 
favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that 
decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concerns pertaining to the personal conduct guideline are set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a that after Applicant was investigated by 
the Army in 2009 for the offense of Abusive Sexual Contact and Simple Assault on four 
women employees, he was barred from a base except for very limited use. Although 
 
 
 
 
8
Applicant admitted that allegation in his Answer, he denied throughout the security 
clearance process that he engaged in any inappropriate sexual behavior with any of the 
women.    
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying as to those allegations:  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: .  .  . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations; and 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
There is sufficient evidence to apply AG ¶¶ 16(d) and (e). Applicant’s behavior 
violates important civil and criminal statutes and rules in our society. Those offenses are  
the type of conduct that a person might wish to conceal, as it adversely affects a 
person’s professional and community standing, if known. The evidence supporting that 
disqualifying condition requires a balancing of resulting security concerns with any 
potentially mitigating matters, and shifts the burden to Applicant rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
AG ¶ 17 includes four conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
 
 
 
9
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 17(c). The multiple 
offenses underlying the Commanding Officer’s Administrative Order barring Applicant’s 
access to the base were serious, not isolated to one woman, occurred two years ago, 
and raise doubts about Applicant’s trustworthiness and good judgment.  
 
The mitigating condition outlined in AG ¶ 17(d) has partial application to the security 
concerns raised in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant submitted documentation that he participated 
in four to six psychotherapy sessions in 2009 with a social worker and counseled with 
his pastor six to eight times from August to November 2009, in order to address the 
allegations. He testified that he has continued pastoral counseling on a monthly basis 
since then. He completed several hours of training in sexual harassment. He took those 
actions as rehabilitative steps to prevent a recurrence of similar allegations in the future.  
 
While those steps, along with the Commander’s recent rescission of the 
Administrative Order barring Applicant from the base, provide some mitigation, they are 
insufficient to warrant full application of the mitigating condition.  Applicant did not 
present persuasive evidence of his acknowledgement or understanding of the 
seriousness of his behavior. Throughout the record, Applicant denied all wrongful 
conduct. He consistently defended the allegations on the basis that four women 
misconstrued his actions, misperceived his “touchy-feely” personal style of interacting, 
or he denied they ever occurred. While that defense may be persuasive if one woman 
had complained, it is not credible given the detailed statements of four witnesses, two of 
whom claimed that he pulled down their blouses and two of whom stated that he rubbed 
(not casually touched) their thighs on more than one occasion. Applicant’s explanation 
for the woman’s complaints lacks credibility and candor. 
 
The facts in this case provide some support for the application of AG ¶ 17(e). 
Applicant’s spouse, business partners, pastor, security officer, and an employee are 
aware of the allegations in the SOR. His conduct is documented by the base’s law 
enforcement division, further eliminating his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or 
duress.  
 
The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 17(f). The CID record 
contains ample evidence from four complaining witnesses to substantiate the 
allegations contained in this record.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern under this guideline: 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
AG ¶ 13 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; and 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. 
 In 2000, Applicant sexually assaulted one woman; in 2008, he sexually assaulted 
three women. Those assaults were in violation of 18 U.S.C. 113(a) (5), a federal 
criminal statute. In early 2009, the Army took administrative action against Applicant 
based on the allegations of four women concerning the criminal sexual misconduct. 
Those allegations and other described inappropriate behaviors could cause Applicant to 
be vulnerable to coercion or duress. The evidence supports the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
AG ¶ 14 provides two conditions that could mitigate the above security concerns: 
 (b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. 
The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 14(b) for the same 
reasons articulated in the analysis of AG ¶ 17(c) above. AG ¶ 14(c) has some 
application based on the reasons set out in the analysis of AG ¶ 14(e). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 60-year-old retired 
Army Colonel. He honorably served this country for over 26 years. He was a 
Commander of a base and Chief of Staff for a command. After retiring from the Army in 
2001, he began a business that supports the Army. He has held a security clearance for 
over 35 years. He and his wife have been married for 37 years. They have three adult 
children. He is an active participant in at least eight community organizations. Those are 
some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns under the whole-person concept.  
 
However, the facts tending to support revocation of his security clearance are too 
significant to be mitigated at this time under the whole-person concept. A CID 
investigation found that four women had complained of repeated sexual misconduct on 
the part of the Applicant. The complaints are similar in nature. One described events 
that occurred shortly after Applicant completed an e-QIP. 
 
Applicant contends the allegations arose because of the women’s 
misperceptions and not his misconduct. He maintained this explanation throughout the 
course of his sessions with both a licensed clinical social worker and a pastoral 
counselor. Social work sessions seemingly focused on ways to prevent others from 
misperceiving his intent during interactions. Similarly, the pastoral counselor noted, “It is 
clearly [Applicant’s] desire to avoid any perception of inappropriate contact in the 
future.” During his testimony, Applicant further evidenced a lack of understanding or 
appreciation of his misconduct. He continued to assert that the allegations were solely 
the result of his interpersonal “touchy-feely” style, and he denied that the inappropriate 
touching actually occurred.  
 
 
 
 
 
12
Applicant’s focus and explanations are consistent with the findings of 
psychological testing that he lacks insight and sensitivity to the feelings of others. That 
continued lack of insight two years after the investigation raises concerns about his 
judgment and candor. More importantly, he failed to fully acknowledge and admit the 
substance of the allegations. I specifically find that he touched the four women as they 
allege he did. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance at this time. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the Guidelines for 
Personal Conduct and Sexual Behavior. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
SHARI DAM  
Administrative Judge 
