1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-03515
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esquire
March 29, 2010
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on December 21, 2009. (Government Exhibit 1.) On September 1, 2010, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
to Applicant, which detailed security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement).
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 21, 2010, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on October 26, 2010. This case was assigned to me on January 12, 2011.  DOHA
issued a notice of hearing on January 18, 2011, and I convened the hearing as
scheduled on February 9, 2011. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 and 2,
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called two
additional witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits A through C, also without
2
objection. The record was left open at the Applicant’s request for the submission of
additional documentation. Applicant submitted Applicant’s Exhibit D on February 11,
2011. This exhibit was received without objection.  (Tr. At 91-93.) DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing on February 23, 2011, and the record closed. Based upon a
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 24, single, and has a bachelor’s degree. He is employed by a
defense contractor and seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with his
employment.
Guideline H - Drug Involvement
The Government alleges under Guideline H that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has used illegal drugs. He admitted all the allegations in the
SOR. Those admissions are deemed findings of fact.
Applicant used marijuana about 40 times between July 2005 and June 2009.
This use occurred during the time Applicant was attending college. During that period
he got in with the wrong peer group, and that is where he used drugs. In 2007 he
purchased and used LSD and ecstasy two times each. He also used cocaine in
November 2007 and July 2008. After a time, Applicant began to dislike this peer group
and separated himself from them. Applicant has not used drugs since that time and
expressed a credible intent not to use drugs in the future. (Government Exhibit 2; Tr. at
43-72.) Regarding his decision to not use drugs in the future Applicant states, “I don’t
want to jeopardize my future, and I’ve realized that what I was doing, essentially, was
wrong.” (Tr. at 72.)
Applicant freely admits that this was a very foolish decision on his part. Applicant
admitted this use without confrontation in his e-QIP of December 2009 and May 2010
interview.  (Government Exhibits 1 and 2.)  In addition, he had to approach a supervisor
at work, as well as his mother, step-father and girlfriend, and inform them of his use. (Tr.
at 78-83.)  (See, “Mitigation,” below.)
The Applicant submitted a written statement at the same time he submitted his
Answer.  That statement says:
I [the Applicant], declare and promise that I will never use
marijuana or any other illegal drug ever again. I understand and consent
to the automatic revocation of my security clearance if I violate this
promise.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)
3
Mitigation
Applicant’s mother and girlfriend testified on his behalf. Applicant informed both
of them about his drug use in the Summer of 2009, after his last use. This was during
the time he was preparing to apply for jobs in the defense arena, and he and his
girlfriend were getting to know each other better. They were each surprised by this
revelation, but Applicant informed and promised them both that he would not use drugs
in the future. (Tr. at 20-23, 31-37.)
Applicant submitted documentary evidence showing that he is a highly respected
person and employee. Applicant’s Exhibit B contains letters from his father, his step-
father, former pastor, a friend, and the parents of his live-in girlfriend. All are extremely
laudatory of the Applicant. 
Applicant’s step-father discussed Applicant’s request for advice about disclosing
his drug use in college. Concerning Applicant he states, “His [Applicant’s] honesty, and
this hearing process, have caused him to reflect even more deeply on his mistakes.”
(Applicant’s Exhibit B at 1.)
Applicant’s former pastor describes him as a person whose “character and
integrity are beyond question.” (Applicant’s Exhibit B at 3.) His father says Applicant is
“very honest, reliable, and trustworthy.” (Applicant’s Exhibit B at 6.) The letters from a
long-time friend, and the parents of his girlfriend, are equally laudatory. (Applicant’s
Exhibit B at 7-9.)
Applicant’s Exhibit B also contains letters from people the Applicant knows from
work. The writers describe the Applicant as a “reliable and trustworthy person with
strong positive moral values,” that he “uses good judgment,” and is “reliable.”
(Applicant’s Exhibit B at 2, 4-5.)
The most recent evaluations of Applicant are found in Applicant’s Exhibits C and
D. Applicant began working for his employer in October 2009. His two evaluations show
that he is meeting or exceeding his job requirements in every category and that he is on
track.
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
4
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on his or her own
common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the
world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of
compromise of classified information. It is also true that DOHA proceedings are not
designed to punish Applicants. Rather, they are designed to assess whether an
Applicant can be trusted at the present time and in the future to properly safeguard
classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized by the President in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access
to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a
person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved
medical direction.
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 
and especially considered the following:  
(a) any drug abuse; and
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
The Applicant used marijuana about 40 times while in college, ending in June
2009. He also used cocaine, ecstasy and LSD on an experimental basis. I find that both
of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶
26 and especially considered the following: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, and 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation. 
The evidence is clear that Applicant’s use of marijuana and other drugs was
during his college days, when he was young and ran with the wrong crowd, was not
habitual in nature, and will not be repeated. Applicant’s credible testimonial evidence
6
shows that he is extremely remorseful about this event, has been truthful about the
incident on repeated occasions with the Government and his employers and family, and
has taken steps to alleviate any possibility of recurrence. It is greatly to his credit that he
submitted a signed statement of intent with his Answer, thereby indicating from an early
stage his desire to avoid drug abuse in the future.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. My Guideline H discussion applies
here as well. Applicant engaged in drug use that ended about 18 months before the
record closed with regards to marijuana use, longer with regards to his experimental
use of other drugs. This use, which was not habitual, occurred during college, when
Applicant was young and fairly immature. The record shows that he has matured,
understands the nature of his conduct, and credibly shows that such conduct will not
happen in the future.
Applicant’s conduct was serious, but there is considerable evidence of
rehabilitation. Applicant is an intelligent young man with a bright future ahead of him.
Based on the state of the record, I find that there have been permanent behavioral
changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, at the present time, I find that there is no
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)); and that there is
no likelihood of recurrence (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts about
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug
involvement. On balance, I conclude that Applicant has successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR THE APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.d.: For the Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
