 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02344 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mark Laverdiere, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 13, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued  a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 16, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 
4, 2011. The case was assigned to me on January 10, 2011. On January 20, 2011, a 
Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for February 9, 2011. The hearing 
was held on that date. During the hearing, the Government offered six exhibits which 
were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 6. Applicant testified and called two 
witnesses.  He offered one exhibit with 19 attachments which was admitted as Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A. The record was held open until February 23, 2011, to allow Applicant to 
submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted three exhibits which were 
 
2 
 
 
admitted as AE B, C and D.  Department Counsel’s response to Applicant’s post-
hearing exhibits is marked as HE I. The transcript (Tr.) was received on February 15, 
2011.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.l, 
1.m, 1.n. He denies SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.o. 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old male employed by a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance. He has worked for his current employer since November  
2009. He served in the U.S. Navy Reserves from March 17, 1999, to March 17, 2007. 
He held a security clearance during that time. He resigned his commission. In April 
2010, he rejoined the Navy Reserves and began doing reserve duty in the fall 2010. His 
current rank is lieutenant. He has been married and divorced twice. His first marriage 
was from 1985 to 1998. Three sons, ages 15, 17, and 20, were born of this marriage. 
His second marriage was from 2000 to 2006. One daughter, age 8, was born of this 
marriage. (Tr. 17-18, 22; Gov 1)   
 
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed that he has a 
history of financial problems. In June 1997 he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. His debts 
were discharged in June 1997. Credit Reports dated November 25, 2009 and July 21, 
2010, revealed the following delinquent accounts: a $7,327 state tax lien entered 
against Applicant in July 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 at 2); a $2,546 state tax 
lien entered against Applicant in 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 at 3); a $22,872 
federal tax lien entered against Applicant in 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 at 6); a 
$17,882 state tax lien entered against Applicant in 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 
at 4);  two cable television accounts, $68 and $120, placed for collection (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 
1.m: Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 at 8); five medical accounts placed for collection, the amounts 
$174, $50, $108, $220, and $102 (SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.o; Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 
at 9); a $227 utility account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.i: Gov 5 at 1); a $375 
charged off credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.l: Gov 5 at 2); and an $88 record company 
account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.n: Gov 6 at 9). 
 
Applicant and his first wife filed for bankruptcy in June 1997 because their 
income was not sufficient to pay their debts. Several of the debts were medical bills. His 
wife suffered a mild stroke at age 31, and his oldest son had an emergency 
appendectomy. They listed total assets of $91,800 and $13,918 in total liabilities. (Tr. 
17-18, 23; Gov 2 at 3; Gov 4) He and his first wife separated in 1997 and divorced in 
1998. Applicant stated that during his first marriage, his wife paid all of the bills including 
the tax returns. He discovered in the late 1990s that the taxes did not get paid. He is not 
sure of whether the federal and state tax returns were filed. In an interview with the 
investigator conducting his background investigation on January 22, 2010, Applicant 
indicated that he owed $18,000 in state taxes for tax years 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998. 
 
3 
 
 
He owed $22,872 in federal taxes. He is not sure which tax years are past due for the 
federal tax debt. (Tr. 24, 43-44; Gov 2 at 5) 
 
Applicant was paying approximately $100 a month towards his state tax debt. He 
stopped payments in November 2009 when he changed jobs. He notified the state 
revenue services department to resume payments. He resumed payments in October 
2010. The collections and compliance section of the state revenue services department 
provided a letter on February 3, 2011 indicating Applicant is on a voluntary payment 
plan where he sends two payments of $50 each month. (Tr. 26-27; AE A at 21; AE B at 
3-5)  
 
Applicant claims he does not have the money to resolve the federal tax debt. He 
attempted to submit an offer in compromise a few years ago, but he began to 
experience financial problems again and was unable to follow through with the offer in 
compromise. He is attempting to contact the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to arrange 
a payment plan towards his federal tax debt. (Tr. 25-26; A 22-23) 
 
Applicant states that his financial problems were caused by insufficient income, 
and several periods of underemployment or unemployment. From July 1996 to April 
2000, he worked as a congressional aide with an annual income of  
$38,000. From August 2000 to December 2001, he served as the director of 
communications for his state’s Governor. He quit that job to move so he could live near 
his children. He remarried in 2000. After moving, he had difficulty finding suitable 
employment. He worked a number of odd jobs and served several active duty Navy 
tours. (Tr 17-19; AE A at 3-4) 
 
In 2004, he found a full-time job but was laid off in August 2005. He separated 
from his second wife in 2005. From August 2005 to 2007, he worked several temporary 
jobs but it was not enough to meet his financial obligations. He testified that his priority 
was to provide for his four children. He resigned his Navy Reserve commission in 2007. 
(Tr. 19-20) 
 
Applicant was past-due on his child support obligations for his eight-year-old 
daughter. The balance was $22,705 at one point. Applicant is currently paying child 
support. He pays $534 monthly towards his sons’ child support. He pays $403 monthly 
towards his daughter’s child support. Part of the amount goes towards his past due child 
support balance. The child support payments are deducted from his paycheck. (Tr. 28; 
Gov 2 at 5; AE D) 
 
When Applicant was hired in his current position, he claims that he was only 
making enough income to pay his current bills. He rejoined the Navy Reserves and 
began doing duty in the fall 2010. He intends to use his drill pay towards his delinquent 
accounts. (Tr. 20, 36-38) 
 
Around June 2010, Applicant contacted the creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 
1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.m, 1.n, and 1.o.  (AE C at 2-8) He sent additional letters on February 8, 
 
4 
 
 
2011 to the creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.m, and 1.o. (AE A at 
24-27) Applicant disputes some of the medical bills for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 
1.h, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.o. He claims some of the charges should have been covered by his 
health insurance, other accounts he does not recognize. The dispute is not resolved. 
(AE A at 27-28) In fact, Applicant contacted the collection agency for the medical bills 
requesting a summary of medical accounts. The collection company provided Applicant 
a list of 11 medical collection accounts, an approximate total of $7,951.23. (AE A at 28) 
 
On November 15, 2010, Applicant wrote a check to the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.i in the amount of $87.76. He claims the debt is now paid in full. It is not clear whether 
this account is resolved because the balance on the debt was $227 and Applicant did 
not provide a statement from the creditor indicating the debt was resolved in full. (AE A 
at 15)  
 
On November 15, 2010, Applicant wrote a check to the creditor alleged in SOR 
¶1.l for $187.78. It is not clear whether the account is resolved because the balance on 
the debt was $375 and Applicant did not provide a statement from the creditor indicating 
the debt was resolved in full. (AE A at 17-19) 
 
On January 6, 2011, Applicant submitted an application with a consumer credit 
counseling service to assist him with resolving his debts. He is in the process of 
completing the paperwork. No formal repayment agreement was completed at the close 
of the record. (Tr. 20; AE A at 9-14; AE C at 9) After the hearing, Applicant submitted a 
budget.  He has $37 left over each month after expenses. (AE D) 
 
Appellant’s awards and decorations include four Navy Achievement Medals. He 
received a letter of commendation from the Commander, Navy Region Northeast for his 
duties a public affairs representative in July 2000. He has had a distinguished career in 
public service. (AE A at 1-7)  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
5 
 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
 
6 
 
 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has 
encountered difficulties meeting his financial obligations since the 1990s. He filed for 
bankruptcy in 1997. He has unresolved delinquent state and federal tax debts that have 
been past-due since the late 1990s. He owes approximately $18,000 in delinquent state 
income taxes. He owes approximately $22,872 in delinquent federal income taxes. He 
also has incurred additional consumer and medical debts since 2000.  
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Applicant has had recurring financial problems for more than 15 years. While Applicant 
is making payments on his state tax debt, he has not resolved the majority of his 
accounts including the federal tax debt. Although employed in a well-paying position 
since November 2009, he waited until the last minute to begin settling his accounts, It is 
too soon to conclude that all of the debts will be resolved. Applicant’s past financial 
history, to include his tax debts and a previous bankruptcy in 1997, raise questions 
about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies. Applicant’s past financial  
problems were partially caused by his two divorces, periods of unemployment, and 
medical bills incurred for his family’s medical treatment. However, I cannot conclude 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. Although, Applicant blames his 
first wife for not filing or paying their state and federal tax returns, he had an obligation 
to ensure that his annual tax returns were filed and paid. Upon learning of the tax debts, 
he neglected to enter into repayment agreements even while employed in well-paying 
jobs. He is paying towards his state debt, but has not entered into an agreement with 
the IRS. He claims he suffered from periods of underemployment, but resigned his 
commission from the Navy Reserves in March 2007 even though he could have used 
this extra income. He claims that supporting his childrens’ needs were his priority, but 
his child support payments were past due over $22,000. Aside from the tax debts and 
the past-due child support debt, the majority of Applicant’s remaining delinquent 
accounts are less than $300. This reflects financial irresponsibility as opposed to an 
inability to pay his accounts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. Applicant just recently contacted a consumer credit counseling agency. 
At the close of the record, he had not entered into a repayment agreement with the 
consumer credit counseling agency. He also had not entered into a repayment 
agreement with the IRS. It is too soon to conclude that his delinquent accounts will be 
resolved in the near future.  
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) partially applies. Applicant made payments towards two of 
his debts. However, I cannot conclude that the debts are resolved because his 
payments were less than the balance owed on the debt and he did not provide a 
statement from the creditor verifying the debt was resolved. He is making regular 
payments towards his state tax debts and is paying his monthly child support 
obligations. However, he has not been proactive towards resolving his other delinquent 
accounts, including the federal tax debt. While he has been employed in his current 
position since November 2009, he made no attempt to resolve his delinquent accounts 
until June 2010. His efforts at that time consisted of sending a letter to his creditors. He 
did not actively follow up with the creditors after sending he letters. It appears that  
Applicant was going through the motions as opposed to making a good-faith effort to 
resolve his delinquent accounts.  
 
AG & 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) potentially applies to the medical collection accounts that Applicant is disputing. 
However, it is premature to conclude Applicant successfully disputed these accounts. 
The collection agency provided Applicant an itemized listing of the medical accounts. 
The list includes six additional medical collection accounts. One of the accounts has a 
balance of $6,874.83. The outcome of the dispute is uncertain. Applicant did not provide 
sufficient evidence to successfully dispute the medical accounts. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s record of 
favorable duty performance with the Navy Reserves. I considered Applicant’s periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. Some were beyond his control, some resulted 
from personal choices. While Applicant made payments towards two of his delinquent 
accounts and is making payments towards his state income tax debt, the majority of the 
debts remain unresolved. Applicant did not demonstrate a good-faith effort to resolve 
his delinquent accounts.  He did not mitigate the concerns raised under financial 
considerations.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
