 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01967   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 5, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 1, 2010, and November 18, 2010, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on December 14, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 30, 2010, and 
the hearing was convened as scheduled on January 31, 2011. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through J, which were admitted without objection. The record 
was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted 
documents that were marked AE K through Q and admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 15, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since October 2009. She held a security clearance several years 
ago in conjunction with another job. She is applying for another clearance for her 
current job. She is a high school graduate. She is single, and she has a 23-year-old 
daughter.1 
  
 Applicant’s finances were stable before certain events. A credit report from 2006 
showed no delinquent accounts. Applicant worked at a military base in a different state 
than she currently resides. She bought a house in about 2005. She put a down payment 
on the house and financed the rest with an adjustable rate mortgage (ARM). She took 
out a second mortgage and also used credit cards to pay for improvements on the 
home. She obtained a second job with a national beverage chain to help pay her 
mortgages and other expenses. Applicant’s mother and daughter lived with her. Her 
mother had medical problems, was unemployed, and did not contribute financially. Her 
daughter was in school. Her daughter was struggling to pay her own debts and also did 
not contribute financially. Applicant’s adjustable rate mortgage increased, raising her 
monthly mortgage payments. Applicant left her position at the military base to work full-
time for the beverage chain. She hoped to become a store manager, which would 
compensate her sufficiently to pay her debts. The country-wide economic slowdown 
affected the national chain. It downsized, closed stores, and laid people off. The store 
manager position never materialized. Applicant submitted Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) tax return transcripts that showed her wages for tax year 2009, which included 
several months working for her current employer, were less than 25% of what she 
earned in tax year 2008. A number of debts became delinquent, and she lost her home 
to foreclosure.2 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s 12 delinquent debts totaling about $14,445. 
Applicant admitted owing all the debts. Three of the debts, totaling about $6,233, had 
been reduced to judgments. 
 
 Applicant decided additional changes were required. She moved to the state 
where her sister lives and obtained a job with a defense contractor. She paid some 
debts that were not alleged in the SOR. She attempted to contact several of her 
creditors after her income increased, but many of her debts were transferred to 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23-28, 55-56; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 27-37, 67; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3, 4; AE E-I. 
 
 
3 
 
collection companies that were difficult to deal with. Applicant felt her best recourse was 
to file bankruptcy.3 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy on February 15, 2011. The bankruptcy 
petition listed under Schedule D – Creditors Holding Secured Claims, a $9,875 car loan. 
The car is in her brother’s name, and she makes the payments on the car loan.  There 
were no claims under Schedule E – Creditors Holding Unsecured Priority Claims. Under 
Schedule F – Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, the petition listed 11 
debts totaling $17,865. The bankruptcy listed all the debts that were in a credit report 
obtained by her attorney. It included all the debts in the SOR with the exception of the 
$605 and $182 debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j.4 
 
 Applicant has received the financial counseling required by her bankruptcy. Her 
finances have stabilized since she moved to her current state and returned to working 
for a defense contractor. She has closed all her credit card accounts, and she has not 
accrued additional delinquent debt since moving and starting her new job. Once her 
debts are discharged in bankruptcy, she is confident that she will be able to stay on top 
of her finances and remain current on all her debts.5 
 
 Applicant submitted several letters attesting to her outstanding job performance, 
ethics, professionalism, and integrity. Her manager at the beverage chain where she 
worked stated that Applicant was responsible for six cash registers and $4,000 to 
$8,000 in cash in day. She wrote that in “the entire time [Applicant] was a shift 
supervisor for [her] not once did she have a bad register drop or bank deposit.” 
Applicant’s sister is married to a senior enlisted service member in the pay grade E-9. 
He is stationed in the city where Applicant now lives. He has been married to 
Applicant’s sister for 17 years. He testified that Applicant is reliable, honest, trustworthy, 
and truthful. He is convinced she is sincere in her desire to rectify her financial 
problems.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 26-27, 35-40, 47; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4. 
 
4 Tr. at 38-46, 52, 68; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, D, J-Q. 
 
5 Tr. at 45, 49-55, 67; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE O. 
 
6 Tr. at 60-66; AE B, C. 
 
4 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant filed bankruptcy, but her debts have not been discharged. Her financial 
issues are recent. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant’s finances were stable until a few years ago. She bought a house and 
took out a second mortgage so she could make renovations. She worked on a military 
installation and had a second job at a national beverage chain. She was supporting her 
ill mother and her daughter. She thought her best opportunity was to work full-time for 
the beverage chain in hopes of becoming a store manager. The economy went 
downhill, the national chain downsized, and Applicant was never promoted to store 
manager. The economic slowdown and her mother’s health issues were outside 
Applicant’s control, but the decision to leave her job at the military base was within her 
control. AG ¶ 20(b) has minimal applicability.7   
 
 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 09-08108 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2011). 
 
6 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as part of her bankruptcy. She is a 
hardworking, honest woman who took a chance with the national chain in hopes of 
eventually bettering herself. That failed to materialize. She moved to a city where she 
has family support. She has a decent job working for a defense contractor. It is unlikely 
that she will make the same mistakes again. Once her debts are discharged in 
bankruptcy, she will be able to live within her means and stay current on her debts. 
Applicant’s financial problems have not yet been resolved. However, the bankruptcy 
provides a clear indication that the problem is in the process of being resolved and is 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable. 
 
 Applicant’s actions do not qualify as a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts.8 AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
                                                          
8 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. Applicant is using the 
legal remedy of bankruptcy to resolve debts incurred when she misjudged her upward 
mobility at a national beverage chain. The subsequent economic downturn and 
downsizing of the chain eliminated that possibility. She is not attempting to absolve 
herself of excessive credit card debt caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending. She 
is attempting to rectify a career choice that did not turn out as she planned. She has 
convinced me that she is on the right track financially.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
