 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
 
In the matter of:             ) 
          ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00029 
                       ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
                       
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on September 17, 2009. On November 23, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 17, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
February 1, 2011. I convened a hearing on February 23, 2011, to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced five exhibits, which 
were marked Ex. 1 through 5 and admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and called no witnesses. He introduced seven exhibits, which 
were identified and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through G and admitted to the record 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on March 3, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains a single allegation of disqualifying conduct under AG ¶ 18, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶ 1.a.). SOR ¶ 1.a. alleges that Applicant is indebted to 
a state higher education services corporation for a student loan account, in collection 
status, which totals approximately $86,386. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted the allegation and denied that it was of security significance under the financial 
considerations adjudicative guideline. Applicant’s admission is admitted as a finding of 
fact. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 3 at 4; Ex. 4 at 4.)  
 
 Applicant is 43 years old, twice divorced, and an employee of a government 
contractor. He seeks a security clearance for the first time. (Ex. 1; Tr. 43, 47-48.) 
 
 After graduating from high school, Applicant studied at two universities. In 1991, 
when he was in his early 20s, he enrolled at a third university in order to study acting. 
He acquired a bachelor’s degree in acting in 1992 and a master’s degree in acting in 
1993. Applicant financed his acting studies with student loans. (Ex. 1; Tr. 43-45, 48-49.) 
 
 Applicant was married for the first time in 1993. He and his first wife divorced in 
1995. Applicant married for a second time in 2002. He and his second wife divorced in 
2004. At present, Applicant lives alone and has no dependents. He is close to his 
parents, who are retired1 and have assisted him financially for many years. (Ex. 1; Tr. 
47-48, 69-74.) 
 
 After completing his education, Applicant began to pursue an acting career in a 
major U.S. city. He took acting jobs, some of which ran for several months, but he also 
found it necessary to supplement his income with other work. In 1995, he acquired a 
role in a major dramatic production and was employed full-time for over two years. After 
the major dramatic production ended, he acquired acting work in television 
commercials, soap operas, television dramas, and television pilots. These jobs were 
often short term, and his income was not always steady. During this time, he also took 
non-acting temporary jobs as an administrative assistant, bartender, and party staff 
assistant. During this time he did not address his student loan debts. (Ex. 1; Tr. 45-46, 
50.)  
  
 
1 Applicant’s father is retired from government service. In his retirement, he owns a consulting business. 
(Tr. 73.) 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 Beginning in 2000, Applicant found it increasingly difficult to make a living as an 
actor. He did not have steady employment as an actor in 2001, 2002, and 2003. In 
2004, he abandoned his acting career, moved away from the major U.S. city where he 
had worked and lived, and sought a new career as an administrator and manager. From 
2004 until the present, he has had relatively steady employment in administrative 
management. He has been employed as a federal contractor for approximately one 
year. (Tr. 42, 45-47, 51-53.) 
 
 Applicant’s student loans continued to accrue interest. In 2007, Applicant made a 
$734 payment on his student loan debt. This was his first voluntary payment on his 
delinquent student loan debt.  (Ex. A; Tr. 50.) 
 
 Thereafter, in 2007, Applicant made nine payments of $400 to rehabilitate his 
delinquent student loans. After Applicant made these payments,2 the loans were then 
refinanced, and $11,814 was added to the principal. The loan amount was increased 
from $46,000 to $71,000. The increase also included penalties, interest, and additional 
fees. (Ex. A; Tr. 54-56.) 
 
 After the refinancing of Applicant’s student loans, the creditor set Applicant’s 
monthly payment at $1,089. Applicant protested the amount of the repayment as 
beyond his means. Applicant offered to pay the creditor $400 to $550 a month, but the 
creditor insisted on receiving $1,089 a month and did not offer Applicant a lesser 
payment amount. Applicant made no payments on his student loan debt in 2008. (Ex. A; 
Tr. 58-60.) 
 
 In September 2009, Applicant and the creditor entered into an informal 
undocumented understanding that Applicant would pay the creditor an initial $275 on 
the delinquent loan debt, followed by monthly voluntary payments of $300. He made the 
$275 payment in September 2009. The creditor’s payment record shows that Applicant 
then made another payment of $275 in October 2009. Thereafter, between November 
2009 and September 2010, Applicant made eleven monthly payments of $300 to the 
creditor. In October 2010, he made a payment of $150 to the creditor, and in November 
2010, he made a second payment of $150 to the creditor. (Ex. A; Tr. 61-62.) 
 
 Applicant explained that he made the $150 monthly payments instead of the 
agreed-upon $300 monthly payments because his living expenses increased when a 
romantic relationship ended and he was no longer sharing rent with another person. (Tr. 
61-62.) 
 
 In January 2011, the creditor obtained an order directing that 15% of Applicant’s 
biweekly disposable income be garnished in payment of his delinquent student loan 
debt, which was calculated to be $86,150.70. The first garnishment payment of $257.91 
was deducted from Applicant’s biweekly pay on February 11, 2011. (Ex. B; Ex. C; Ex. D; 
Tr. 62-63.)   
 
2 Applicant’s last $400 payment was made in November 2007. (Tr. 58-59.) 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
 At his hearing, Applicant explained that his father has offered to lend him money 
to pay or settle the delinquent student loan debt. If this occurs, Applicant would owe a 
debt to his father, which he would repay over time. (Tr. 63-65.)     
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant prepared a personal financial 
statement in July 2010. At his hearing, he amended his personal financial statement to 
reflect current income and expenses. Applicant’s net monthly income is $2,634.3 His 
fixed monthly expenses are as follows: rent, $1,300; utilities, $130; food, $200; 
miscellaneous, $200. Since completing his personal financial statement, Applicant no 
longer has an automobile, and he no longer has automobile expenses. (Ex. B; Ex. 4 at 
4-5; Tr. 67.)    
 
 Applicant’s attachments to his personal financial statement showed that in March 
2010, he had settled a $5,035 state tax debt. In September 2010, he entered into a 
payment agreement to satisfy a second state tax debt of $4,069 by paying $125 a 
month. In June 2010, the Internal Revenue Service accepted Applicant’s offer to pay a 
$4,450 federal tax debt by making monthly payments of $105. Applicant provided 
documentation to corroborate that he owed a credit union a delinquent debt of $1,215 
and was making monthly payments of $100. Additionally, Applicant provided 
documentation corroborating that he was paying $50 a month on a $264 medical debt. 
(Ex. 4 at 4-13; Tr. 67-68.)   
 
 Applicant’s personal financial statement reflected that he was making monthly 
payments of $182 on three credit card debts totaling approximately $2,443. Additionally, 
Applicant reported that he owed his father a debt of $6,200 and was making monthly 
payments on that debt of $100. At his hearing he reported that his father had 
suspended his payment obligation until later in 2011. Applicant’s net monthly remainder 
is $242. He discussed his student loan obligation with a financial counseling agency, 
and he has sought financial counseling from a family member. (Ex. 4 at 5; Tr. 63-64, 
68.) 
 
 Applicant provided three letters of character reference. One of the letters was 
from a person who has known Applicant since childhood. This person described 
Applicant as “a hard working, well grounded, and responsible person.” (Ex. E.) 
 
 The second letter was from an individual who supervised Applicant for three 
years. This person praised Applicant as trustworthy, dependable, honest, and reliable. 
The third letter was from a former colleague, who pointed out that Applicant possessed 
integrity and a strong sense of right and wrong. (Ex. F; Ex. G.) 
 
 
 
 
3 This amount reflects Applicant’s take-home income after taxes and deductions, including the biweekly 
garnishment of $257.91 payable to the creditor holding Applicant’s delinquent student loan debt. (Ex. B; 
Ex. 4 at 4-6.) 
 
5 
 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
6 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. From 1991 until 1993, Applicant acquired student loans to finance his 
undergraduate and graduate degrees in acting. While his income fluctuated during his 
acting career, he did not address his student loan debt until 2007. In January 2011, the 
student loan creditor obtained an order garnishing 15% of Applicant’s biweekly 
disposable income in payment of his delinquent student loans. This evidence is 
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
 
7 
 
 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant admitted that he owed approximately $86,000 in delinquent student 
loans. In 2007, Applicant made a payment of $734 on his student loan delinquency. 
This was his first payment on this debt which had increased considerably since he 
acquired it to finance his education from 1991 to 1993. 
 
In 2007, in response to the creditor’s direction, Applicant made several payments 
of $400 in order to rehabilitate his delinquent student loans. The creditor refinanced the 
loan debt and notified him that his required monthly payment on the delinquent student 
loan debt was $1,089. Applicant told the creditor that the required payment was beyond 
his means. He made no payments on his delinquent student loans in 2008.  
 
In 2009, the creditor informally agreed to accept a lesser amount in payment 
from Applicant.  In accordance with this agreement, Applicant made two payments of 
$275 and eleven monthly payments of $300. When Applicant submitted two monthly 
payments that were less than the agreed-upon amount, the creditor obtained an order 
to garnish 15% of Applicant’s bi-weekly disposable debt to satisfy his delinquent student 
loan debt.  
 
Applicant provided documentation that in the last year he had paid or negotiated 
payment plans for debts not alleged on the SOR. He has received some financial 
counseling. While his wages are currently being garnished to satisfy the large student 
loan delinquency, he may seek his father’s help in satisfying the debt.  
 
Applicant’s student loan delinquency has existed for over 18 years. While 
Applicant took steps to rehabilitate his student loan debt in 2007, and made good faith 
payments in 2009 and 2010, his efforts were not consistent, leading the creditor to 
institute garnishment proceedings. Applicant’s efforts to resolve this debt are relatively 
recent, and he has not yet developed a track record of reliable payment over time. I 
conclude that AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply to the facts in this case. 
 
Applicant chose a career in acting, and, despite success, he did not always have 
work as an actor. However, he accepted other kinds of work to supplement his income. 
He was aware of his delinquent student loans for many years, but he did not take timely 
action to satisfy them. I conclude that Applicant’s student loan delinquency was not 
caused by circumstances beyond his control. Accordingly, AG¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant has received some financial counseling, and his wages are being 
garnished to satisfy his delinquent student loan debt. However, it is not evident from the 
record that his financial problem is being resolved or is under control. Applicant’s father 
may assist him by paying his student loan indebtedness for him, and then Applicant 
would be indebted to his father. It is not clear at this time whether Applicant will be able 
satisfy his delinquent student loan debt from his own resources. I conclude that AG ¶ 
20(c) does not fully apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.  
 
The record reflects that in 2007, nearly 16 years after incurring his student loan 
indebtedness, Applicant took steps to rehabilitate his student loans. However, after the 
loans were refinanced, the creditor set Applicant’s monthly loan repayment at $1,089 a 
month, an amount that Applicant claimed was beyond his means. Applicant informally 
negotiated a lesser amount of $300 monthly with the creditor, and he made good faith 
payments, as agreed, until his living arrangement changed and he lacked sufficient 
resources to pay the full amount. For his good faith efforts to address this debt, 
Applicant merits some credit under AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
However, when Applicant’s financial resources changed, he failed to make the 
payments as agreed. The creditor then obtained an order to garnish 15% of Applicant’s 
biweekly discretionary income. Pursuant to the garnishment order, $257.91 is forwarded 
to the creditor from Applicant’s pay every two weeks. A payment made because of an 
involuntary garnishment results in limited mitigation because it is not voluntary 
repayment of a debt. See ISCR Case No. 08-06059 at 6 (App. Bd. Sept. 21, 2009). 
Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) does not fully apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case. Neither AG ¶ 20(e) nor ¶ 20(f) is relevant to the facts of Applicant’s case.        
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
9 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 43 
years. In 1991, 1992, and 1993, Applicant acquired student loans to finance his 
education. He did not address his student loan debt for at least 16 years, even when he 
had the resources to do so. It is well-settled that failure to discharge debts over a period 
of time constitutes a continuing course of conduct that raises concerns about an 
applicant’s reliability and trustworthiness. ISCR Case No 07-10575 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul 3, 
2008).    
 
Recently, Applicant has acted in good faith to resolve debts not alleged on the 
SOR. Moreover, he made payments on his student loans in 2007, 2009, and 2010. 
Nevertheless, his financial situation remains tenuous. As of January 2011, his student 
loan debt is being satisfied by garnishment. His net monthly remainder is approximately 
$242, leaving few resources for dealing with unexpected expenses or emergencies. It is 
too soon to tell if Applicant will meet his financial obligations and avoid delinquencies in 
the future. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:            Against Applicant 
   
                                                         Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
