                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-06912 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
John Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Brad Jones, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On December 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 5, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 8, 2011. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 10, 2011. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on March 8, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted into evidence. Applicant and one 
witness testified. She offered Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted into 
evidence without objections. The record was held open until March 15, 2011, to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant did not submit additional 
documents and the record closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 
15, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f. She denied the remaining 
allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. She is not married. She has a grown son. She has 
worked for her present employer since January 2005. She has held a top-secret 
security clearance in her position. She completed her bachelor’s degree in 2008.1  
 
 There are nine debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant admitted in her answer that 
she owed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($44,000) and 1.f ($34,197). The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d 
is a credit card debt and the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f is a defaulted car loan. Applicant has not 
addressed the credit card debt because she has been unsuccessful in contacting the 
creditor. She sent a certified letter to the creditor, but received no response.2 The car 
loan debt is for a car she purchased in 2005 or 2006. The purchase price was $55,000 
and her monthly payments were between $800 and $900. The car was involuntarily 
repossessed. She reached a settlement agreement with the creditor on February 17, 
2011, to pay $23,677. She was required to make a $6,000 down payment and then 
monthly payments of $589 for 30 months. She stated she paid the $6,000 down 
payment, but did not provide documents to prove her payment. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.d and 1.f are unresolved.3  
 
 Applicant disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($176) to a telephone company. She 
did not provide proof of her dispute. Applicant stated she settled and paid the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.b ($4,743) to a credit card company in March 2010. She did not provide 
documents to prove that she paid the debt. These debts are listed on her credit reports. 
These debts are unresolved.4 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($10,000) is a credit card debt. She did not have 
information on the debt, but believed she used it for expenses. Applicant was unsure 
about the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($6,975). She stated she tried to reach out to the creditor 
1 Tr. 11, 23-25, 99-100. 
 
2 Applicant did not provide a copy of the certified letter. 
 
3 Tr. 28-30, 33-38, 52-55, 62-63, 84-91; GE 3, 4; AE C is a copy of the proposed settlement agreement. 
 
4 Tr. 39-43, 45; GE 3, 4, 5. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
and address the debt. A credit report notes that a debt to the same creditor in SOR ¶1.e 
is disputed by the creditor, but it is unclear if it is the same debt as alleged. Applicant did 
not know anything else about this account. These debts are unresolved.5  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($14,913) is for a credit card. Applicant said she was 
confused about the debt. She believed she settled and paid it. She did not provide 
documents to prove she paid it. The debt is on her credit reports.6 The debt is 
unresolved.7  
 
 Applicant disputes the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h ($243) and 1.i ($68) because she 
does not believe they belong to her. She did not provide information about what, if 
anything, she has done to dispute the debts. The debts are not listed on her credit 
reports. I find in her favor on these debts.8  
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant provided a letter from an attorney she hired. 
The letter is dated January 3, 2010,9 and confirms he has been hired “for the purpose of 
working with the credit bureaus to audit and verify the status of her credit reports.” The 
letter stated that according to Applicant there were inaccurate, invalid, and unverifiable 
accounts. It went on to say “we are requesting the appropriate investigative procedures” 
from the three credit bureaus. Applicant did not provide any additional information as to 
what actions her attorney may have taken. She had not talked to him recently.10  
 
 In November or December 2007, Applicant’s mother became ill. Applicant stated 
she began to incur additional expenses due to her mother’s illness. She used credit 
cards to help pay the expense of traveling to another state by plane and paid some of 
her mother’s expenses. She estimated that over a seven to eight month period she 
traveled to see her mother seven times and the cost of airfare, rental car, and 
sometimes a hotel, were about $800 to $900. She helped pay her mother’s mortgage a 
few times, which was between $200 and $300, and she paid some of her medical bills, 
which were about $300 a month. She was also on family leave from June 5, 2008, to 
June 17, 2008, to be with her mother before she passed away in late June 2008. 
Applicant paid her funeral expenses, which were approximately $2,500.11   
 
5 Tr. 46-48; GE 3, 4, 5. 
 
6 Tr. 50-52; GE 3, 4, 5. 
 
7 Tr. 63-67; GE 3, 4, 5. 
 
8 Tr. 68-69. 
 
9 A duplicate of the letter was provided as GE 6. 
 
10 Tr. 43-44; Answer to SOR.  
 
11 Tr. 27-28, 76-78, 100-108; AE A.  
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant stated her finances were in good order until she began assisting her 
mother. She indicated that the costs associated with her mother’s illness caused her to 
experience financial problems in around April 2008. Applicant stated that she incurred 
large credit card debts primarily due to her mother’s illness. She stated over the past 
three years she has been paying some of the debts she owes to collection companies. 
She has other active credit cards that she pays timely. When asked why she had such 
large debts that were beyond the amounts she paid to help her mother, she did not 
answer the question. When asked what she has spent her money on since her mother’s 
death, she could not answer the question. She does not have a budget. Applicant stated 
she is current in paying all of her monthly expenses. She purchased a 2007 car with 
$9,000 in cash. She took a loan from her 401(k) account to make the payment. She 
contributes 8% of her salary to her 401(k) retirement account. She also has $28,000 in 
student loans that she is paying. She has three open credit cards that are current. She 
has about $2,000 in her savings account and $300 in her checking account. She rents 
an apartment and pays her utilities on time. She does not know where she spent her 
money the last three years.12  
 
Applicant currently earns approximately $108,000 annually. In addition, in the 
past she had a part-time job at a store and earned about $5,000 annually. She also 
served as a secretary for a real estate investment company. She received 
compensation for her job and it was based on the amount she invested in the company. 
She received dividend payments from her investments. Applicant stated she was 
receiving about $800 to $900 a month from the company from about 2005 until late 
2007. She stated the bank that financed the real estate project went bankrupt and she 
no longer received this income.13  
 
 Applicant stated that in approximately March or April 2008 she contacted a credit 
solutions company. She stopped using them in August 2010 because she learned they 
were taking her fees and not satisfying her debts. She did not provide information as to 
how much she paid to the company and for how many months. She believed the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.c was included in the program, but she was not sure if the debt was settled. 
She intends to resolve all of her delinquent debts as quickly and as efficiently as 
possible.14  
 
Applicant provided documentation with her interrogatories that showed she was 
making some payments to some other creditors in the past. She did not provide 
documentation regarding the debts listed in the SOR.15  
 
12 Tr. 28, 77-83, 91-94, 103-111. 
 
13 Tr. 28, 30, 55-62, 109. 
 
14 Tr. 48-50, 74, 78, 96-97. 
 
15 Tr. 30-33. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s son testified on her behalf. He was aware that his mother was helping 
his grandmother. He believes his mother has a lot of integrity. He knows his mother has 
helped other family members financially, including himself. He did not know exactly how 
much money she gave to family.16  
 
 Applicant’s supervisor provided a character letter. She noted that Applicant has 
an outstanding work ethic and her credentials are highly valuable. She is impressed 
with her performance and integrity. On many occasions she has gone above and 
beyond what is expected to deliver high quality customer service, sometimes working 
long hours to ensure the project runs smoothly. She consistently has high performance 
ratings. She demonstrates integrity and is always honest.17 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
16 Tr. 112-119. 
 
17 Tr. 70-75; AE B. 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has seven debts totaling approximately $114,828 that have been 
delinquent for several years and are unpaid or unresolved. I find there is sufficient 
evidence to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not taken action to resolve her delinquent debts. I find that AG ¶ 
20(a) is not established because Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing, and not the 
result of circumstances making them unlikely to recur. She has a large amount of debt, 
but did not provide proof that they are not hers or that she has a plan for resolving them. 
She admits to owing at least two of them that total approximately $78,197. Her failure to 
address her delinquent debts casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness and 
good judgment.  
 
 Applicant stated her finances were fine until her mother became ill and then 
passed away. She has been employed by the same employer since 2005. She earns a 
substantial income. The amount of money she expended when her mother was ill does 
not equate to the large amount of debts she has incurred. She was unable to explain 
where she spent all of her money. Her mother’s illness may have had some impact on 
her finances, which would trigger the application of AG ¶ 20(b) because the condition 
that resulted in the financial hardship was beyond her control. For full application of AG 
¶ 20(b), however, Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant’s mother passed away in June 2008. It has been two and half years since that 
event. Applicant failed to show she is acting responsibly in resolving her delinquent 
debts. I find AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies.  
 
Applicant has hired an attorney to help her dispute items on her credit report. 
She stated she was working with a debt consolidation company at one time. She did not 
provide supporting document to show actions she may have taken through the company 
or what she has done since terminating her agreement. She did not provide anything of 
 
8 
 
 
substance as to what her attorney has done for her. She stated she paid certain 
delinquent debts and disputed others. She stated she made the initial $6,000 down 
payment as part of a settlement on one of her debts, but did not provide the documents 
to show that the payment was made. There is insufficient evidence to conclude 
Applicant has made good-faith efforts to pay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve her 
delinquent debts. Therefore, I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant 
disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i. I did not find them on her credit report and 
therefore find in her favor on those two debts. Other debts she disputed, but failed to 
provide documented evidence to substantiate the basis of her dispute or provide 
evidence of her actions to resolve the dispute. I find AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to those 
debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant has 
held a security clearance without incident. She has incurred a large amount of 
consumer debt. She helped her mother when she was ill, but the amount she spent 
does not equate to the large amount of delinquent debt she has accumulated. She does 
not know how she spends her money. Although she has an attorney to help her dispute 
some debts, there was no evidence as to what actions, if any, he has taken. Applicant 
admitted she owes more than $78,000 on two debts. She did not provide proof that she 
has a payment plan or is resolving her delinquent debts. She has failed to meet her 
burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
 
9 
 
 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.i:   For Applicant 
   
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
