 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02992   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Lucien A. Cravens, Jr., Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 14, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 14, 2010. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 30, 2010, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on February 1, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
 
2 
 
through 8, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified but did not submit 
any documentary evidence. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
information. Applicant timely submitted documents that were marked exhibits (AE) AE A 
and A.1 through A.7 and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s e-mails 
forwarding the exhibits are marked exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on February 16, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since November 2009. He served on active duty in the United 
States military from 1982 until he was honorably discharged in 1995. He is applying for 
a security clearance. He attended college for a period but did not earn a degree. He has 
been married and divorced twice. He has two adult children.1 
  
 Applicant was a truck driver in a thriving geographic location. He bought his own 
truck and trailer and his business was very successful. He incorporated his business in 
2005. He and his ex-girlfriend lived with her child in a home that he bought in 2001. He 
bought a trailer that he could use for vacations and leisure activities. He bought a 
timeshare in a vacation location where he could park his trailer. He bought a 2005 car 
for his ex-girlfriend and a 2006 pick-up truck that was financed with a loan of about 
$48,000. He bought two jet skis and a trailer to transport them in about January 2007. 
The economic downturn hit his geographic area hard. He attempted to keep his 
company afloat, but he lost most of his business. He also stated that his ex-girlfriend 
“manipulated [his] finances by not paying bills, or simply by taking funds and items that 
belonged to [him] without [his] knowledge.” A number of debts became delinquent, and 
his house was lost to foreclosure.2 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s four delinquent debts totaling about $29,626 and 
the mortgage on the house that was foreclosed. Applicant admitted all the allegations 
except SOR ¶ 1.c, which he denied. SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b allege debts of $6,910 and 
$9,339 for the deficiency owed on the loans for the two jet skis after Applicant returned 
them and their trailer as a voluntary repossession in about October 2009. SOR ¶ 1.c 
alleges a debt to a bank that was $2,000 past due. SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a debt of $11,377 
to a collection company on behalf of a bank. SOR ¶ 1.e alleges the amount due on the 
mortgage, $175,000, before the house was foreclosed.3  
 
 Applicant took his current job because he realized his trucking business was not 
succeeding. He and his ex-girlfriend broke up in 2009.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 12-14, 31-34, 40, 64-65; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 16-27, 30, 36, 42-44, 51, 59-60, 65-68; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5. 
 
3 Tr. at 16-17; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
4 Tr. at 29, 65. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in October 2010. The bankruptcy petition 
listed under Schedule D – Creditors Holding Secured Claims, a $5,040 loan for his ex-
girlfriend’s car, a $55,000 loan for his trailer, and a $27,000 loan for his pick-up truck. 
There were no claims listed under Schedule E – Creditors Holding Unsecured Priority 
Claims. Under Schedule F – Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, the 
petition listed seven debts totaling $219,377. The largest listed claim was $175,000 for 
the mortgage on Applicant’s foreclosed home. The petition listed Applicant’s annual 
income as $3,000 for 2006, $8,000 for 2007, $3,000 for 2008, $13,271 for 2009, and 
$55,670 for 2010 “(YTD approximate).” The proposed payment plan calls for monthly 
payments of $390 for five years. Applicant established that he made the four monthly 
$390 payments since November 2010.5  
 
 Applicant testified that his business was flourishing until about the fall of 2007. 
He explained that the bankruptcy petition listed his income for 2006 at $3,000 because 
that was the profit reported by his business. He stated that his expenses, including his 
mortgage and car loans, were paid by the corporation before the profit was calculated. 
He stated that he “used [his] personal credit card and stuff like that to get [his] business 
started. And it was kind of paying [him] back towards what [he] had used from [his] 
personal accounts to get the business going.” In essence, Applicant stated that he was 
living off repayments from the corporation of loans he had made to the corporation 
when he started the business. He also stated that he had an office in his home from 
which he ran the business. Applicant submitted copies of his corporation income tax 
returns for tax years 2006 through 2009. The 2006 tax return noted gross profits of 
$113,856 and total deductions of $132,894, resulting in a taxable income of -$19,038. 
The 2007 tax return noted gross profits of $83,624 and total deductions of $87,793, 
resulting in a taxable income of -$4,169. The 2008 tax return noted gross profits of 
$88,785 and total deductions of $87,435, resulting in a taxable income of $1,350. The 
2009 tax return noted gross profits of $90,477 and total deductions of $87,658, resulting 
in a taxable income of $2,819.6 
 
 Applicant’s girlfriend’s car was voluntarily repossessed. It was sold at a higher 
price than the car loan, and Applicant received a check from the finance company. The 
loans for his trailer and pick-up truck are being paid outside his bankruptcy plan. The 
two debts for the jet skis were not listed on the bankruptcy petition because they were 
“charged off,” and the bankruptcy payment plan would not include charged-off debts. 
The $11,377 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was listed in the bankruptcy. Applicant made 
$50 payments toward this debt in June and July 2010. The bankruptcy listed credit card 
debts of $13,000 and $4,000 to the same bank that was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant 
denied the debt because he thought it was a different account than the two that were 
listed on the bankruptcy. After reviewing the credit reports and bankruptcy petition, I find 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 30, 52-53; GE 6-8; AE A.5, A.6. 
 
6 Tr. at 19-20, 43, 66, 69-76; AE A.3. Any irregularities in Applicant’s accounting or debts that 
were not specifically alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. They will be used 
in assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in 
analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
 
4 
 
that the $2,000 past-due debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is the same debt as the $13,000 
debt to the bank that was listed on the bankruptcy petition. The $175,000 listed in the 
SOR and on the bankruptcy petition reflects the amount of the mortgage before the 
house was foreclosed. The amount of a deficiency, if any, is unclear. Any deficiency 
owed will be resolved in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy.7   
 
 Applicant paid, or continued to pay, several debts that were not alleged in the 
SOR. He is embarrassed and humbled that he had to file bankruptcy. He is living in the 
small trailer that he bought for vacations. He received the financial counseling that is 
required for his bankruptcy. He stated that he intends to continue to maintain the 
payments to the trustee until the bankruptcy payment plan is completed.8  
 
 Applicant submitted several letters attesting to his outstanding job performance, 
leadership, work ethic, competence, professionalism, honesty, loyalty, trustworthiness, 
resourcefulness, reliability, dependability, and integrity.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 20-21, 29-30, 34-39, 46-51, 58-59, 62-66; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3, 5-8; AE 
A.4. 
 
8 Tr. at 29-30, 39-40, 52-62; AE A.1, A.2, A.4. 
 
9 AE A.7. 
 
5 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
 
6 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s trucking company was operating as a successful business. He 
incorporated the company in 2005. He owned his home that he shared with his ex-
girlfriend and her child. He bought his ex-girlfriend a 2005 car and himself a 2006 pick-
up truck that he financed with a loan of about $48,000. He bought a trailer that he could 
use for vacations and leisure activities, and a timeshare in a vacation location where he 
could park his trailer. In about January 2007, he bought two jet skis and a trailer to 
transport them. Economic hard times hit Applicant’s geographic location in the fall of 
2007. He lost most of his business, and his ex-girlfriend took advantage of him 
financially. The economic downturn that caused Applicant to lose his trucking business 
and the actions of his ex-girlfriend qualify as conditions that were outside his control. To 
be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. 
 
When it became clear that Applicant’s trucking business was no longer viable, he 
accepted his current job with a defense contractor in November 2009. He and his ex-
girlfriend broke up in 2009. He lost his house to foreclosure. He is living in the small 
trailer he bought for vacations in order to save money. He filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
in October 2010. The plan has not been approved by the court, but his proposed 
payment plan calls for monthly payments of $390 for five years. He has made the 
required $390 payments every month since November 2010. He has received the 
financial counseling required for the bankruptcy. He is taking steps toward rectifying his 
financial problems. However, I remain concerned about certain aspects of this case. 
Applicant testified that his business was flourishing until the fall of 2007, which justified 
the purchase of extravagant items such as jet skis, trailer, timeshare, and multiple 
vehicles. Yet his Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition listed Applicant’s annual income as 
 
7 
 
$3,000 for 2006. He explained that his expenses, including his mortgage and car loans, 
were paid by the corporation before the profit was calculated. Applicant basically stated 
that he was living off repayments from the corporation of loans he had made to the 
corporation when he started the business. I find that Applicant has recently started to 
act responsibly toward his finances. I am unable to make an affirmative finding that he 
acted responsibly throughout the course of accruing his debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable. 
 
 The $100 Applicant paid toward the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d and the four 
monthly payments of $390 to the bankruptcy trustee are not sufficient to qualify as a 
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not 
applicable. The first prong of AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving 
counseling for the problem) is applicable. The Chapter 13 bankruptcy provides some 
indicators that, if the Chapter 13 bankruptcy is carried out, Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved. A track record of additional payments is necessary before 
those indicators can be considered “clear.” The second prong of AG ¶ 20(c) is partially 
applicable. Applicant’s financial issues are recent and ongoing. At this time, I am unable 
to determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant denied owing the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, because he thought it 
was a different account than the two debts to the same bank that were listed on the 
bankruptcy petition. The $2,000 past-due debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is the same debt as 
the $13,000 debt owed to the bank that was listed on the bankruptcy petition. AG ¶ 
20(e) is not applicable.  
 
 In sum, I conclude that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. I considered 
Applicant’s favorable character evidence and his honorable service to this country in the 
U.S. military. However, I have lingering concerns about Applicant’s finances that he has 
failed to mitigate. Those concerns must be resolved in favor of national security.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
