 
                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 10-01593 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns related to foreign preference and 
foreign influence. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant requested a security clearance by submitting an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) signed on April 9, 2009. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
 
1 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request.  
 
On June 23, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that 
specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference) of the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).2 In his Answer to the SOR, signed and notarized on July 14, 2010, 
Applicant denied that there is a security concern under Guidelines B and C, but admitted 
all the factual allegations under both guidelines. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on October 4, 2010, and the case was assigned to me on October 7, 2010. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 19, 2010, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on November 10, 2010. The Government offered three exhibits, marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
offered three exhibits, admitted without objection as Applicant's Exhibits (AE) A through 
C. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on November 19, 2010. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Libya. The facts are summarized at pages 1 through 4 of the request, 
and supported by three documents pertaining to Libya (Hearing Exhibit 1). The 
documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take administrative 
notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports in Hearing Exhibit 1. They 
are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are 
set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 70 years old, was born in Libya. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
business at a Libyan university in 1963. He did not serve in the Libyan military. (Tr. 43-
44) He came to the United States in 1965 at the age of 25. He married in Libya in 1971. 
He has four adult children: one son and daughter living with him, and one son and 
daughter currently living in Libya. (Tr. 74-79) Applicant earned a master’s degree and a 
doctorate in political science at a U.S. university in 1975. His doctoral thesis was critical 
of the Libyan policies. (Tr. 36) He became a U.S. citizen in 1994. He worked part time for 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
a county school system as a school bus attendant from 1994 to 2010. (Tr. 59-60) He was 
also employed by a defense contractor from 1995 to 2006 as a security officer. He 
received his first security clearance in 1997. He has held it continuously with no security 
violations. (Tr. 105-106) He began working for his current employer, a defense 
contractor, as a security officer in 2006. Applicant submitted character reference letters 
regarding his current performance. The security shift supervisor, who has known 
Applicant for 13 years, described him as trustworthy and dedicated. Applicant has not 
been involved in negative behavior, but has provided exceptionally professional and 
honorable service. Another employee, who has known Applicant for five years, stated 
that Applicant performs his job “to the letter of the law, making sure the security practices 
and policies are enforced at all times …” (GE 1, 2; AE A, B; Tr. 19-22) 
 
In the early 1960s, Applicant was an undergraduate in Libya. Two of his 
classmates at university later held high-level government positions. Most are now retired 
or deceased. Applicant has not been in touch with these friends since the 1980s. (Tr. 32-
33, 57, 100-104) 
 
In 1975, after completing his doctorate in the United States, Applicant returned to 
Libya and worked for a Libyan government agency. After three years, he sought other 
opportunities and accepted a position with the United Nations. He remained in that 
position until 1981. While in this post, Applicant spoke freely about his political opinions. 
When he was leaving, a friend with political connections warned him that, because of his 
opinions, he was a target of the Libyan regime. (Tr. 22-31, 35-36) 
 
 In 1981, Applicant and his wife returned to the United States on a visa. He spent a 
year on sabbatical, bringing his knowledge up-to-date. He was not employed, and lived 
on his savings. His wife returned to Libya because of deaths in the family in about 1982, 
and Applicant planned to return as well. Libya had stepped up its actions against critics 
of the regime, and Libyan citizens living abroad were targeted. Applicant testified, “The 
regime was at its height in terms of terrorism and killing and tracking the Libyans 
abroad.” Applicant testified that his wife “got stuck in there. And she couldn't get back.” 
He also stated that, “I was afraid for my wife too that they might harass and this type of 
thing.” She applied for a student visa, which was granted. (Tr. 39) After her return, in 
about 1984, Applicant and his wife requested political asylum in the United States. They 
feared for their lives if they returned to Libya. The Department of State granted Applicant 
and his wife political asylum in about 1987. (Tr. 34-40) 
 
 Applicant has a Libyan passport. It expires every two years, and Applicant has 
renewed it regularly, including after he obtained U.S. citizenship in 1994. He testified 
that, as a Libyan citizen, he cannot get a visa to Libya on his U.S. passport, and can only 
use a Libyan passport to enter and exit Libya.3 In his interrogatory response, he said that 
obtaining a Libyan visa on his U.S. passport is “time consuming and a hussle [sic] that 
3 The Department of State’s report, “Libya: Country Specific Information” notes that the Libyan 
government requires dual nationals to enter and exit Libya on Libyan documents. (HE I) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
you have no time for in a family emergency.” He retains his foreign passport to visit 
family and to attend family funerals. He surrendered his Libyan passport to his Facility 
Security Officer (FSO) in about April 2009. He requested it be returned to him so he 
could travel to Libya in 2009, and he used it to enter and exit Libya. Following the trip, he 
returned it to his FSO. He requested it again in April 2010, so that he could renew it. The 
FSO complied, and the passport is now valid until April 2012. Applicant returned the 
passport to the FSO, who currently has possession of it.4 During his security interview in 
2009, Applicant stated that he would be willing to renounce his Libyan citizenship, if 
absolutely necessary for employment. At the hearing, however, he said he had stated in 
his interview that he would not renounce his Libyan citizenship. He testified that he 
keeps it as a convenience, and he would not renounce it because, “Basically it would cut 
me off from my loved ones.” (GE 2, 3; Tr. 44-55) 
 
 Applicant testified that in the early 1990s, several countries imposed sanctions on 
Libya and it became isolated. But the political climate changed in the mid-1990s. 
Applicant felt it was safer, and he wanted to visit his family whom he had not seen in 
years. He traveled to Libya nine times between 19945  and 2009, using his Libyan 
passport to enter and exit Libya. He “kept a low profile,” did not express his opinions, and 
“nobody bothered me.” Applicant traveled to Egypt for his sons’ weddings in 2002 and 
2006, and used his U.S. passport. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 56-57, 91, 96-97) 
 
Applicant's father passed away in 1968. He owned a gas station and a few 
commercial rental properties. Applicant's mother, also deceased, was a homemaker. His 
wife was born in Libya. She maintains her Libyan citizenship and is also a naturalized 
U.S. citizen. When Applicant lived in Libya, his wife taught Arabic in a private school. 
She resides in the United States, but spends several months per year in Libya. (GE 2; 
Tr. 67-70) 
 
Applicant has four children. His twin sons and youngest daughter were born in 
Libya, and are naturalized U.S. citizens. His oldest daughter, who is 38 years old, was 
born and grew up in the United States. In the 1990s, she worked for the United Nations. 
She now lives in Libya with her husband and their three children. She works for a private 
school. Her husband works in real estate and has never worked for the Libyan 
government. Applicant talks with his daughter almost daily by telephone. One of 
Applicant's twin sons also lives in Libya. He is a 36-year-old naturalized U.S. citizen. He 
was a contractor in the information technology field in the United States. He moved to 
Libya for business opportunities in 2007. He then moved to Egypt, his wife’s native 
country. He returned to Libya in 2010. Applicant talks with his son about three to four 
times per year. His youngest daughter, who lives in the United States, submitted a letter 
noting that Applicant “is strongly connected to his family roots back home.” None of 
4 The record does not indicate whether the FSO notified the appropriate authorities that he had returned 
the passport to Applicant’s possession in 2009 and 2010.  
 
5 The record is unclear about whether Applicant's 1994 trip to Libya occurred before or after he became a 
U.S. citizen in March 1994. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant's children has ever worked for the Libyan government or served in the Libyan 
military. (GE 2; AE C; Tr. 70-82) 
 
Applicant has one brother and four sisters who live in Libya. His 60-year-old 
brother owns a chain of bakeries with his wife. In the 1970s, he worked for a bank, which 
was nationalized by the Libyan government. Applicant talks with his brother once every 
two months. Two of Applicant's brothers-in-law worked for the Libyan government, one in 
a city job, and one in customs; they are both deceased. Another brother-in-law was a 
low- to mid-level officer in the Libyan military for approximately ten to twelve years. He is 
now 90 years old and is ill. The fourth brother-in-law owns a print shop. Applicant rarely 
talks with his brothers-in-law. None of his four sisters have worked for the government. 
He talks to one of his sisters every week or two, and to his other sisters approximately 
once every two to three months. (GE 2; Tr. 83-91) 
 
Applicant does not receive financial, educational, medical, or retirement benefits 
from Libya. He does not have bank accounts there. He purchased a condominium in 
Libya in about 1992, now valued at approximately $110,000. His sister lived in the condo 
until June 2010 and paid him about $360 per month. As of the hearing date, it was 
vacant. He intends to retire in Libya and live in the condo because his modest pension 
income will be insufficient to live comfortably in the United States, but it will provide a 
comfortable standard of living in Libya. (Tr. 58-65) Applicant owns a home in the United 
States, valued at approximately $330,000. He intends to keep the home. He expects to 
retire in three to four years. (GE 2; Tr. 65-67, 93, 105) 
 
During his 2009 security interview, Applicant said he has an emotional attachment 
to Libya. He reiterated at the hearing that, because his grandparents and parents come 
from Libya, his roots are there. He still sees it as his country. However, when discussing 
the United States, he stated, “My allegiance is to this country. No doubt about it.” (GE 2; 
Tr. 98-100) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
The Great Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya (Libya) 6 
 
Libya is an authoritarian regime that has been headed by Colonel Mu’ammar 
Qadhafi since he led a military coup in 1969. According to documents created by the 
U.S. Department of State, Libya does not have a constitution, and its governance stems 
from Colonel Qadhafi’s Green Book, which combines Islamic ideals, pan-Arabism, and 
socialism. After the coup, relations between the United States and Libya deteriorated 
because of its policy of supporting international terrorism and subverting moderate 
African and Arab governments. In 1979, the United States designated Libya a “state 
sponsor of terrorism.” It ended diplomatic relations, closed the Libyan embassy in 
6 The documents and summary related to Libya that Department Counsel submitted for Administrative 
Notice were created before the current political unrest in that country. However, these recent events 
would not have effected my decision in this case. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Washington in 1981, and imposed numerous sanctions. Some sanctions were later 
lifted, but certain export controls remain in place. Libya’s history of confrontational 
policies and terrorism led the United Nations to impose sanctions as well, which 
remained in place until Libya curtailed its support for international terrorism in 2003. 
Libya has taken steps to cooperate in the global war on terrorism. The United States 
rescinded its designation of “state sponsor of terrorism” in 2006. 
 
The Libyan government has a poor human rights record. According to the 
Department of State’s report on human rights practices, violations include arbitrary 
arrests, reported killings, denial of fair trial, and infringements on freedom of speech, 
assembly, and association. Political detainees are held incommunicado for unlimited 
periods. Prisoners are routinely tortured during interrogation. 
 
Although arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence is 
prohibited, the law is not respected. Security agencies routinely monitor telephone calls, 
internet use, and email communication with foreign countries. The Department of State 
warns U.S. citizens traveling in Libya to maintain a strong security posture. Security 
personnel may place foreign visitors under observation; monitor hotel rooms, 
telephones, and fax machines; and inspect personal possessions in hotel rooms. 
 
The Libyan government has an extensive security system that includes police, 
military units, and intelligence services. Security forces commit human rights abuses, 
intimidate and detain individuals without formal charges, and act with impunity. An 
extensive network of agents conducts surveillance for the government. According to the 
Department of State, the government threatened to seize and destroy property 
belonging to enemies of the people or those who cooperated with foreign powers, and 
exiled government opponents reported that authorities harassed their family members 
and threatened them with detention.  
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.7 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines B and C. 
 
7 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest8 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.9 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the government has a compelling interest in ensuring that each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.10 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern involving foreign preference arises when an individual acts 
in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, 
then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful 
to the interests of the United States. (AG ¶ 9) 
 
 Under AG ¶ 10, the following disqualifying conditions are relevant: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport;…; and 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
 Applicant is a dual citizen of Libya and the United States. Dual citizenship, in and 
of itself, is not disqualifying; nor is Applicant’s use of a Libyan passport before he 
became a U.S. citizen. However, conduct that constitutes an exercise of foreign 
8 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
10 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
citizenship, after becoming a U.S. citizen, is disqualifying. Applicant exercised the rights 
of a Libyan citizen by possessing a valid Libyan passport after becoming a U.S. citizen 
in 1994. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) applies.  
 
 Applicant also exercised his rights as a Libyan citizen by renewing his Libyan 
passport approximately every two years, even though he had become a U.S. citizen in 
1994. He again exercised his Libyan citizenship when he entered and exited Libya 
using his Libyan passport. Applicant used his foreign passport to travel in 1998, 2000, 
2002, 2004, 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009. Applicant's numerous trips on a foreign 
passport occurred after he became a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 10(b) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 11 contains factors that can mitigate disqualifying conditions. I have 
considered the six mitigating conditions, especially the following: 
 
 (b) The individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;  
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship occurred 
before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor; 
and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 The record contains conflicting testimony about Applicant's willingness to 
renounce his foreign citizenship. In his 2009 security interview, Applicant said he would 
renounce it if it was absolutely necessary to keep his employment. However, at the 
hearing, he testified that he had told the security investigator at the interview that he 
would not renounce it. He also testified that he would not renounce it because if he did, 
he would no longer be able to see his foreign family. AG ¶ 11(b) does not apply. 
 
One reason Applicant used his foreign passport to enter and exit Libya after 
becoming a U.S. citizen was because it was more convenient, given that it would be 
difficult and time-consuming to obtain a visa for travel to Libya on his U.S. passport. 
However, personal convenience does not constitute a mitigating factor when evaluating 
the negative security significance of use of a foreign passport. Applicant’s exercise of 
his Libyan citizenship by using his foreign passport occurred at least eight times since 
he attained U.S. citizenship in 1994. AG ¶ 11(c) cannot be applied.  
 
The object of AG ¶ 11(e) is to prevent use of a foreign passport while an 
applicant holds a security clearance. The listed methods to prevent use include 
destruction or surrender to the appropriate security authority. Here, Applicant appears to 
have complied with this requirement because he surrendered his Libyan passport to his 
FSO. However, the goal of the condition was not met, as the FSO allowed Applicant 
access to the foreign passport whenever he requested it. He allowed Applicant to have 
the passport in 2009 so that he could travel to Libya. He again gave the passport to 
 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant in 2010, so that Applicant could renew it. The record does not indicate that the 
FSO notified the appropriate authorities that Applicant had requested return of the 
foreign passport. Although Applicant surrendered his foreign passport, he could retrieve 
it whenever he wished, and thus had unrestricted use of the passport. His surrender did 
not accomplish the goal of the mitigating condition. Applicant receives only partial 
mitigation under AG ¶ 11(e). 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, and find that the 
following are relevant to the case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 The possession of family ties with a resident or citizen of a foreign country is not 
disqualifying under Guideline B, unless those ties create a conflict of interest or a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation. The country in question must be considered. 
Libyan security agencies routinely monitor telephone calls, internet use, and email 
communication with foreign countries; Applicant talks with his daughter in Libya by 
telephone almost daily. He has frequent contact with other family members, talking to 
his brother in Libya about once every two months, and to one of his sisters every week 
or two, and to his other sisters approximately once every two to three months.  
 
 His two older sisters are gravely ill, and he considers it important to be able to 
visit them or attend their funerals in Libya in the future. Moreover, Applicant testified that 
he has spoken against the regime in the past. According to the Department of State, 
government opponents have reported that authorities harassed their family members 
and threatened them with detention. Clearly, Applicant's ties and contacts with his 
foreign family, and the fact that they are in Libya, represent a heightened risk of foreign 
coercion, and a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) apply.  
 
 Applicant currently shares living quarters with his wife and two children, who are 
all dual U.S.-Libyan citizens. His wife stays in Libya a few months per year. Applicant’s 
testimony and the record evidence indicate that he has ties of affection and obligation to 
his Libyan family. Such ties represent a heightened risk of exploitation. Applicant also 
owns a condominium in Libya, valued at approximately $110,000. It is part of his future 
financial plan, as he intends to live there in retirement. It is a substantial foreign interest, 
representing one-third of the value of his U.S. home. AG ¶ 7(d) and (e) apply. 
 
 I have also considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline B, AG ¶ 8, 
especially the following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 Applicant could be placed in a position that could force him to choose between 
U.S. and foreign interests. He is bound by strong ties of affection to his son, daughter, 
and siblings who are citizens and residents of Libya, a country where human rights are 
violated, and the government intercepts telephone, electronic and email 
correspondence. Applicant's foreign relatives could be subject to coercion because the 
Libyan government has threatened to destroy property of those who cooperated with 
foreign powers, and authorities have harassed and threatened with detention the family 
members of exiled government opponents. AG ¶ 8(a) cannot be applied. 
 
  In evaluating mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b), I considered the extent of Applicant's 
U.S. ties, including his more than 40 years in the United States, his U.S. graduate 
education, the fact that one daughter was born in the United States, his years of 
working for U.S. defense contractors, and his home ownership. However, these facts 
must be weighed against Applicant’s close relationships with foreign nationals. He has 
been married to a Libyan citizen, who is now a dual citizen, since 1971. His four children 
remain Libyan citizens as well. He admits an emotional attachment to Libya, and has a 
substantial investment in a home there where he plans to retire. His frequent contacts 
and trips to visit his foreign family, and his decision not to do anything that would cut off 
his ties to them, all demonstrate that his contacts are not casual, and that he has strong 
ties of affection and obligation to them. His youngest daughter described him as 
“strongly connected to his family roots back home.” Given Applicant's ongoing and 
strong ties to Libyan citizens, I cannot confidently conclude he would resolve a conflict 
of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) and (c) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guidelines, I considered 
 
 
12 
 
 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
Applicant's foreign contacts raise security concerns. He maintains ongoing 
relationships with foreign citizens and dual nationals, including his wife, children, sisters, 
and brother. His attachment to his daughter in Libya is evident in their daily contact. His 
strong family ties are also obvious in his statements that he maintains a valid Libyan 
passport so that he can visit his family, and his travel to visit them at least eight times 
since becoming a U.S. citizen. His testimony that he would not renounce his citizenship 
because it would cut him off from his family indicates his strong ties to his foreign family. 
Applicant has an emotional attachment to Libya, where he was born and raised and 
where many of his close family members live. He maintains a property to live in when 
he retires there. Moreover, Applicant's son, daughter, and siblings live in a country that 
poses a heightened risk of exploitation. 
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the cited security 
concerns. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts 
raised under the guidelines for foreign influence and foreign preference. Such doubts 
must be resolved in favor of the Government. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraph 1.a.(1) – 1.a.(2) Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B    AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.f.  Against   Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
