                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
  ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 10-04503 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant has failed to 
mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Accordingly, his request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
  
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) dated January 16, 2009, to request a security clearance required as part of his 
employment with a defense contractor (Item 4). After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.1  
 
On October 15, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
(Items 1, 2) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 See Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Directive under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on November 5, 2010, and also requested a 
decision without a hearing (Item 3).  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations under 
Guideline B. DOHA Department Counsel forwarded to Applicant a file of relevant 
material (FORM)2 dated January 5, 2011, in support of the Government’s preliminary 
decision to deny Applicant's request for a security clearance. He received the FORM on 
February 4, 2011. He was given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to file a 
response. He submitted a reply dated February 5, 2011. The case was assigned to me 
on February 28, 2011, for a decision based on the written record. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
Sudan. The facts are summarized at pages 3 through 7 of the FORM, and supported by 
12 Government reports. The reports provide elaboration and context for the summary. 
The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge not 
subject to reasonable dispute, and are included in the Government reports. They are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, 
Government’s FORM, and Applicant's Reply to the FORM, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, 55 years old, was born in Sudan. In 1989, he married a Sudanese 
citizen. They have three children, who are 11, 17, and 21 years of age. Applicant 
worked as a translator in Saudi Arabia from 1981 to 1985. He then became an 
ophthalmic technician from 1985 to 2000. He immigrated to the United States on a 
student visa in 2000.3 He spent two years studying ophthalmology at a U.S. university, 
and received a certificate in 2002. He worked as an ophthalmic technician from 2002 to 
2008. In March 2008, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen. His U.S. passport 
was issued the same month. In October 2008, he accepted employment with a defense 
contractor, where he is currently a linguist for the U.S. military. (Items 4, 6) 
 
 In late 2004, Applicant traveled to Sudan to bring his wife and children to the 
United States. They came in 2005. His wife did not have Sudanese government 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included six documents (Items 1 - 6) proffered in 
support of the Government’s case. 
 
3  In 2001, Applicant requested political asylum. It was granted, but about that time, he also won the 
diversity visa lottery. His attorney advised him to accept the diversity visa. The record does not include 
information about the basis of Applicant's request for political asylum. (Item 6) 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
connections while in Sudan. Applicant's wife is a Sudanese citizen and a permanent 
U.S. resident. She is not employed outside the home. She expects to become a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in October 2011. Applicant's son is a Sudanese citizen and 
permanent U.S. resident. His other two children are naturalized U.S. citizens. All three 
children live in the United States. The record contains no evidence whether Applicant 
owns real property in the United States or in Sudan. (FORM Reply; Items 4, 5) 
 
 Applicant's mother is in her 70s, and is a citizen and resident of Sudan. She is a 
homemaker, and has no political affiliations or contact with the government. He last saw 
her in 2004 when he traveled to Sudan. In 2009, Applicant stated he contacts her once 
every two or three months. However, in 2010, he stated he contacts her once per year 
by telephone. He provides financial assistance to his mother, because of her health 
problems, by sending her $500 per year. Applicant's father is deceased. Other than his 
mother, Applicant does not provide financial support to his family. Applicant's family 
knows that he is a linguist for the U.S. military. (FORM Reply; Items 5, 6) 
 
 Applicant's father-in-law and brother-in-law are citizens and residents of Sudan. 
His mother-in-law passed away in 2010. He talks with his father-in-law once every two 
or three months, and his brother-in-law once per year. (FORM Reply; Item 6) 
 
 Applicant has six brothers4 and two sisters who are citizen-residents of Sudan. In 
his 2010 response to a DOHA interrogatory, he stated that his brothers and sisters do 
not have military experience, political affiliations, or contacts with the Sudanese 
government. He described all of his brothers as farmers and both of his sisters as 
housewives. All of them live in the same town. He last saw them in person when he 
visited Sudan in 2004. Applicant stated that he did not have contact information for any 
of his siblings. However, he also stated that he contacts each of them about once per 
year, except one sister, whom he contacts twice per year. In addition, this information 
conflicts with his statement in 2009, that he contacts three of his brothers about every 
month or two. (Items 5, 6) 
 
 Although Applicant stated that none of his siblings have military experience, one 
of Applicant's brothers was a soldier in the Sudan People’s Liberation Army from 
approximately 2004 to late 2009. In his security interview in January 2009, Applicant 
disclosed that his brother was a soldier. His brother left the army in late 2009 and 
returned to farming because the army was disbanded following a peace agreement 
between northern and southern Sudan. When Applicant completed his interrogatory 
response in August 2010, after his brother had returned home, he listed his brother’s 
occupation as farmer. (FORM Reply; Items 5, 6) 
 
 In his FORM Reply, Applicant explained the apparent inconsistency about how 
often he contacts his siblings. In early 2009, when he had his security interview, he had 
4 In his January 2009 security interview, Applicant stated he had seven brothers, but listed six. On his 
security clearance application, he listed five brothers. (Item 4; Item 6 at 10) 
 
 
4 
 
 
more frequent contact with some of his siblings because of their location, including his 
brother who was in the army. However, he stated, 
 
Though out [sic] the Liberation of south Sudan my brother in question and 
the rest of my family had to move to different villages making it difficult for 
them to be able to travel long distances to use the phone booth, because 
it is in the main village. Since the Liberation of South Sudan my family has 
been able to move back to the main village again so that I able [sic] to 
have more contact with them. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Sudan 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts about Sudan, which appear in 
official U.S. Government publications (see Items 1 – 12). 
 
In 1953 the United Kingdom and Egypt concluded an agreement that provided for 
self-government for Sudan. After a transitional period, Sudan became independent, but 
the country then experienced 17 years of civil war from 1955 to 1972. Soldiers mutinied 
in 1983 and civil war resumed. In 2005, a Comprehensive Peace Agreement was 
signed, establishing a new Government of National Unity and the Interim Government of 
Southern Sudan. The interim period allowed for the implementation of the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and elections at all levels. There has been progress, 
and elections were held in April 2010. However, major issues persist.  
 
A rebellion in the Darfur region resulted in the deaths of tens of thousands of 
persons and has led to an estimated two million internally displaced persons. The 
Sudanese Government is accused of being complicit in the bombing, murder, and rape 
of innocent displaced persons from Darfur.  
 
In 1993, the U.S. Secretary of State designated Sudan a state sponsor of 
terrorism. Sudan has been involved in counterterrorism operations against U.S. 
interests in Sudan. However, the government still supports Hamas, and continues to be 
designated a state sponsor of terrorism. Sudan is under a broad U.S. embargo with 
extensive trade restrictions on exports. President Clinton’s declaration in 1997 that 
Sudan presented an “unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and 
foreign policy of the United States” was reaffirmed by President Bush in 2006.  
 
Sudan’s human rights record is poor and numerous serious abuses occur, 
including extrajudicial and other unlawful killings by government forces; and torture, 
beatings, rape, and other cruel and inhumane treatment by security forces. There are 
arbitrary arrests and detentions; violence against women and ethnic minorities; 
executive interference with the judiciary and denial of due process; restrictions on 
citizens’ privacy; and restrictions on freedom of speech, press, assembly, religion, and 
movement. The U.S. State Department continues to warn against travel to Sudan. It 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
also has indicated that terrorists are known to operate in Sudan and seek opportunities 
to carry out attacks against U.S. interests. In addition, anti-American sentiment is 
prevalent and Americans are warned to exercise the utmost caution in Sudan. 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.5 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information.  
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, and find that the 
following are relevant: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 The mere possession of close family ties with a resident or citizen of a foreign 
country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one 
relative lives in a foreign country, and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts 
with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.9 
 
 The country in question also must be considered. In particular, the nature of its 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
9 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001). 
 
 
7 
 
 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant's family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. Sudan is a designated state sponsor of terrorism, and terrorists 
are known to operate there. It has a poor human rights record, engages in arbitrary 
arrests, and violates citizens’ privacy.  
 
 Applicant has ties of affection and obligation with his foreign family. He shares 
living quarters with his wife, who is a Sudanese citizen. He stays in touch with his 
mother, siblings, and in-laws in Sudan. He sends his mother money to help with her 
medical expenses. His relationship with his foreign family members creates a 
heightened risk of exploitation or coercion. Moreover, Applicant's ties of affection and 
obligation to his foreign family create a potential conflict of interest between his desire to 
protect them, if they were threatened or coerced by Sudanese authorities or terrorists, 
and the obligation he would have to protect classified information, were he to hold a 
security clearance. AG ¶ 7(a), (b), and (d) apply.  
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline B (AG ¶ 8), 
especially the following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 Applicant is bound by ties of affection and/or obligation to his mother, brothers, 
sisters, father-in-law and brother-in-law, citizens of a country that allows terrorist groups 
to operate within its borders, and violates the human and civil rights of its citizens. In 
light of such facts, Applicant could be placed in a position that could force him to choose 
between U.S. and foreign interests. AG ¶ 8(a) cannot be applied. 
 
  In evaluating mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b), I considered Applicant's ties to the 
United States, including his 11 years living here, his three years of U.S. citizenship, and 
his service to the U.S. government through employment with a defense contractor. 
However, Applicant's foreign ties must be evaluated as well. Applicant was born and 
raised in Sudan. He came to the United States when he was a mature man of 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
approximately 44 years of age. Other than his wife and children, Applicant has a large 
immediate family that continues to reside in Sudan. His has strong ties to his mother, 
demonstrated not only by his contacts with her, but by the fact that he sends her funds 
to help with her health expenses each year. I cannot confidently conclude, based on 
these facts, that Applicant would resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply.  
 
 Mitigation under AG ¶ 8(c) is also unavailable. Relationships with immediate 
family members are presumed to be close, unless the evidence demonstrates 
otherwise. Applicant is bound by ties of affection to his foreign family. He stays in touch 
with his family in Sudan as frequently as their situation allows. When they were not 
living in proximity to a telephone, he spoke with them once per year. But when they 
were in a location that allowed more frequent contact, he took the opportunity to do so, 
speaking  with some of them every month or two. Given the nature of Applicant's family 
ties, the risk of foreign influence cannot be ruled out.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence  
 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen for three years, and has provided service to the 
Government through his work with a defense contractor. However, numerous facts 
weigh against granting him a security clearance, including his ongoing relationships with 
his brother, sisters, and in-laws, and his close relationship with his mother, all Sudanese 
citizens. Concerns remain under Guideline B because of these ties to Sudan, a country 
that poses a heightened risk of exploitation. I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
Foreign Influence security concerns. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant's suitability 
for a security clearance. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in 
these determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the Government.10 
10 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
9 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.f.  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
