 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 10-00788 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Marc G. Laverdiere, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mary Vandall, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 20, 2009. 
On October 20, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on November 13, 2010; answered it on November 
24, 2010; denied all the allegations in the SOR; and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on November 29, 2010. Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel was ready to proceed on December 16, 2010, and the case was assigned to 
me on December 22, 2010. Applicant was timely notified of the time and place of the 
hearing, and I conducted it as scheduled on January 5, 2011. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through J, which were admitted without objection. 
I kept the record open until February 4, 2011, to enable Applicant to submit additional 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX K through P, which were admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX K through P are 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
January 28, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old security officer employed by a defense contractor. He 
has worked for his current employer since September 2009. He has never held a 
security clearance. 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 2002 and worked in several low-
paying jobs at various locations throughout the country. His SCA reflects that he was 
unemployed from April to September 2009, when he was hired by his current employer. 
He also was unemployed from June to August 2008 and January 2003 to June 2004. 
He had at least three jobs that were only part time. He was a part-time cashier from July 
2005 to February 2006, a part-time waiter and bartender from February 2007 to June 
2008, and a part-time cashier from August 2008 to December 2009. He testified that he 
was terminated from one job, which he could not identify, for missing too much work 
after he had the flu for a week but had no doctor’s note to prove it. (Tr. 38.) 
 
Applicant married in July 2003 and divorced in March 2006. He remarried in May 
2007 and divorced in February 2009. He married his current spouse in May 2009, and 
they are currently separated (Tr. 42.) He has a 7-year-old daughter from his first 
marriage, for whom he pays child support. He was 19 years old when his daughter was 
born and 22 years old when he was divorced. 
 
Applicant disclosed his child support arrearage and two other delinquent debts 
on his SCA. In an interview with a security investigator in December 2009, he 
acknowledged the debts, stated his intention to pay his child support by payroll 
deduction, and promised to resolve the other debts. (GX 2 at 3.) 
 
The SOR alleges four delinquent debts. The evidence concerning these debts is 
discussed below.  
 
Medical Bill for $1,812. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated he was 
unaware of this debt before receiving the SOR. This debt was not reflected on his credit 
reports dated November 3, 2009 or September 10, 2010, but it was reflected on his 
credit report dated October 5, 2010. (GX 3; GX 5; GX 6.) The debt was paid in full on 
November 24, 2010. (AX F.) 
 
3 
 
 
 
Cell Phone Bill for $407. Applicant told a security investigator that he stopped 
paying this bill in 2005 because he was being billed for services not provided. (GX 2 at 
3.) He did not provide any more details, nor did he document the basis for his dispute. 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated he had previously made payments of $237, 
and that he had paid the balance of $170 at the time of his answer. He attached a copy 
of a certified check for $170, and he submitted a copy of the same check at the hearing. 
(AX H.). After the hearing, he submitted copies of three personal checks issued before 
the date of the SOR and two personal checks issued after the date of the SOR. (AX K 
through P.) These checks, along with the check attached to his answer, show that the 
debt has been paid in full. At the hearing, he submitted a statement showing a zero 
balance on this account. (AX J.) 
 
Delinquent Child Support Payments Totaling $14,408. In his answer to the 
SOR, Applicant attributed the child support arrearage to his periods of unemployment. 
He testified that child support was deducted from his pay when he was working. (Tr. 30-
31.) He stated that he timely paid his child support payments and some of the arrearage 
after beginning his current job, and that all arrearages were paid as of the date of his 
answer to the SOR. He attached a copy of a certified check for $13,898.85. A copy of 
the same check was submitted at the hearing. (AX C.) At the hearing, he submitted a 
statement of his child support account, showing that $13,898.85 was the total amount 
due as of November 17, 2010. (AX D.) His pay voucher from his current employer 
reflects that $173.96 is being deducted from his pay every two weeks. (GX 4.) Records 
from the state child support enforcement office reflect the payments by payroll 
deduction. (AX E.) 
 
Telephone-Internet Bill for $479. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated he 
had made payments of $278.79, and that the balance was paid as of the date of his 
answer. His personal financial statement submitted to DOHA in September 2010 
reflected payments of $60 per month on this debt. At the hearing, he submitted a copy 
of a certified check for $200, dated November 24, 2010, and marked “Payment in Full.” 
(AX G.) 
 
Applicant submitted a letter from his grandfather, stating that his grandfather 
gave him a gift of the full amount due on all his delinquent debts, with no expectation of 
repayment. His grandfather expressed hope that Applicant would be able to obtain a 
security clearance if all his delinquent debts were satisfied. (AX A.) Applicant’s 
grandparents and mother accompanied him to the hearing but did not testify. 
 
 Applicant’s current net pay is about $1,280 per month, after deduction of 
payments for child support. In response to DOHA interrogatories, he submitted a 
personal financial statement reflecting the following expenses: rent ($525), groceries 
($250), utilities ($310), car expenses ($320), and miscellaneous expenses ($160). He 
noted that he shares living expenses with a roommate. Assuming that all expenses 
except the car expenses are shared equally, he should have a net monthly remainder of 
about $35. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
5 
 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to a security investigator in December 2009 and the credit 
reports submitted by Department Counsel establish two disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) 
(“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). Thus, the burden shifted to Applicant to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts established by his admissions and the 
evidence. 
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s debts were numerous, recent, and did 
not occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant became a father at age 19, and he 
incurred the obligation to pay child support at age 22. He encountered three periods of 
unemployment and three periods of underemployment. He has undergone multiple 
marital breakups, but there is no evidence that he incurred additional expenses as a 
result of them. He acted responsibly during his unemployment by looking for other jobs. 
 
6 
 
 
He paid his child support through payroll deduction whenever possible. I conclude that 
AG ¶ 20(b) is established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because there is no evidence that Applicant has 
sought or received counseling. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). An applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only 
establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement 
the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be 
paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 The evidence indicates that Applicant was aimlessly drifting from the time he 
graduated from high school until he found his current job. His current job is the first that 
offers him financial stability and an opportunity for advancement. After starting his 
current job, he initiated a payroll deduction to make his regular child-support payments, 
and he began making payments on the arrearage. Even before he received the SOR, 
he was making payments on two of the debts alleged in the SOR in addition to his child 
support. Before his generous grandparents stepped in, he was making good-faith efforts 
to resolve his debts in spite of his limited income. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) is 
established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
stopped paying the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b in 2005, because he thought he was 
being charged for services not received and was not receiving satisfactory responses 
from the service provider. He did not document the basis of the dispute. Thus, I 
conclude that AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is young and financially unsophisticated. Until he found his current job, 
he was aimlessly drifting through dead-end jobs and several marriages. He incurred his 
child-support obligation when he was only 22 years old, with limited earning potential. 
He has been candid about his financial past throughout the security clearance process. 
He was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He was accompanied to the 
hearing by his mother and his grandparents, demonstrating that he has strong family 
support. Thanks to the support of his family, he is no longer vulnerable to pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. The ultimate question is whether he will be financially 
responsible now that his grandparents have lifted him out of his financial quagmire. 
Based on his demeanor at the hearing, the efforts he took to address his debts after 
starting his current job and before his grandparents’ intervention, and the strong family 
support he enjoys, I am satisfied that he will continue to act responsibly and will not 
disappoint his very generous grandparents.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to decide close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
