                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 10-08875 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence, and Guideline C, Foreign Preference. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
On November 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B. On February 24, 2011, Department Counsel amended the SOR to include 
security concerns under Guideline C. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 20, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 13, 2011. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 2, 2011. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on February 24, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted into evidence. The Government 
requested administrative notice be taken of HE I. I granted the request. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf. He offered exhibits (AE) A through H, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. The record was held open until March 2, 2011 to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documents. They were marked as AE I and J, and 
admitted into evidence without objection.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
March 3, 2011.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding ¶¶ 2.a 
and 2.b, security concerns under Guideline C. Applicant did not object. He waived the 
notice requirement and requested to proceed with the hearing.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR. He admitted the allegations in 
the amended SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 27 years old. He was born in the Netherlands and immigrated with 
his parents and three brothers to the United States when he was 12 years old. He 
became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 2005. His parents continue to live in 
the United States as permanent residents. He has two brothers who are also 
naturalized citizens of the United States. Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree and a 
master’s degree in the United States. He stated he made a conscious decision that he 
wanted to devote his career to public service. 
 
 Applicant holds dual citizenship with the Netherlands. He has a Dutch passport 
that expired on March 1, 2005, and he has not renewed it. He last used his Dutch 
passport on May 6, 2004. He obtained a U.S. passport on February 4, 2005. He is 
willing to renounce his Dutch citizenship. Once he became a naturalized citizen of the 
United States, he never used his Dutch passport. He has not received any benefits from 
his Dutch citizenship since becoming a U.S. citizen. His grandparents live in the 
Netherlands and he anticipates visiting them in May 2011 to introduce his wife.3 He 
provided a statement which said: 
 
I have consistently and repeatedly stated that I am more than willing to 
surrender my Dutch citizenship and expired passport. I have noted 
1 Department Counsel had no objections to AE I and J. His memorandum was marked as HE II. 
 
2 Tr. 87-89, 132-134. 
 
3 Tr. 78-87, 89, 122-130.  
 
3 
 
 
previously that should my Dutch citizenship impose any obligations, I 
would not comply. I have in the past attempted to obtain instructions for 
surrendering my Dutch citizenship, but was unable to locate any useful 
information online. My Dutch language skills have significantly 
deteriorated due to disuse. I have long considered myself an American 
ever since my family emigrated to [State] in 1995 and long before being 
officially naturalized; I do not participate in the Dutch ex-pat community as 
I do not believe I share their identity; and I do not personally identify 
myself as “Dutch-American” or subscribe to any other hyphenated 
identity.4 
 
 Applicant married in February 2008. They have no children. His wife is a citizen 
of Taiwan and resides in the United States with Applicant. They met while attending 
graduate school in the United States. There were many foreign students who were in 
the same curriculum as they were. Applicant will sponsor his wife for United States 
citizenship when she is eligible. She will be eligible after she has been a permanent 
resident for three years, which is in about nine months. His wife was attending graduate 
school on a student visa, for about 18 to 20 months before they married. They 
graduated in May 2008, both earning master’s degrees in public policy. She would have 
had to return to Taiwan in December 2008, but because they married she was permitted 
to remain in the United States.5  
 
 Applicant’s wife has worked since September 2008 for a nongovernment 
organization (NGO) in the United States, whose purpose is to strengthen democracy 
around the world through private enterprise. It is funded by a national endowment. As 
part of her duties, she is required to travel to the People’s Republic of China (PRC) 
about once every year or two. Her contact with the PRC is with civil organizations that 
are think tanks, human rights organizations, and other NGOs. Prior to her present job, 
she was the assistant to the director of an NGO which fostered scholarly nonpartisan 
dialogue. She worked on issues that involved the PRC. Her earlier employment was as 
an intern where she worked as a bilingual translator for a U.S.-sanctioned radio station 
broadcasting pro-democracy information. Applicant’s wife has contact with citizens of 
the PRC through her job, which is involved with human rights groups and activists.6 
 
 Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Applicant’s wife 
has one sibling, a brother, who is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. He is engaged to be 
married. His fiancée works for a shipping company. They plan to marry in a year or two. 
Applicant indicated it is very likely his wife will attend the wedding, and he will also if he 
is able. Her brother completed his mandatory military service in the Taiwanese Coast 
Guard and remained because of the job opportunities. Applicant’s father-in-law retired 
from the Taiwanese Navy between five and ten years ago. His mother-in-law works in 
                                                          
4 AE I. 
 
5 Tr. 44, 49, 96-99, 110. 
 
6 Tr. 109-113; AE C, D. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
special education at a school. Applicant’s wife communicates with her parents about 
three times a week. She does not speak with her brother very frequently. Applicant 
speaks to his in-laws about six times a year on special occasions. He has limited 
language skills to communicate in their language. Applicant and his wife do not provide 
financial support for any of her relatives, although they may occasionally send gifts on 
special occasions.7 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law has a large family consisting of nine brothers and 
sisters, who live in Taiwan. Applicant’s wife has many cousins who live there. His 
mother-in-law is the youngest of the siblings. His wife does not speak with any of her 
mother’s family frequently, but may see some of them when she is visiting Taiwan. One 
of Applicant’s wife’s uncles works in the PRC. He and his wife live part-time in Taiwan 
and part-time in the PRC. Applicant believes he manages some type of factory. 
Applicant’s wife may have contact with them when she visits Taiwan or by telephone on 
special occasions. Applicant believes there may be another family member who 
manages a farm in Malaysia, but he is unsure.8  
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law’s extended family was split during the Chinese civil law. 
Applicant does not know how many siblings he had. His family moved to Taiwan during 
the civil war. Many years later, his father-in-law found distant relatives who still lived in 
the PRC and he may have had some contact with them, but Applicant is unsure who 
they are or what type of contact has been made. He believes that the relatives are from 
the father-in-law’s father’s first wife, so he may have half-brothers, sisters, and cousins.9  
 
Applicant and his wife traveled to Taiwan in January 2010, January 2008, and 
January 2007. In January 2007, Applicant went to Taiwan to ask his wife’s parents if he 
could marry their daughter. He was there for two weeks. In January 2008, he and his 
wife traveled together and also took a four-to-five day trip, as tourists, to the PRC. In 
2010, they went to Taiwan to visit his wife’s relatives. As part of their trip, they also went 
on a seven-day trip to coastal China as part of a longer trip to Asia. It was a vacation 
and allowed his wife to gain perspective for her professional responsibilities as the 
assistant program officer. Applicant accompanied her so they could visit the West Lake 
area which is a popular destination for couples. Applicant anticipates he and his wife will 
continue to travel to Taiwan in the future to visit her relatives. In 2006, he traveled with 
friends throughout Asia and their trip originated in Hong Kong, but did not visit mainland 
PRC. Applicant is interested in the PRC’s national parks so he visits them while there.10 
 
7 Tr. 50-54, 78, 99, 107-109. 
 
8 Tr. 100, 103-107. 
 
9 Tr. 100-103. 
 
10 Tr. 44-48, 65-67, 114-120; AE J. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 In 2005,11 Applicant visited the PRC. His college roommate was a citizen of the 
PRC at the time. This former roommate has since become a naturalized citizen of the 
United States. The roommate met Applicant at the airport in the PRC, along with 
another friend, who was Canadian. They stayed with the roommate at his home and 
met his parents. His parents are naturalized U.S. citizens, but return to the PRC and 
stay about eight months of the year. Applicant’s friend’s uncle, is a high-ranking 
government official. Through Applicant’s friend’s uncle, they received a tour of the Great 
Hall of the People in the PRC. Applicant never met the uncle. His former roommate now 
lives and is employed in the United States. Applicant took the trip because he was 
interested in seeing China.12 
 
 Applicant’s wife had contact with a PhD student from the PRC who was a 
translator. At one time, Applicant and his wife had contact with students from the PRC 
who were their classmates. They both studied in a program that had many international 
students. Applicant has minimal, if any, contact with most of them now, except to 
occasionally see what they are doing through Facebook. He has two former classmates 
that live in the PRC. In 2008, when he was in the PRC, he visited one friend while he 
was there and they had dinner. He believes he is employed by the local Chinese 
government. He has lost contact with the other friend. His wife maintains contact with a 
friend from the PRC. The contact may be about once every three months. She may use 
this person to assist her in validating information she uses in her job.13  
 
 Applicant’s wife may visit friends when she is in Taiwan. Applicant may 
accompany her when they all meet for dinner. He does not have friends in Taiwan 
independent of his wife. He would only see them if he was visiting Taiwan. Applicant’s 
wife maintains a bank account, that she has had for many years, in Taiwan for 
convenience. It has approximately $3,500. Applicant estimated their total assets in the 
United States to be about $100,000. He and his wife have purchased a home together 
and intend on staying in the United States to raise a family.14  
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from the program manager where he is 
employed. He started working for his employer initially through a prestigious fellowship 
program for outstanding graduates with master’s degrees, who wanted to pursue public 
service. It was only open to young professionals “with exceptional technical and 
research skills combined with strong leadership potential.” Applicant remained with the 
company and is considered one of the top performers. He has had access to 
procurement-sensitive and proprietary data and has followed the rules and guidelines to 
protect the information. He is viewed as one of his program manager’s most trusted 
11 SOR ¶ 1.i alleges the year 2008. The correct date is 2005. 
 
12 Tr. 45-48, 65, 67-76; AE J. 
 
13 Tr. 56-64, 76-77. 
 
14 Tr. 48, 54-56, 77-78. 91-93, 121-122. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
advisors. He has demonstrated strong moral character with the utmost integrity. His 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment have never been questioned.15  
 
 Applicant provided character letters about his wife from her employer. Her 
employer describes their work as promoting democracy around the world through 
market-oriented reform. Their organization receives some of its funding from the 
Department of State. She is responsible for handling the PRC portfolio, because of her 
comprehensive understanding of the PRC, and the associated obstacles and 
opportunities to free enterprise and political reform. She traveled to the PRC in August 
2010, with her supervisor, to enhance the situational awareness and gauge the 
effectiveness of the projects in promoting democracy and market-oriented reforms. She 
was steadfast and committed to accomplishing the important work of her organization.16 
 
 A past employer for Applicant’s wife also provided a character letter. She noted 
that Applicant’s wife helped initiate a number of funded projects in East Asia that 
effectively advanced democracy and market-oriented reform in China, Vietnam, and 
North Korea. She is committed to the work and has a tireless passion for advancing 
democracy and fostering civil society across the region. She is considered a 
tremendous asset to the NGO’s “bipartisan efforts to foster democratic institutions and 
‘support freedom around the world’ in support of American foreign policy objectives.”17 
 
Taiwan and PRC18 
 
 In 1949, Taiwan was populated by refugees fleeing a civil war in China. That 
same year, Communists in mainland China established the People’s Republic of China, 
and a separate, independent government was established in Taiwan. The PRC does 
not recognize Taiwan, and insists there is only “one China.” 
 
 Taiwan is a multi-part democracy. Through nearly five decades of hard work and 
sound economic management, Taiwan has transformed itself from an underdeveloped, 
agricultural island to an economic power that is a leading producer of high-technology 
goods. On January 1, 1979, the United States formally recognized the PRC as the sole 
legal government of China. The United States also announced that it would maintain 
cultural, commercial, and other unofficial relations with the people on Taiwan. The 
Taiwan Relations Act (TRA) signed into law on April 10, 1979, created the legal 
authority for the conduct of unofficial relations with Taiwan. The American Institute in 
Taiwan, a private nonprofit corporation with offices in Taiwan, is authorized to issue 
visas, accept passport applications, and provide assistance to U.S. citizens in Taiwan. A 
15 AE A. 
 
16 AE E. 
 
17 Id. 
 
18 HE I 
 
7 
 
 
counterpart organization was established by Taiwan. It has multiple offices in the United 
States. 
 
 Maintaining strong, unofficial relations with Taiwan is a major U.S. goal. The 
United States does not support Taiwan independence, but it does support Taiwan’s 
membership in appropriate international organizations such as the World Trade 
Organization (WTO), which it joined in 2002, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
(APEC) forum, and the Asian Development Bank. In addition, the United States 
supports appropriate opportunities for Taiwan’s voice to be heard in organizations 
where its membership is not possible. 
 
 The TRA enshrines the U.S. commitment to help Taiwan maintain its defensive 
capability. The United States continues to sell appropriate defensive military equipment 
to Taiwan, in accordance with the TRA.  
 
 President George W. Bush stated in 2003, that the United States is opposed to 
any attempt by either side to unilaterally alter the status quo in the Taiwan Strait. The 
United States insists on the peaceful resolution of cross-Strait differences and 
encourages dialogue to help advance such outcome.  
 
 Taiwan’s commercial ties with the United States have been maintained or 
enhanced since 1979. It enjoys Export-Import Bank financing, overseas private 
investment corporation guarantees, normal trade relations status, and ready access to 
U.S. markets.  
 
 Maintaining diplomatic relations with the PRC has been recognized to be in the 
long-term interests of the United States by seven consecutive administrations, however, 
maintaining strong, unofficial relations with Taiwan is also a major U.S. goal, in line with 
the desire to further peace and stability in Asia.  
 
 The PRC is a large and economically powerful country, with a population of over 
a billion people and an economy growing at about 10% per year. The PRC has an 
authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. The PRC has a 
poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses political dissent, and its practices 
include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners. 
 
 Both the PRC and Taiwan are known to be active collectors of U.S. economic 
intelligence. The PRC also maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
8 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
9 
 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and especially considered the following:  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or person, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a 
citizen and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. Applicant’s wife is a citizen of Taiwan. She 
resides with Applicant in the United States. She is a permanent resident of the United 
States and Applicant is sponsoring her for U.S. citizenship. She will meet the residency 
requirement in about nine months. Applicant’s parents-in-law, brother-in-law, and 
extended family are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Applicant’s wife has friends who 
are also citizens and residents of Taiwan. When he and his wife visit Taiwan, they see 
her family and friends. Applicant and his wife have acquaintances and casual friends 
who are residents and citizens of the PRC. The PRC and Taiwan are both known to be 
active collectors of U.S. economic intelligence. This creates a heightened risk of foreign 
 
10 
 
 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. It also creates a conflict 
of interest. Therefore, I find AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply. Applicant’s wife maintains 
a bank account in Taiwan for convenience with a balance of about $3,500. Applicant 
estimated that their assets in the United States were about $100,000. The bank account 
does not equate to a substantial business, financial, or property interest which could 
subject Applicant to a heightened risk of foreign influence. Therefore, I find AG ¶ 7(e) 
does not apply. 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 Applicant’s wife, parents-in-law, brother-in-law, extended family members, and 
friends are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Applicant and his wife visit her immediate 
family periodically, and she talks with them often. They both have less contact with her 
brother and limited contact with the extended family. However, they likely visit with them 
when they are in the country. Applicant anticipates future visits to Taiwan. He and his 
wife’s contact with her immediate family are frequent and more than casual. Their 
contact with the extended family is infrequent and not likely to create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. Both Applicant and his wife have acquaintances and casual 
friends from college that are from the PRC. Applicant and his wife have minimal contact 
with them and with his friend whose uncle arranged the tour of the Great Hall. That 
friend is now a resident and citizen of the United States. Applicant may occasionally see 
an update about his other friend in the PRC on Facebook. His wife has minimal contacts 
in the PRC with people she uses to help her with validating information for work. I find 
both Applicant and his wife’s PRC contacts are infrequent and casual and not likely to 
create a heightened risk. Therefore, AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply to her immediate family, 
but does apply to her extended family and to both Applicant’s and his wife’s contacts in 
the PRC.  
 
 
11 
 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that Applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the U.S., or there is a serious problem in the 
country with crime or terrorism.  
 
Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who is devoted to public service to his country. 
His wife is a permanent U.S. resident who is devoted to promoting a pro-democracy 
agenda through the NGO she works for. She will apply to become a U.S. citizen in a few 
months when she is eligible. Her family lives in Taiwan. Her father is retired from the 
Taiwanese Navy and her brother currently serves in the Taiwanese Coast Guard. 
Taiwan has a democratically elected government and maintains close relations with the 
United States. It collects U.S. intelligence, as do other U.S. allies. It does not have a 
poor human rights record and there is no indication that it uses coercion in its 
intelligence operations. I find it unlikely that Applicant or his wife would ever be placed in 
a position of having to choose between the interests of Taiwan or her family living there 
and the interests of the United States. Applicant identified with being American before 
he became a citizen. The ties to Taiwan through his wife do not create a conflict of 
interest because of Applicant’s deep and longstanding loyalties to America. Any issues 
can be expected to be resolved in favor of the United States. I find mitigating condition 
AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference is as follows: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern. I 
have considered the following are potentially applicable:  
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a 
foreign country; (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social 
welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country; (4) residence in a 
foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; (5) using foreign 
citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another country; 
and 
 
12 
 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11 to include: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;  
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor, and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Applicant emigrated with his family, when he was a boy, to the United States from 
the Netherlands. He became a U.S. citizen on February 4, 2005. He held a Dutch 
passport that expired on March 1, 2005. He did not renew the passport. I find none of 
the above disqualifying conditions apply. Applicant did not use his Dutch passport after 
becoming a U.S. citizen. It then expired. He researched how to formally renounce his 
Dutch citizenship and is willing to do so. He has not exercised any rights, privileges, or 
obligations of foreign citizenship since becoming a U.S. citizen. I find all of the above 
mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
13 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is devoted to his career in public service to his nation. His wife is a citizen of 
Taiwan. She has embraced the American culture and is working for an NGO in 
promoting democracy. She is a permanent resident of the United States and is waiting 
to fulfill the time requirements before she can become a citizen. Her family lives in 
Taiwan. Although Taiwan is an active collector of U.S. intelligence, there is no indication 
that it coerces its citizens. I have considered Applicant’s deep loyalties to the United 
States and conclude that he would resolve in favor of the United States any conflicts of 
interest that may arise. I find the nominal contacts Applicant and his wife have with 
acquaintances from the PRC do not rise to the level of a security concern. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the guidelines for Foreign Influence and Foreign 
Preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.p:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
