 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 10-00318 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Marc G. Laverdiere, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 28, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision 
to revoke his security clearance, citing security concerns under Guideline G. DOHA 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on November 1, 2010; answered it in an undated 
document; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on November 9, 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
November 30, 2010, and the case was assigned to me on December 22, 2010. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant was timely notified of the time and place of the hearing, and I conducted it as 
scheduled on January 5, 2011. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 9 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, 
and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A and B, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 26, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. Navy from 1997 to 2008, and he began working for his current employer 
shortly after his discharge from the Navy. He has held a security clearance since March 
1999.  
 
 Applicant began consuming alcohol in 1999, when he was 20 years old, drinking 
three or four beers on the weekend. From about 2001 to 2004, he consumed alcohol 
only once or twice a year, consuming one or two beers at a sitting. Starting in October 
2004, he began consuming about 10 beers every night (GX 2 at 7.) 
 
 In March 2005, Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol 
(DUI). He had a blood-alcohol level of .19%. In July 2005, he pleaded guilty and was 
sentenced to 12 months in jail (suspended), a $500 fine with $250 suspended, placed 
on probation for two years, and required to complete an Alcohol Safety Action Program 
(ASAP). His driver’s license was suspended for 12 months. In May 2005, he completed 
a 2-week alcohol education program administered by the Navy, consisting of outpatient 
education, group sessions, and individual sessions. He completed the court-ordered 
ASAP in July 2006. (GX 2 at 8; GX 3.) He abstained from consuming alcohol from 
March 2005 to July 2006 (GX 2 at 7.) 
 
 In January 2006, Applicant was cited for reckless driving for driving 75 miles per 
hours (mph) in a 55 mph zone. He was convicted of improper driving and fined $50, and 
he was required to attend an eight-hour driver improvement course. (GX 2 at 6; GX 4.) 
Alcohol was not involved in this incident. 
 
 In July 2006, Applicant began consuming two or three drinks at social occasions 
two or three times a month. In June 2008, he was arrested for DUI. He had a blood-
alcohol level of .18%. In January 2009, he was convicted and sentenced to four days in 
jail and a fine. He was ordered to perform 80 hours of community service. He completed 
his community service in June 2009 (GX 2 at 11; GX 5; GX 8; GX 9; AX A at 2.) In 
August 2009, his driving privileges were reinstated in the jurisdiction where this offense 
occurred, but his license will not be reinstated in the jurisdiction where he lives until 
January 2012. (AX A at 7-8; Tr. 63.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In October 2008, Applicant was arrested for DUI (2nd offense) and driving without 
a license. In January 2009 (the same month he was sentenced for the previous DUI), he 
was convicted of the DUI and sentenced to 365 days in jail (345 days suspended) and a 
$1,000 fine ($500 suspended). He was also convicted of driving without a license and 
sentenced to 30 days in jail (suspended), a $100 fine, and unsupervised probation for 
four years. He was ordered to complete ASAP and required to have an ignition interlock 
installed on his vehicle. His driver’s license was suspended for three years, but he was 
authorized to have a restricted license. (GX 6.) The court permitted Applicant to travel 
outside the continental United States on official business from October 20, 2008 to 
December 5, 2008. (GX 9; AX B at 7.)  
 
In February 2009, the court issued an order of interdiction, prohibiting the sale of 
alcoholic beverages to Applicant. The order of interdiction was reviewed on December 
1, 2010, and it was dismissed. (AX B at 5-6.) As of November 3, 2010, Applicant had 
completed the eight hours of required alcohol education, the victim impact panel, and a 
three-month substance abuse counseling program. He had attended all ASAP 
monitoring meetings, and he voluntarily attended weekly Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meetings. 
 
 Applicant did not receive a diagnosis or prognosis during any of his alcohol 
treatment programs. He has abstained from alcohol since his DUI arrest in October 
2008. He continues to attend AA meetings weekly. He undergoes blood-alcohol testing 
every three months. (Tr. 60-62.) He is involved in a serious relationship, and she knows 
about his past and supports him. He testified that he realizes that there can be no “next 
time,” because if he is arrested again for anything, his career and his life as he knows it 
will be over. (Tr. 63-65.)  
 
 Applicant’s manager since he was hired in August 2008 submitted a letter 
describing him as talented, hard working, dedicated, and dependable. The manager 
was familiar with his record of alcohol-related convictions and observed him complying 
with the conditions imposed by the court. He noted that Applicant has not let the 
restrictions imposed on him by the courts interfere with his job performance. He stated 
that Applicant frequently tries to educate his friends and coworkers about the 
devastating consequences of drinking and driving. He regards Applicant as honest, 
trustworthy, and loyal. (AX B at 11.) Applicant’s roommate and coworker has witnessed 
Applicant’s change of lifestyle and believes that he has become a stronger, more 
responsible person. (AX B at 12.) 
 
 Applicant’s immediate supervisor testified that he has known Applicant since he 
was hired. His first impression of Applicant was that he was more confident than most 
new hires. The witness soon found that Applicant was one of the company’s best 
engineers. He testified that Applicant has been honest and straightforward about his 
record of alcohol-related conduct. He has not seen Applicant consume alcohol, although 
he does not socialize with Applicant on weekends. (Tr. 32-35.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
5 
 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the 
point of intoxication, from approximately 1999 to “at least” October 2008 (¶ 1.a). It also 
alleges Applicant’s three DUI arrests in March 2005 (¶ 1.b), June 2008 (¶ 1.d), and 
October 2008 (¶ 1.e), and the convictions and sentences as described in the above 
findings of fact. Finally, it alleges that he completed a 10-day alcohol education program 
administered by the Navy in May 2005 (¶ 1.c). 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” The relevant disqualifying conditions are: AG ¶ 22(a) (“alcohol-related 
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or 
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent”), and 
AG ¶ 22(c) (“habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent”). The disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 22(d)-(f) are not applicable because 
there is no evidence of a diagnosis of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing and the 
documentary evidence of Applicant’s arrests, convictions, and sentences are sufficient 
to establish AG ¶¶ 22(a) and (c). Thus, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts established by his admissions and the evidence.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 23(a). Applicant had multiple 
episodes of alcohol-related misconduct and they did not occur under unusual 
circumstances that made them unlikely to recur. Thus, the issue is whether the first 
prong of this mitigating condition (“so much time has passed”) is established. This prong 
focuses on whether the alcohol-related conduct was recent. There are no Abright line@ 
rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a 
careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows Aa significant 
 
6 
 
 
period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative 
judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ 
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). 
 
 As of the date of the hearing, more than two years had passed since the October 
2008 DUI, and Applicant has abstained from alcohol since that date. He has served his 
jail time, completed all court-ordered counseling, paid his fines and court costs, and 
completed his community service. He attends AA meetings weekly and warns his 
friends and coworkers about the dangers of drinking and driving. He has matured and is 
involved in a serious relationship. He has established a reputation for candor, 
dependability, and trustworthiness at work. On the other hand, he will be on probation 
until January 2013, and his driving privileges will not be restored until January 2012. He 
has been under pressure to protect his security clearance and his job since his arrest in 
October 2008. After balancing these considerations and observing Applicant’s candor 
and sincerity at the hearing, I am satisfied that he will stay on his current path even 
when the pressures of his probation and the fear of losing his clearance and his job are 
removed. He knows there will be no “next time.” Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 23(a) is 
established. 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).” AG ¶ 23(b). Applicant has not 
been diagnosed as alcohol dependent, but he has acknowledged his past bad judgment 
and decided that he must abstain from consuming alcohol. For this reason and those in 
the above discussion of AG ¶ 23(a), I conclude that AG ¶ 23(b) is established. No other 
enumerated mitigating conditions under this guideline are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the Navy for about 11 years. He has held a 
security clearance since 1999. All his alcohol-related misconduct occurred while he was 
on active duty, and he is now living, working, and socializing in a different environment. 
He has earned a reputation as a devoted and valued employee. He was sincere, 
candid, and credible at the hearing. The strong endorsements of his supervisors were 
persuasive. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline G, 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to decide close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on his alcohol consumption. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
