                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05439 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On October 29, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 In an undated response to the SOR, Applicant elected to have her case decided 
on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on December 10, 2010. The FORM was mailed to Applicant and it was 
received on January 12, 2010. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to 
the FORM and did not submit additional material. The case was assigned to me on 
February 28, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.f. She denied 
the allegations in ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 1.h, and did not provide a response to the allegation in 
¶ 1.g. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. She graduated from high school in 2000. She attended 
college, but did not earn a degree. She is not married and has no children. She has 
been employed with her current employer since February 2010. She has been 
employed since 2001, except for the period from December 2004 to June 2005. She 
indicated she did not collect unemployment benefits during this period.  
 
 Applicant admits she owes the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($2,677), 1.b ($236), 
1.d ($3,552), and 1.f ($246). She indicated these are all medical debts that were not 
covered by her insurance and were incurred due to a surgery she had. Applicant did not 
provide information as to when she had surgery. She stated in her answer that she will 
be paying off these accounts and provided specific amounts for her upcoming 
payments. She did not include any evidence that she has communicated with the 
creditors to establish a repayment plan or evidence than any payments have been 
made.1  
 
 Applicant stated in her answer that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($151), 1.e ($852), 
and 1.f ($90) have been paid. Credit bureau reports list these debts as delinquent. She 
did not provide evidence to show she has paid the debts.2  
 
 Applicant did not admit or deny the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($1,500). She stated that 
she needed more information from the creditor. She did not provide evidence that she 
communicated with the creditor to obtain more information or to dispute the debt. This 
debt is listed as delinquent in the credit bureau report.3  
 
 Applicant explained in her interview with an Office of Personnel Management 
investigator that she experienced financial difficulties in 2004 following the death of her 
father. She stated she began to live outside her financial means at that time. She also 
experienced financial hardship in 2007 when she accepted a low-paying job because 
1 Item 4. 
 
2  Items 4, 8, 9. 
 
3 Id.  
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
she hoped it would offer her better opportunities, and then she was unable to pay her 
bills.4 No other evidence was provided regarding Applicant’s financial situation.  
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
4 Item 7. 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has eight delinquent debts totaling $9,277. She has not provided 
evidence to show the debts are paid or resolved. I find there is sufficient evidence to 
raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant indicated that she has paid some of the alleged debts, is paying others, 
and does not have enough information regarding one debt. She did not provide 
evidence of her actions regarding her delinquent debts. Therefore, there is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that her financial problems are resolved and under control, or that 
it is unlikely she will experience them again in the future. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant indicated that some of the debts were attributed to medical expenses 
that were not covered for surgery she had. She also indicated she had a period of 
unemployment and underemployment. These circumstances may have been beyond 
her control. However, without the details of the specific circumstances and information 
that she acted responsibly under those circumstances, I cannot apply AG ¶ 20(b). 
Applicant did not provide evidence of payments she may have made to creditors, or 
communications she may have had with creditors regarding payment plans. There is no 
evidence she received financial counseling or of changes she may have made to 
indicate the problem is being resolved, or is under control. Applicant did not provide 
documentation to substantiate the debt she disputes. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 
20(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 29 
years old. She began experiencing financial problems in 2004 after her father passed 
away and she was living beyond her means. She also had surgery and some of the 
medical payments were not covered by her insurance. Applicant indicated she paid 
some of her delinquent debts and has plans to pay the others, but she did not provide 
sufficient evidence to support her claim. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to meet her burden of persuasion and 
mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
