 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04093  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Dan Cron, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 29, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 22, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 23, 2010. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 11, 2011, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on February 2, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, 
 
2 
 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A 
through K, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted documents that were 
marked AE M through Q and admitted without objection. The correspondence about 
Applicant’s exhibits is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on February 10, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer for more than 11 years. She seeks to retain her security 
clearance, which she has held for most of her employment with the defense contractor. 
She attended college for a period but did not obtain a degree. She has been married for 
20 years. She has two children, ages 16 and 12.1 
  
 Applicant came from humble beginnings. Her parents dream for her was that she 
would some day become a secretary. Applicant had greater aspirations. Her husband 
enlisted in the Navy and served on active duty for eight years, including a deployment to 
Operation Desert Storm, before he was honorably discharged. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree. They both had good jobs and their finances were sound before he decided to 
explore a new area. Lured by the booming real estate market in their area and the 
number of television shows that depicted the profits to be made by buying and selling, 
known as “flipping,” properties, he invested in the real estate market. He would research 
an area and buy a house at a good price, usually through a foreclosure sale. He then 
renovated the property before placing it for sale. He bought his first house at about the 
end of 2005. He funded the expenses through credit cards and lines of credit, most of 
which he opened in his own name. On several of the accounts, without her knowledge, 
he listed his wife as an authorized user and the creditor would give him a higher line of 
credit.2 
 
 Applicant’s husband successfully sold the first six houses he purchased, within 
one to two weeks of placing them on the market. With the profits earned from the sales, 
he would pay the credit cards and lines of credit. By the time he had renovated and 
placed the seventh, and last, house for sale, the real estate market had started its 
decline before its collapse. The house was on the market for a year and did not sell. He 
used the credit cards and lines of credit to pay the mortgage. The interest rates and the 
balances on the accounts kept increasing to the point where he was unable to pay the 
accounts, and they became delinquent. He handled the family finances and paid their 
bills. Out of shame and fear, he kept the status of their finances from his wife. He 
attempted to keep current any of the accounts on which she was a joint holder, because 
he did not want collection companies contacting her.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 66-71; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 25-37, 41-43, 57, 61-63, 67-70, 73-74, 79; GE 4; AE A. 
 
3 Tr. at 31-43, 49-51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4. 
 
3 
 
 In December 2009, Applicant was completing her Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) for her periodic background investigation. Before she 
answered the financial questions, she went to her husband and asked him if their 
finances were in order. That is when he broke down and told her about the true state of 
their finances. After considerable anguish, they went through all their finances. She 
listed all their delinquent debts on her SF 86.4 
 
 Applicant and her husband consulted a bankruptcy attorney. He told them that 
because most of the debts were in his name that he could file bankruptcy individually. 
He also told them that in their state, joint debts would also be discharged in the 
bankruptcy. Applicant’s husband filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and his debts were 
discharged in June 2010. Applicant and her husband both took the financial counseling 
required for his bankruptcy.5  
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling about $170,000. The debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($45,644), 1.c ($38,429), 1.d (past-due $263), and 1.e ($36,917) were 
solely in Applicant’s husband’s name. She was only listed on the accounts as an 
authorized user. She has no legal responsibility for these debts. They were discharged 
in her husband’s bankruptcy.6   
 
 Applicant was determined to pay the debts that were in her name. In May 2010, 
she entered a payment agreement to pay a past-due debt. The debt, which had a 
balance of $13,990 when the agreement started, was paid in full by October 2010. She 
settled a $5,725 debt for $1,832 in May 2010. These two debts were not alleged in the 
SOR. She settled the $8,364 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f during or before January 2011.7 
 
 Based upon the advice of the bankruptcy attorney, Applicant and her husband 
believed the $40,497 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was discharged in his bankruptcy. This 
military credit union account was opened in the 1990s and remained without a 
significant balance for most of the time they had it. They both thought she was an 
authorized user on the account. After the hearing, they requested the credit union to 
investigate whether Applicant was a co-applicant on the account or an authorized user. 
The credit union researched their archives and determined that it is a joint account, with 
Applicant and her husband both on the application. Applicant has made payment 
arrangements with the credit union to pay the account. She paid $5,000 on March 7, 
2011, and another $5,000 on March 8, 2011. She has agreed to pay a minimum of 2% 
of the remaining balance every month until the debt is paid.8 
 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 41-42, 63, 74-75; GE 1, 4. 
 
5 Tr. at 51-54, 71; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5; AE C, D. 
 
6 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 72-73; GE 2, 3; AE E-G, J, K. 
 
8 Tr. at 43-47, 71-72; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE J, K, N-Q. 
 
4 
 
 After the bankruptcy, in order to get their finances back on track, Applicant’s 
husband accepted a good-paying job in another state. He earned more than $150,000 
last year. They have a large surplus each month that can be used to pay their remaining 
delinquent debt. Applicant and her husband both credibly testified that they will take the 
steps necessary to resolve the debt. Applicant’s husband never sold the seventh house. 
He has a tenant in the house on a contract to purchase the house by December 2012. 
They are now in a position where they can carry the mortgage until the house is sold. 
Applicant has become more involved in the family’s finances. Her husband does not 
intend to re-enter the real estate market after the seventh house is sold.9  
 
 Applicant is highly regarded by her employer. Her performance appraisals 
reflected excellent work. She has been recognized with a number of awards, including a 
recent global award, which is given to only 1% of the company. She submitted two 
character letters and two supervisors attested to her outstanding job performance, work 
ethic, reliability, judgment, trustworthiness, responsibility, and integrity.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
                                                          
9 Tr. at 55-60, 72-84; AE A, B. 
 
10 Tr. at 92-100; AE H, I, L, M. 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five financial considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant and her husband had good jobs and were financially secure before he 
decided to enter the real estate business and “flip” houses. He financed the purchases 
and renovations through credit cards and lines of credit. Six houses were successfully 
bought and sold. The real estate market collapsed, and he was unable to sell the 
seventh house. The actions of Applicant’s husband qualify as conditions that were 
outside her control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual 
act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant’s husband kept the dismal state of 
their finances from her until she submitted her SF 86 and asked him if their finances 
were in order. He admitted their problems, and they set out to rectify the situation. He 
declared bankruptcy, and all the debts that were solely in his name were discharged. 
They both obtained financial counseling.  
 
 Before the SOR was issued, Applicant started addressing the debts that were her 
responsibility. She paid or settled three debts, two of which were not alleged in the 
SOR. After the bankruptcy, he accepted a high-paying job in another state. They chose 
to live apart in order to be in a better position to rectify their financial problems. They 
both thought that a $40,497 debt to a military credit union was discharged in his 
bankruptcy. She mistakenly believed that she was only an “authorized user” on the 
account, and therefore not liable for the debt. She learned after the hearing that it is a 
joint account, and that they both signed the application papers for the account. She paid 
$10,000 to the credit union and agreed to pay the balance through monthly payments. 
Both Applicant and her husband were credible and sincere in their testimony that the 
debt will be paid, and they do not intend for this to happen again. They have a 
substantial surplus each month, and she is more involved in their finances.  
 
 In ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008), the Appeal Board 
discussed an applicant’s burden of proof under these mitigating factors: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
 
7 
 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2 
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and [has] taken significant actions to implement 
that plan.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 
2006). The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s 
financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which 
that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his [or her] outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
 I find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances and made a 
good-faith effort to pay or otherwise resolve the debts that were her responsibility. Her 
financial problems occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not 
cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I further find 
clear indications that her financial problems are being resolved and are under control. 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) are applicable.  
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e were solely in Applicant’s 
husband’s name. They were discharged in his bankruptcy. Applicant has no legal 
liability for those debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to those debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. Applicant and her 
husband have their finances back on track after his failed real estate ventures. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has mitigated financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
