 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-03203 
                                                            )                                                                                          
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on 
August 21, 2009. On December 16, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On January 12, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. He elected to have 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 8, 
2011. A Notice of Hearing, setting Applicant’s hearing for March 2, 2011, was issued 
February 16, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled to consider whether it is 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced five exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 5 and admitted to the record without objection. Applicant testified 
and called three witnesses. He did not introduce any exhibits.   
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until close of business on 
March 9, 2011, so that Applicant could, if he wished, provide additional information for 
the record. Applicant timely filed a letter containing additional information and six 
documents. Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s post-hearing submissions. 
I marked the seven post-hearing submissions as Applicant’s Ex. A through Ex. G, and 
they were admitted to the record. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on 
March 9, 2011. 
 
                                                       Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant admitted the four allegations and offered additional 
information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact. (SOR; Answer to 
SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 41 years old and employed by a government contractor as a security 
compliance principal leader. He has worked for his present employer for approximately 
ten years.1 His gross annual salary in 2010 was approximately $108,000. (Ex. 1; Ex. 3 
at 5; Tr. 70.) 
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1987 to 1999. He was 
first awarded a security clearance in 1988. During his military career, he received 
numerous medals and citations, including the Meritorious Service Medal, the Joint 
Service Commendation Medal, the Joint Service Achievement Medal, four good conduct 
medals, the National Defense Service Medal, and the Armed Forces Expeditionary 
Medal. Applicant received an honorable discharge in September 1999. (Ex. 1; Ex. B; Tr. 
64-65.) 
 
 Applicant has been married and divorced twice. One child was born to each of 
his marriages, and his two minor children live with their mothers. Applicant provides his 
former wives with $2,053 in child support each month.2 (Ex. 1; Ex. 3 at 5; Tr. 13-14, 30-
31, 35.)  
 
1 Applicant worked for his present employer from November 1999 to May 2003. He then left to work for 
another employer for about 18 months. He returned to his current employer in September 2004 and has 
worked for his current employer since that time. (Ex. 1.) 
  
2 Applicant pays $753 a month to his first ex-wife for the support of their 14-year-old daughter. He pays 
approximately $1,250 a month to his second ex-wife for the support of their three-year-old son. He also 
pays an additional $50 in child support arrearages to the second ex-wife each month, for a total of 
 
3 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
 Applicant and his first wife, a U.S. citizen, were married overseas. They divorced 
in 2004, after 14 years of marriage. Applicant married his second wife, who was not a 
U.S. citizen, in 2005. As a foreign citizen, Applicant’s second wife had no credit rating in 
the United States. Consequently, Applicant assumed financial responsibility for all 
purchases they made as a couple. In August 2007, Applicant’s second wife gave birth to 
their son. (Ex. 1; Tr. 25-26.) 
  
 Applicant and his second wife purchased a home together in February 2006. The 
home was secured by a first mortgage of $320,600. Applicant’s wife was on the deed to 
the home but not on the first mortgage. In 2008, Applicant and his wife acquired a 
second mortgage, also secured by the home, which they used to pay for home 
improvements. Applicant’s wife was a signatory to the second mortgage.3 In 2008, 
Applicant’s annual gross income was approximately $107,000; his wife’s annual gross 
income was approximately $75,000. The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.c. that Applicant owed a 
bank $35,363 on the second mortgage, which had been charged off as a delinquent 
debt.  The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.d. that the first mortgage was in foreclosure status, that 
the balance on the mortgage loan was $306,000, and that Applicant owed the lender 
$34,874 in past due payments on the mortgage loan. (SOR; Ex. 4 at 9; Ex. 5 at 2; Tr. 
31-32, 35-39, 63, 70.) 
 
 During their marriage, Applicant and his second wife informally agreed that she 
would pay each month for day care for their infant son, and she would make required 
monthly payments on their two automobiles. Applicant agreed to pay the mortgage on 
their home and their monthly telephone, electric, and cable charges.  (Tr. 50-51.) 
 
 In October 2009, when Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator 
from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management, he reported that in December 2008, he 
had separated from his second wife because she had a drinking problem and behaved 
aggressively, but would not seek help. In his January 2011 Answer to the SOR and in 
testimony at his hearing, Applicant stated he came home from a trip at Christmastime in 
2008 and found that his wife had abandoned their home, taking with her their 17-month-
old son, an automobile, and about half of their joint household goods. Applicant’s 
statements about his second wife’s abandonment of their home were corroborated by 
two witnesses: his first wife and his long-time colleague and friend, who is also his 
manager at work. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 2 at 4; Tr. 25, 77, 104.) 
 
 After his wife abandoned their home, Applicant tried for several days to contact 
her, but she would not respond. He was angry and upset. He feared his wife might 
leave the United States with their son. He informed his supervisors of the situation. He 
was unable to contact his wife for approximately one month. (Tr. 110-112.) 
 
 
approximately $1,300.  He is current on his child support payments to both ex-wives. (Ex. 3 at 5; Tr. 35, 
67.) 
  
3 In November 2008, Applicant and his wife listed the home for sale for $365,000. The property did not 
sell, and Applicant removed it from the market on July 1, 2009. (Ex. F.) 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
 In January 2009, Applicant’s wife appeared unexpectedly at their residence to 
pick up something, and she left after five minutes. A month later, the holder of 
Applicant’s wife’s car note called him to report that she was not making her monthly 
payments. Applicant was able to contact his wife. He asked her if she intended keep the 
vehicle. She advised him that she did not want to keep and pay for the vehicle. She 
asked that Applicant take possession of the vehicle. Applicant sought and obtained 
police permission to pick up his wife’s vehicle in another jurisdiction, and after taking 
possession, attempted to sell it. (Tr. 25-26.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife refused to pay any debts or financial obligations incurred during 
the marriage. Creditors began to contact Applicant for payment of debts that his wife 
had formerly agreed to pay. Applicant continued to pay the first and second mortgage 
debts for about nine months after his wife left the home. Thereafter, without his wife’s 
income, he was unable to pay the two mortgages, pay his wife’s and his financial 
obligations, and pay child support for his two children. His wife also refused to 
participate in Applicant’s attempts to refinance the two mortgages. Lacking sufficient 
funds to make the monthly mortgage payments, Applicant released the home to the 
holder of the first mortgage in October 2009. (Tr. 26-27, 32-36, 46-47.) 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he had not initiated contact with the 
mortgage lender since releasing the home in October 2009. He reported that he 
received some communications from the lender about the foreclosure status of the 
home. However, he did not know if the home had been sold through foreclosure.4 He 
stated that he would provide a letter from the lender indicating that he would not be 
liable for a deficiency if foreclosure does not resolve his indebtedness on the home. 
However, he failed to provide the letter in his post-hearing submissions.  (Tr. 36, 40-41, 
53-55.) 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant owed a $57 medical debt to an 
unspecified creditor.  The SOR alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. that Applicant owed a $608 
medical debt to an unspecified creditor. Both debts bear the same account number. In 
his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted both debts but stated he was unable to 
identify the creditors. At his hearing, he stated that he had checked with his former 
wives and neither was able to identify the debts or the creditors. The debts have not 
been paid. Applicant stated he would pay the debts if they were his. He has not filed 
written disputes of the debts with credit bureaus. Applicant reported that he had last 
received credit counseling in 2001.  (SOR; Answer to SOR; Tr. 55-60, 66.)   
 
  Applicant’s total net monthly income is $6,025. His monthly expenses total 
$5,861 and include the following: rent, $1560; groceries, $425; credit card payment, 
$160; utilities (cell phone, cable, and internet), $497; car expenses (includes insurance 
and gasoline), $350; car security, $18.95; medical expenses (medication), $40; child 
 
4 In a post-hearing submission, Applicant reported that on March 9, 2011, he had contacted the lender, 
who stated that the property was in “pre-foreclosure” status. He also provided a mortgage interest 
statement (Form 1098) from the lender showing that real estate taxes of $3,014 had been paid for tax 
year 2010. (Ex. A; Ex. B.)  
 
5 
 
 
                                           
support, $2,053; miscellaneous (includes bank card), $135; and car payment, $622.50.5  
Applicant’s monthly net remainder is $164. (Ex. 3 at 5; Tr. 68-69.) 
  
 Applicant’s three witnesses praised his character and strong work ethic. His 
former supervisor stated that Applicant was noted in his organization for his integrity 
and professionalism. He added, “I would trust him with my life.” Applicant’s first wife, 
who is also a co-worker, characterized Applicant as diligent, a hard worker, and a good 
care-giver to his children. (Tr. 76-102.) 
 
 Applicant’s performance appraisals for 2008, 2009, and 2010 rated his 
professional achievements as “highly effective” and “”superior.” He is a valued 
employee who is recognized for his outstanding technical and leadership skills. (Ex. C; 
Ex. D; Ex. E.)  
    
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
5 In March 2010, when the electrical system on his previous vehicle needed repairs of approximately 
three to four thousand dollars, Applicant traded the car and purchased a used 2006 Cadillac.  As of 
September 2010, he had made six of 60 required payments on the vehicle and owed a balance of 
$25,081. (Ex. 3 at 11; Tr. 45.) 
 
6 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes two conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
 
7 
 
 
may raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and 
was unable or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these 
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
The financial delinquencies alleged on the SOR are current and ongoing. 
Additionally, Applicant reports a monthly net remainder of $164, suggesting that he has 
few reserves in the event of a financial emergency. Under these circumstances, future 
financial delinquency could occur. Moreover, he has not received financial counseling 
since 2001, and there is no clear indication that his financial problems are being 
resolved or are under control. He has not initiated a good-faith effort to repay his 
creditors or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 
and 20(d) do not apply to the facts in this case. 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties appear to have begun in 2008 when his second 
wife abruptly abandoned their home and refused to pay debts that she and Applicant 
had acquired together in their marriage. When this happened, Applicant’s wife’s income 
of $75,000 a year was no longer available to help in the payment or refinancing of their 
two home mortgages. As a consequence, Applicant could not meet his mortgage 
payments on the house, and he was unable to sell the property because of the 
downturn in the housing market. Applicant relinquished the home to the mortgage 
lender in 2009, with the expectation that the property would go into foreclosure status. 
 
Applicant was directly affected by two unforeseen events beyond his control: his 
wife’s abandonment and the downturn in the real estate market. Applicant was unable 
to pay two mortgages on his home as well as monthly child support of approximately 
$2,053. These facts suggest that AG ¶ 20(b) might apply in mitigation. 
 
 
8 
 
 
It is important, however, to recognize that AG ¶ 20(b) has two parts: the 
identification of events beyond an individual’s control that could cause a failure to meet 
financial obligations and an examination of the individual’s subsequent actions to 
assess whether he or she acted responsibly when faced with an uncontrollable event 
that precluded meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant could do little about market conditions that prevented him and his 
second wife from selling their home in 2008. Additionally, Applicant could not take 
action to pay or refinance his mortgages without the cooperation of his estranged 
second wife. However, after relinquishing his home to the mortgage lender in October 
2009, Applicant failed to remain in contact with the creditors holding his first and second 
mortgages. He failed to provide documentation corroborating his statement that he 
would not owe a deficiency after his property was sold at foreclosure. At his hearing, he 
had no information about the current status of the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.d. 
 
To date, $34,874 remains unpaid and past due on Applicant’s first mortgage 
account, which totals $306,000. An additional $35,363 has been charged off on a 
second mortgage debt. Applicant learned after his hearing that his property is in pre-
foreclosure status. I conclude that Applicant’s failure to remain in contact with his 
creditors about the status and prospects for resolution of his mortgage loans was not 
responsible and that AG ¶ 20(b) applies only in part to the facts of his case.  
 
Applicant was also passive in determining the status of the two lesser debts 
alleged on the SOR. After being on notice since December 16, 2010, Applicant had not 
attempted to contact the creditors, nor had he written to the credit bureaus to challenge 
the legitimacy of the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b. As a result, they too remain 
unresolved. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole- person concept.         
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult of 41 
years. His employers and coworkers consider him to be an outstanding professional 
and of excellent character. They reported that he carries out his professional duties with 
energy and care. He has served his country with honor and distinction in the U.S. 
military. He was dealt a serious blow domestically when his wife abandoned his home, 
took their young son with her, and refused to pay debts that she and Applicant had 
incurred together during their marriage. 
 
Applicant has been steadily employed with his current employer for 
approximately ten years. His total net monthly income is $6,025. His net monthly 
expenses total $5,861. His net monthly remainder is $164.  
 
In 2010, despite owing considerable unresolved mortgage debt, he purchased an 
automobile and committed to 60 monthly payments of $622. His additional automobile-
related expenses are approximately $369, resulting in total automobile-related 
expenses each month of approximately $1,000. In spite of recent serious financial 
difficulties, he has not sought financial counseling since 2001. His lack of attention to his 
financial delinquencies continues to raise security concerns. Moreover, he lacks a 
realistic plan to satisfy his financial obligations, raising concerns about his judgment and 
potential financial vulnerability. 
 
Applicant may find it beneficial to seek professional financial counseling and legal 
advice about resolving his debts and acquiring financial stability in the near term. 
Applicant can reapply for a security clearance one year after the date that this decision 
becomes final. If he wishes, he can produce new evidence that addresses the 
Government’s current security concerns.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Accordingly, I 
conclude, after a careful review of the facts of his case, the financial considerations 
adjudicative guideline, and the whole-person analysis, that Applicant failed to mitigate 
the security concerns arising from his financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.d.:    Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
                                                  Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
______________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
