                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01648 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines K, 
Handling Protected Information, and Guideline M, Use of Information Technology 
Systems. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 10, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines K and M. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 22, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 13, 2011. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 9, 2011. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on March 1, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his 
own behalf, and offered Exhibits (AE) A through D. Department Counsel objected to AE 
A and D. His objections were overruled and AE A though D were admitted into 
evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 8, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c, and did not admit or 
deny the sole allegation in ¶ 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2002 and a master’s 
degree in 2004. He began working for his present employer in 2004, after he completed 
his master’s degree. He is not married and has no children. He was granted an interim 
secret security clearance in 2004 and, in 2005, he was granted a full clearance. 
 
 In December 2004, while holding an interim secret security clearance, Applicant 
performed a “trusted document download” program on an unclassified system and failed 
to accurately reference the security classification guide. He subsequently downloaded 
classified information he thought to be unclassified onto the company’s Wide Area 
Network (WAN).1  
 
 Applicant explained that he had only recently graduated from his master’s 
program and was new to the company. He explained that he had followed the proper 
procedures in using the “trusted download” program. The program is supposed to detect 
and black out any classified words contained in the document, so a redacted classified 
document can be downloaded onto an unclassified system. Applicant indicated that he 
spent a month referencing the security labels on the database and checked the data to 
ensure it did not include classified material. His coworkers assisted him in the process 
and agreed the information was cleansed. He went through the document line by line 
ensuring there was no classified information. He followed the prescribed protocol. He 
then emailed the data as an attachment and a team member looked at the data and 
pointed out that there was a combination of two words, that when juxtaposed, were 
considered classified. Each of the two words, when they stood alone, was not 
considered classified. The “trusted download” program did not detect the two words.2  
 
Applicant’s supervisor had discussions with five others to determine whether the 
words were classified. Three of those it was referred to were security officers, the fourth 
held a top secret security clearance, and the fifth was the program manager. After a day 
of discussions with others in the company, the supervisor deferred the decision to the 
program manager who ultimately chose to err on the side of caution and labeled the 
1 Tr. 37-39, 90-92. 
 
2 Tr. 37-45, 83-87; GE 6. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
words classified. In doing so, it was determined Applicant violated the rules of protecting 
classified information and received a written reprimand. Applicant stated that whoever 
classified the words did not note the distinction of using the words separately and 
together. He explained that it was not until an experienced person, who held a higher 
security clearance, reviewed the information, that the subtlety was noted. Applicant 
believed he took precautions and he complied with the rules. He had attended security 
training and asked people to review his work prior to transmitting the data electronically. 
Upon discovery, proper procedures were followed to cleanse and sanitize the affected 
hardware. The possibility that classified material was lost or unaccounted for could not 
be precluded. Applicant no longer performs “trusted downloads” on any system because 
he concluded it is not reliable. He advised others not to use it also. He no longer 
accepts an assignment that tasks him with sanitizing classified data so the document 
can be viewed on an unclassified system.3 
 
 On January 4, 2005, Applicant was the last person to leave a secure area where 
he worked. It was the responsibility of the last person in the space to follow proper 
security procedures before leaving. In addition to ensuring all computers were turned off 
and documents were secure, the last person was required to make a log entry stating 
the time he or she left, and verify the spaces were secure. It also required that the last 
person remaining secure the lock by spinning it to make sure it was locked properly. 
Applicant was the last person to leave and failed to spin the lock because he became 
distracted by a telephone call prior to leaving. It was determined that the space was 
unlocked for approximately 18-20 minutes before the security guards noted the 
discrepancy. Applicant admitted he failed to spin the lock. The space is a secure room 
that requires three security procedures to enter. First, an employee must swipe their 
badge. Second, the employee enters a personal security code into a phone pad. Third, 
the employee opens the door using the combination lock. Throughout the day, the door 
does not require the lock to be spun, but at night the last person needs to secure the 
lock. Because others had also failed to adhere to the specific requirements to secure 
the spaces, new procedures were implemented that required at least two people to 
jointly secure the spaces at night.4 
 
 Applicant was reminded after the incident how to properly secure the lock and of 
his responsibility to properly protect classified information and exit closing procedures. 
He was also required to attend a Closed Area Briefing. It was determined that a 
compromise of classified information did not occur. Because this was a second security 
infraction within a year, Applicant was suspended from work for five days without pay.5  
 
 In August 2009, as part of his work responsibilities, Applicant provided detailed 
feedback to a deployed technology group that develops the technology used by his 
company. The deployed technology group had a higher level of classification than 
3 Tr. 37-45; GE 2, 6; Answer to SOR.  
 
4 Tr. 45-51, 65-68; GE 2, 6; Answer to SOR. 
 
5 Tr. 51; GE 7; Answer to SOR.  
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant. He gave them feedback on a “mechanism” through the unclassified email 
system. Applicant explained that because the “mechanism” was “obvious and visible” he 
did not believe mentioning the “mechanism” was classified. The “mechanism” is in the 
classification guide and it is classified. Applicant stated he spoke with his coworkers 
before he sent the email using the “mechanism” name. The security investigation 
determined that classified information was transmitted over unsecured networks and it 
must be assumed that a compromise of the classified information occurred. It 
determined that Applicant’s interpretation of the “mechanism” being “obvious and 
visible” was broader than it should have been. Applicant did not believe he was 
transmitting classified information. A supervisor with a top secret security clearance, 
who worked on special access programs, determined Applicant made an incorrect 
interpretation. Applicant was cited for a security violation and given a written reprimand. 
The investigation determined that Applicant’s conduct was not deliberate.6  
 
 Applicant acknowledged his mistakes and takes the matters very seriously. He 
has become a champion of following all security rules and regulations. After the first 
incident he took a refresher course in handling classified information. He also read 
classification guides and other guidance on computer-related classifications. As a lead 
engineer, he repeatedly reinforces to his subordinates the importance of absolute 
compliance. He has implemented new procedures to correct flaws he observed in the 
security system. He has drastically curtailed providing detailed feedback on unclassified 
systems, which was the cause of the last incident. This has slowed down technical 
development because he now uses a classified system for his feedback. Applicant has 
participated in additional operational security training. He emphasizes the importance of 
security everyday and has talked to his coworkers about the violations he committed 
and the importance of adhering to all the rules. He recommends they always have two 
people review their work before sending information out on an unclassified system.7  
 
 Applicant provided character letters from coworkers. They attest to his attention 
to detail, dependability, resourcefulness, and good attitude. His technical skills are 
unmatched, and he is a mentor to new engineers. One letter mentions that Applicant 
has taken additional classes and read material to ensure he adheres to Operational 
Security and Classification Requirements. Applicant received an award for his 
substantial contributions to the company’s goals. A coworker explained how Applicant 
has used his own security problems to warn others to be diligent and of the hazards that 
can arise in a secure environment. He is known to take extra precautions to ensure all 
security rules and regulations are adhered to. He is considered an honest man with 
integrity.8  
 
 
 
6 Tr. 51-63, 68-83, 87-90; GE 2, 8; Answer to SOR. 
 
7 Tr. 92-101. 
 
8 Tr. 63-64; AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handing Protected Information 
 
AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information;  
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern.  
 
AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable.  
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, or other information on any unapproved 
equipment including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or 
computer hardware, software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, 
“palm” or pocket device or other adjunct equipment; 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; and 
 
(h) negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by 
management. 
 
Applicant committed security violations in 2004, 2005, and 2009. He received a 
written reprimand in 2004. He was suspended without pay in 2005 and attended 
additional training. In 2009, he received a written reprimand. I find the above 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from handing protected information. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 35: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and  
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant was new at his job in 2004. He took all necessary precautions when he 
used a “trusted download” program to cleanse a classified document. He followed the 
proscribed protocol. He asked his coworkers to assist him in the process and confirm it 
was cleansed. It was only later, when a more experienced supervisor scrutinized the 
document and sought advice from others, that it was determined the document had two 
words that were unclassified when used separately, but classified when they were 
juxtaposed. Applicant was reprimanded for his actions.  
 
Applicant admitted that in 2005 he failed to spin the lock to secure the spaces 
where he worked. A new two-person procedure has been implemented to prevent 
recurrence. In 2009, Applicant believed he was acting properly when he referred to a 
“mechanism” on an unsecure network. He asked for guidance from his coworkers 
before using the term. The term was included in the classification guide.  
 
Although Applicant committed security violations in 2004 and 2009, they appear 
to be the result of improper or inadequate training. He asked for assistance, sought 
guidance, scrutinized the protocol and documents, but ultimately he was held 
accountable when it was later determined that his analysis was wrong. I find AG ¶ 35(c) 
applies.  
 
The violation that occurred in 2005 was due to Applicant’s negligence when he 
became distracted and failed to secure the office properly. Because this was a recurring 
problem in the office a new procedure was implemented. Applicant acknowledges his 
mistakes. He has become a champion of following all security rules and regulations. As 
a lead engineer, he repeatedly reinforces to his subordinates the importance of absolute 
compliance. He has implemented new procedures to correct flaws he observed in the 
security system. He has drastically curtailed providing detailed feedback on unclassified 
systems, which was the cause of the last incident. He has participated in additional 
operational security training. He emphasizes the importance of security everyday and 
has talked to his coworkers about the violations he committed and the importance of 
adhering to all the rules. He recommends they always have two people review their 
work before sending information out on an unclassified system. I find the 2004 and 2009 
incidences happened under unusual circumstances. I find with Applicant’s renewed 
commitment to security awareness that future incidences are unlikely to recur.  
 
I also find with regard to all three violations that they do not cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. He has responded 
favorably to counseling and security training and now demonstrates a positive attitude 
toward the discharge of his security responsibilities. I have considered that Applicant 
was attempting to do the right thing in 2004 and took precautions to ensure he was 
acting correctly. Again in 2009, he believed he was acting appropriately and was taking 
precautions. Unfortunately, he was wrong. He has since changed the way he conducts 
himself and has reinforced his commitment to properly handling classified information. 
The 2005 violation was the only one that was due to his negligence. I find AG ¶¶ 35(a) 
and 35(b) apply.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems:  
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliably and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information.  
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have especially considered the following: 
(d) downloading, storing, or transmitting classified information on or to any 
unauthorized software, hardware, or information technology system; and 
(g) negligence or lax security habits in handling information technology 
that persists despite counseling by management. 
Applicant committed two security violations involving information technology from 
2004 to 2009, as detailed above. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 and especially 
considered the following:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and  
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor.  
 
The same analysis as discussed above applies to this guideline. The violations 
committed by Applicant in 2004 and 2009 can be attributed to his inexperience. Despite 
his effort to comply with the rules, his analysis was wrong. As detailed above, he has 
 
9 
 
 
committed himself to a new level of security awareness. I find AG ¶¶ 41(a) and 41(c) 
apply. I find there in insufficient evidence to find AG ¶ 41(b) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines K and M in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a well respected employee. He is considered a hard worker and a 
person of integrity. He committed three security violations in six years, the last occurring 
in 2009. Despite his efforts to do things correctly, he made errors. Applicant has 
committed himself to ensure he is cautious and complies with all security rules and 
regulations. I believe Applicant was acting in good faith and relied on the assistance and 
advice of others in 2004 and 2009. I do not believe Applicant is a security risk. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
successfully mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline K, Handling 
Protected Information and Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph  2.a:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
