 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00291 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
March 28, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Personal Conduct security concerns related to his 
falsification surrounding his drug use and his use of marijuana while possessing a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 27, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 19, 2010, and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On November 8, 2010, Department Counsel requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge in the instant matter pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.7. The 
case was assigned to me on November 9, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
 
2 
 
November 9, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 15, 
2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GEs) 1 through 6, which were admitted without 
objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AEs) A through E, which were admitted 
without objection, and testified on his own behalf. The record was left open until January 
3, 2011, for the Applicant to submit additional documentation, however, nothing further 
was submitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 28, 
2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a. through 1.e. He denies allegation 1.f. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
  
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor since 2003. He also 
worked for another government contractor from 1986 through 2002. He is married and 
has two children. Since his marriage in 2003, he has become a Born-Again Christian. 
(GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 5, 31-33, 56-58.) 
 
 The details surrounding Applicant’s drug use are inconsistent and confusing. 
Applicant admits he first used illegal substances in approximately 1986 or 1987. In the 
late 1980s, he used marijuana “off and on” every two months and tried cocaine on one 
occasion in approximately 1989. In his early testimony, he indicated that his marijuana 
use continued recreationally through approximately 1999 or possibly even 2000. 
However, he later changed his testimony to indicate he ceased his recreational use of 
marijuana in 1989. Applicant was employed with a government contractor from 1986-
2002 and received a security clearance in 2000. He claimed that he did not use 
marijuana while possessing a security clearance. When he was laid-off from his position 
with that contractor in 2002, he resumed using marijuana for five to seven days. His 
most recent marijuana use was in approximately August 2004, at a party, (although he 
later testified the party was in 2003). He admitted he used marijuana in August 2004, 
after the grant of his clearance in July 2004, in his answer (SOR ¶ 1.b). At hearing, he 
denied this allegation. He testified that his last use was in 2003 at a party. He indicated 
that he was so intoxicated at the party that he did not recall using marijuana. In 2004 or 
2005, after learning from a friend that he had used marijuana at the party, he self 
reported the incident to his facility security officer (FSO). In 2005, his access to 
Sensitive Compartmentalized Information (SCI) was revoked by another government 
agency due to his use of illegal drugs and related personal conduct (SOR ¶ 1.c). 
(Answer; GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; AE C; Tr. 32-64.) 
 
 The SOR alleges (SOR ¶ 1.a.), and the Applicant admits that on his March 9, 
2004, security clearance application, he intentionally falsified question 27, which asked 
“Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used 
any controlled substances, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, 
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants 
(barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.) hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc), or 
prescription drugs?” Applicant answered this question, “No,” because he thought it 
 
3 
 
would interfere with his employment. In truth, Applicant admits he used marijuana in the 
seven years prior to the application and should have answered this question, “Yes.” In 
his own words he “lied on Form 86.” (Answer; GE 1; GE 5; AE C; Tr. 36-39.) 
 
 Applicant also admitted that he falsified his May 30, 2007, security clearance 
application (SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e.). Section 24.a. of the application asked: “Since the age 
of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled 
substances, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, 
morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, 
methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.) hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc), or prescription 
drugs?” This time, Applicant answered, “Yes,” but indicated in April 1999 he used 
marijuana one time. Further, Section 24.c. of the application asked “Have you ever 
illegally used a controlled substance while employed as a law enforcement officer, 
prosecutor, or courtroom official; while possessing a security clearance; or while in a 
position directly and immediately affecting the public safety?” and Applicant answered, 
“No.” He failed to disclose that he had used marijuana in 2004, after his security 
clearance was granted by another government agency. At hearing, Applicant admitted 
he intentionally omitted his more recent marijuana use because he did not want it to 
affect his security clearance. However, he was unwilling to admit that he used marijuana 
in 2004, despite his past admissions. (Answer; GE 2; GE 5; AE C; Tr. 41.) 
 
 In October 2009, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Department of Defense. During that interview, Applicant indicated his only drug use was 
in 2003 at a party. Applicant asserted both in his answer and in his testimony that he 
believed the investigator’s questions about his drug use were focused solely on the 
party and did not concern other occasions he used drugs. He did not disclose to the 
investigator that he used marijuana between 1986 and 2004 or that he used cocaine in 
approximately 1989 (SOR ¶ 1.f.). (Answer; GE 3; AE A; AE B; AE C; Tr. 32-33, 45-46.)  
 
 Further, in interrogatories propounded to the Applicant by the Department of 
Defense, Applicant indicated that his last use of marijuana was in 2003. However, the 
letter that advised Applicant his program access had been revoked indicated that 
Applicant admitted his last use of marijuana was in August 2004. Thus, Applicant was 
not fully forthcoming with the information regarding his marijuana use in his answers to 
the interrogatories (SOR allegation 1.g.). (GE 4; GE 5; Tr. 43-46.) 
 
 Applicant presented his two most recent performance evaluations. They 
demonstrate that Applicant is outstanding, exceeds, or meets performance 
requirements in all of the criteria used to assess his work performance. (AE D; AE E.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
5 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another country, 
engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that 
country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group.  
 
 Applicant admits to the falsification of his 2004 and 2007 security clearance 
applications. The Government also presented sufficient information to establish that 
Applicant falsified information regarding his marijuana use in his 2009 interview with an 
authorized investigator of the DoD and in his 2010 answers to interrogatories. It is clear 
from Applicant’s admissions that he did in fact use marijuana, with varying frequency 
from 1986 through 2004. His choice to engage in the illegal use of marijuana in August 
2004, after he had been granted a security clearance in July 2004, is personal conduct 
that could affect Applicant’s professional or community standing and displays 
questionable judgment. His explanation that he stopped using marijuana in 2003 is self 
serving, and inconsistent with his admissions and the letter from the other government 
agency that revoked his SCI clearance. The Government has established sufficient 
concern under AG ¶ 16(a), 16(b) and 16(e) to disqualify Applicant from possessing a 
clearance.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
6 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant's falsification is unmitigated. Falsification of information provided to the 
Government cannot be considered minor. Although in 2005, Applicant self reported his 
marijuana use in 2004, the record contains no evidence that he sought to correct the 
falsification promptly or that he sought to correct his many other falsifications. Further, 
even after his disclosure, he continued to provide false information to the government 
regarding the full extent of his past drug use. Instead of coming forward with the 
investigator in October 2009, he chose to blatantly deny any other drug use. Further, he 
falsified information in his interrogatories in 2010 with respect to the date of his last use 
of marijuana. His conduct reflects negatively on his trustworthiness and good judgment. 
Moreover, his decision to use marijuana, a substance that is illegal, while possessing a 
security clearance, indicates that Applicant lacks the judgment to possess a clearance. 
He has not shown sufficient steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation. AG 
¶¶ 17(a), 17(c), and 17(e) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant has performed successfully at work, receiving good ratings. He is now 
a Born-Again Christian and did self-report one instance of marijuana use to his FSO. 
However, Applicant used marijuana continuously between 1986 and 1999. He used 
 
7 
 
marijuana in 2002, after being laid off by his employer. He chose to use it again in 2004, 
after becoming so intoxicated that he does not even recall he used marijuana, even 
though he had been granted a security clearance in 2004 and he was aware that drug 
use was a security concern. Then he chose to hide the full extent of his drug use from 
the Government for several years. His conduct indicates a lack of judgment and 
trustworthiness, and raises doubts as to whether he understands what is required of 
those who hold security clearances. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
