 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10541 
                                                            )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on May 2, 2008. On April 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On May 20, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 9, 2009. 
 
2 
 
 
I convened a hearing on July 13, 2009, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
Government called no witnesses and introduced four exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 
through 4 and admitted to the record without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf.  He introduced no exhibits and called no witnesses.  
 
 At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open for one week, until close of 
business July 20, 2009, so that Applicant could provide additional information for the 
record.  Applicant timely filed one exhibit for the record, which I marked as Ex. A, and 
admitted to the record, without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the 
hearing on July 17, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 11 allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.k.) In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
nine of the allegations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.i.); he denied two allegations (¶¶ 1.j. and 1.k.).  
Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 32-41.)  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and employed as a physical security specialist by a 
government contractor. Since 1998, he has been continuously employed in security 
work and has worked for three different employers. When he took his current job in 
2008, Applicant accepted pay that was slightly lower than what he had earned in his 
previous job because he wanted to work in a new area of security and develop new 
skills. (Ex. 1; Tr. 24-27.)   
 
 Applicant, who is married, is the father of two children. He and his wife are the 
parents of a five-year-old son. Applicant is also the father of a 14-year-old son who does 
not live in his household. Applicant pays child support of $352 a month to the mother of 
his 14-year-old son. (Tr. 47, 49.) 
 
 In 1999, Applicant’s father died. Applicant paid his father’s debts, and, in doing 
so, failed to pay his own debts. He became financially overextended. In 2003, Applicant 
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy; he identified debts of $9,900 and assets of about $1,500. 
The bankruptcy court discharged his debts in December 2003. (SOR ¶ 1.a.; Answer to 
SOR; Tr. 27-29.) 
 
 In 2004 or 2005, Applicant and his wife separated, and, in 2005 or 2006, 
Applicant purchased a home with another woman. Applicant and the woman moved into 
the home and were jointly responsible for two mortgages placed on the property. The 
two mortgages totaled approximately $300,000. Applicant and the woman lived in the 
home together for about three months. Then, they ended their relationship, Applicant 
moved out of the home, and he had no further contact with the woman. The mortgages 
were not paid, and the property went into foreclosure. Applicant made no effort to 
contact the mortgage lenders to arrange payment or to discuss forbearance. (SOR ¶¶ 
1.f. and 1.g.; Tr. 29-34, 51-52.) 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant resumed his relationship with his wife, and he continued to experience 
financial difficulties. In addition to the two unpaid mortgages, Applicant admitted the 
following debts in collection status: a cell phone debt of $981 (SOR ¶ 1.b.); a debt of 
$3,107 to a creditor he could no longer identify (SOR ¶ 1.d.); a debt of $981 to a 
collection agency (SOR ¶ 1.h.);1 and an unpaid account of $11,981 (SOR ¶ 1.i.). He had 
neither responded to nor contacted these creditors, and he had made no payments on 
the debts. (Tr. 34-41.) 
 
 Applicant also admitted the following debts in charged-off status: charges of 
$1,026 for bad checks written to a bank account (SOR ¶ 1.c.) and $11,911 owed to a 
creditor for failure to timely pay an automobile loan (SOR ¶ 1.e.).2 He stated he had not 
made contact with the creditors to pay the debts or arrange payment plans. (Tr. 35-37, 
40-41.) 
 
 Applicant denied a $183 medical debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.j. and claimed he had 
paid the debt. However, he failed to provide documentation to corroborate payment. (Tr. 
41-42.) 
 
 Applicant also denied a debt of $3,727, which was alleged at SOR ¶ 1.k. In his 
answer to the SOR, he claimed the debt had been discharged in his 2003 bankruptcy. 
At his hearing, he averred that the debt may not have been discharged in his 
bankruptcy. Applicant’s credit report of May 2008 showed the delinquent account was 
opened in May 2007. He acknowledged he had not contacted the creditor for 
clarification of the status of the debt. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 4 at 6; Tr. 42-43.) 
 
 Applicant stated he had sought a second job to earn money to pay off his 
delinquent debts. He said he had been searching for a second job for over a year, with 
no success. Applicant also made an application for a debt consolidation loan, but he 
was denied because he had so many debts. (Tr. 35-36, 44-45.) 
 
 In his response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant reported that his net monthly 
income was $1,840. He reported net monthly expenses of $1,442 and a net monthly 
remainder of $400.  (Ex. 2 at 4; Tr. 46-47.)   
 
 At his hearing, Applicant reported that he and his wife had separated again in 
May or June of 2009. Applicant and his wife no longer live together, and they are 
planning to divorce. Applicant now rents an apartment. Since the recent separation, he 
is responsible for paying half of the monthly support for his five-year-old son, an amount 
he estimates to be approximately $400. With this new child care expense for his 
younger son, he no longer has a net monthly remainder. (Tr. 48-49, 54-55.) 
 
 
1 This debt appears to duplicate the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. (Ex. 4 at 4; Tr. 39-40.) 
 
2 Applicant stated that this debt duplicated the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.i. He identified this as an 
automobile loan that he was delinquent in paying. He stated that he still had possession of the 
automobile. (Tr. 36, 39, 40-41.)   
 
4 
 
 
  Applicant’s Deputy Program Manager and Quality Assurance Manager provided 
a joint letter of character reference for the record. They praised Applicant’s dedication to 
duty, attention to detail, and “impressive display of skill and knowledge” in carrying out 
his work assignments. They noted that he took initiative and responsibility for additional 
assignments, exhibited professionalism, and was a valued member of the company’s   
team.  (Ex. A.) 
 
                                                           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
5 
 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Additionally, under AG ¶ 19(e) security concerns are raised when an 
applicant demonstrates “consistent spending beyond [his] means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.” Applicant, who has a history of not 
meeting his financial obligations, incurred substantial delinquent debt and was unable or 
unwilling to pay his creditors. These facts are sufficient to raise the three potentially 
disqualifying conditions identified above. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
 
6 
 
 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant admitted a history of financial difficulties that spanned the period from   
September 2003, when he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, to the present time. Applicant 
used the legal tool of bankruptcy for relief from the debts he incurred when he paid his 
father’s debts. However, he did not manage his financial affairs responsibly after he 
received the fresh start provided by the discharge of his debts.  
 
Applicant has been continuously employed in full-time work in the security 
industry since 1998. His net income from his full-time job was approximately $1,840 a 
month. He admitted that nine of the ten delinquencies alleged on the SOR remained 
unresolved, resulting in substantial debt which continues to the present day, a situation 
which raises concerns about Applicant’s good judgment. He failed to provide 
documentation to support his assertion that his medical debt had been satisfied. 
 
However, it should also be noted that the record supports a conclusion that two 
debts alleged on the SOR are duplicates. Applicant’s credit report of May 2008 supports 
a conclusion that the $981 cell phone debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.h. duplicates the $978 
cell phone debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. Additionally, the record also supports a 
conclusion that the $11,911 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.i. duplicates the $11,911 debt 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e.    
 
Although Applicant sought a consolidation loan as a way to manage his debt, he 
was turned down because his debts were high and numerous. He did not seek any 
other means of debt resolution or counseling. He did not contact his creditors to arrange 
payment or settlement of his debts. While he did not dispute his debts and admitted that 
he was responsible for them, it was not clear that he understood his financial problems 
or how to resolve them. He had no plan in place to systematically resolve his substantial 
delinquent debt and prepare for future contingencies. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(a), AG ¶ 
20(b), AG ¶ 20(c), AG ¶ 20(d), and AG 20(e) do not apply in mitigation to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. 
 
7 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial problems began 
several years ago and are long-standing. He has not taken affirmative action to pay or 
resolve the majority of his delinquent debts, and his many delinquencies and his lack of 
attention to them continue to raise security concerns. He has been continuously 
employed in the security industry since 1998. In 2005 or 2006, he made personal 
domestic choices, purchased a home with a person with whom he had a relationship, 
incurred substantial mortgage debt, and then terminated the relationship and his joint 
responsibility to pay the mortgage debt. Additionally, he failed to provide evidence of 
payment for any of the other debts alleged on the SOR.  Despite a steady income for 
several years, he failed to budget his income to satisfy his many debts.  Instead, he 
continued on a pattern of financial overextension. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.i.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.k.:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
