KEYWORD: Foreign Influence
DIGEST: This 30-year-old software designer retains significant close ties to family members in  his
native South Korea.  Applicant came to the U.S. in the early 1990s, and became a U.S. citizen in
October 2002.  Despite his long residence in the U.S., he retains close ties to South Korea,
specifically close family members.  On balance, he has not adequately mitigated the risks indicated
by the Government’s evidence.  Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 04-04419.h1
DATE: 01/05/2007
DATE: January 5, 2007
In Re:
------------------------
SSN: -----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 04-04419
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
BARRY M. SAX
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
D. Michael Lyles, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
2
This 30-year-old software designer retains significant close ties to family members in  his
native South Korea.  Applicant came to the U.S. in the early 1990s, and became a U.S. citizen in
October 2002.  Despite his long residence in the U.S., he retains close ties to South Korea,
specifically close family members.  On balance, he has not adequately mitigated the risks indicated
by the Government’s evidence.  Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On January 26, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, as amended, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant.  The SOR detailed reasons
why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding required under the Directive that it
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.  The SOR recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to conduct proceedings and
determine whether a clearance should be granted, denied or revoked.
On February 23, 2006  and March 23, 2006, Applicant responded to the allegations set forth
in the SOR, and elected to have a decision made by a DOHA Administrative Judge on the basis of
the written record; i.e., without a hearing. On August 11, 2006, Department Counsel issued a File
of Relevant Material (FORM).  Applicant was instructed that any response to the FORM was due
within 30 days of receipt.  In this case any response was due by September 16, 2006.  Applicant filed
a timely response. The matter was assigned to me for decision on September 20, 2006. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 29-year-old software engineer for a defense contractor.  The SOR contains
seven (7) allegations under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).  Applicant admits all seven allegations.
All admissions are accepted and incorporated herein as Findings of Fact. After considering the
totality of the evidence, I make the following FINDINGS OF FACT as to the status of each SOR
allegation.
Applicant came to the United States in 1991, at age14, to live with his mother, who had come
in 1987.  Applicant considers himself to be assimilated into American society and has no cultural
ties to South Korea. 
1.a.  Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of South Korea.  Applicant calls him about
once a month.  He works for a moving company. 
1.b.  As of January 2004, his sister was a citizen and resident of South Korea.  She was
completing school and he expected her to return to the U.S., and become a citizen.
1.c.  His grandmother is a citizen and resident of South Korea. 
3
1.d.  His aunt and uncle are citizens and residents of South Korea. As of January 2004, she
was in the U.S., learning English, and accompanied by her two children (Item 7 at page 3). She
intended to return to South Korea, but there is no evidence she had done so.  
1.e.  His cousin is a citizen and resident of South Korea.  As of January 2004, he was a
student.  They were in contact once or twice a month by internet. 
1.f.  Applicant no longer maintains a relationship with his with three friends who are all
citizens and residents of South Korea.
1.g.  Applicant traveled to South Korea in at least 1999/2000, 2001, and 2003.  The first trip
was to visit an ill grandmother in Seoul (18 days).  The second was a visit to his family in Seoul
(three weeks), and the last  trip (three weeks) was with his South Korean-born,  naturalized American
fiancee.  They visited with both their families in the Seoul area.  They also visited friends and his
family’s cemetery.  The first two trips were paid for by his parents and he paid for the third trip.
Applicant does not consider himself close to his father or other foreign relatives and friends (Item
7).  He “rarely communicates with his father and grandmother in South Korea” (Response to
FORM).  Overall, however, the evidence compels the conclusion that Applicant does have close ties
of affection and obligation to individuals who are citizens of and reside in a foreign country, to wit,
South Korea. 
Applicant does not consider himself to be a dual citizen with South Korea and has taken steps
to formally renounce his South Korean citizenship and surrender his South Korean passport.  He has
no personal foreign financial assets, investments, or interests.
Applicant’s wife is a South Korean-born, naturalized U.S. citizens.  She, too, has family in
South Korea.  
Applicant understands his security obligations to the United States, He avers he is not
susceptible to improper contacts by any source (Item 4). 
POLICIES
Each adjudicative decision must include an assessment of nine generic factors relevant in all
cases: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowing participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6)
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood
of continuation or recurrence (Directive, E.2.2.1., on page 16 of Enclosure 2).  I have considered all
nine factors, individually and collectively, in reaching my overall conclusion.
The eligibility criteria established by Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive 5220.6
identify personal characteristics and conduct that are reasonably related to the ultimate question of
whether it is “clearly consistent with the national interest” for an individual to hold a security
4
clearance.  An applicant’s admission of the information in specific allegations relieves the
Government of having to prove those allegations.  If specific allegations and/or information are
denied or  otherwise controverted by the applicant, the Government has the initial burden of proving
those controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  
If the Government meets its burden (either by the Applicant’s admissions or by other
evidence) and proves conduct that creates security  concerns under the Directive, the burden of
persuasion then shifts to the Applicant to present  evidence in refutation, extenuation or mitigation
sufficient to demonstrate that, despite the existence of conduct that falls within specific criteria in
the Directive, it is nevertheless consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue
a security clearance for the Applicant.
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the
Government based upon trust and confidence.  As required by DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended,
at E2.2.2., “any doubt as to whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with the
interests of national security will be resolved in favor of the nation’s security.”
CONCLUSIONS
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  In  his response to the SOR,
Applicant admits all of the allegations.  In his response to the FORM,  Applicant adds what he
considers to be mitigating information.
Applicant came to the United States at age 14 and is now 29.  He grew up in American
society and considers himself to be an American only.  There is nothing in the record to suggest
otherwise.  At the same time, as the FORM documents, Applicant has longstanding and close ties
to South Korea through a variety of relatives, both his and his fiancee’s and those in the U.S. and
South Korea.  There is no question of Applicant’s loyalty to the Unite States, but there is also no
question that the potential exists that Applicant may be placed in a position where he may be forced
to choose between his affection for the United States and his affection for his relatives, if not directly
for South Korea.  
Disqualifying and Mitigating Conditions - The Concern: A security risk may exist when an
individual’s immediate family, including cohabitants, and other persons to whom he or she may be
bound by ties of affection, influence or obligation, are not citizens of the United States, or may be
subject to duress.  These situations could create the potential for foreign influence that could result
in the compromise of classified information.  Contact with citizens of other countries are also
relevant to security determinations if they make an individual potentially vulnerable to coercion,
exploitation, or pressure.
Disqualifying Condition (DC): (1) An immediate family member, or a person to whom the
individual has close ties of affection, is a citizen of, or resident or present in, a foreign country; DC
2 Sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of their citizenship status, if the
potential for adverse foreign influence or duress exists; 
Mitigating Conditions (MC): None are clearly established by the evidence of record.  Under
5
MC (1) It has not been clearly shown that all of the immediate family member(s), (spouse, father,
mother, brothers, sisters, cohabitant, or associate(s) in question), are not agents of a foreign power
or in a position to be exploited by a foreign power in a way that could force the individual to choose
between loyalty to the person(s) involved and the United States.  Under MC 3 contact with some of
the individuals in the foreign country remain close, while others have become casual and infrequent.
His relationship with his family remains “close,” as that term is used in the Directive.    
South Korea is generally recognized as an ally and friend of the United States (Items I, II, and
III).  At the same time, the U.S. Government is concerned about South Korea’s significant
involvement in economic espionage in the U.S. (Item IV). 
Pleadings from a 1997 criminal case, U.S. v. Kim [not related] (Item V) show that such
espionage has occurred.  That case does not mean that Applicant will act improperly, but it does
suggest that a higher risk exists that he may be asked to act improperly than if the other country was
one that was not recognized as an active collector of economic espionage.  DOHA’s Appeal Board,
in ISCR Case No. 98-0592 at 3 (May 4, 1999), recognizes that “even countries friendly to the United
States can attempt to gain access to classified information.”  
I have carefully considered the Government’s evaluation of the evidence and the application
of that evidence to the disqualifying and mitigating conditions found in the Foreign Influence
guidelines (FORM at 5-10).  Based on the totality of the evidence, I conclude that “Applicant’s
contact with foreign nationals is regular, sustained, and bolstered by affection” (FORM at 12).  As
with all applicants for a security clearance, the burden is on Applicant to demonstrate the absence
of significant risk.  He has not done so and, accordingly, I am unable to conclude that Applicant has
demonstrated that he possesses the good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness required of
anyone seeking access to the nation’s secrets. 
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings as required by Section 3, Paragraph 7 of Enclosure 1 of the Directive are
hereby rendered as follows:
Guideline B (Foreign Influence)  Against the Applicant
Subparagraph  l.a.           Against the Applicant
                Subparagraph 1.b.               Against the Applicant
            Subparagraph 1.c.           Against the Applicant
           Subparagraph 1.d.            Against the Applicant
Subparagraph  l.e.           Against the Applicant
                Subparagraph 1.f.               For the Applicant
           Subparagraph  l.g.           Against the Applicant
                
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
6
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
BARRY M. SAX
ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
