KEYWORD: Financial; Personal Conduct; Alcohol; Criminal Conduct
DIGEST: The Applicant owes at least 39 different creditors approximately $252,675.11.  He has no
valid, current plans to pay these debts off.  In addition, the Applicant falsified a Government
questionnaire concerning his debt situation.  Adverse inference is not overcome.  Clearance is
denied.
CASENO: 04-09750.h1
DATE: 01/23/2007
DATE: January 23, 2007
In Re:
            --------------------------
SSN: -----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 04-09750
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
WILFORD H. ROSS
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Michael J. Wenstrup, Esquire
SYNOPSIS
Several of the creditors listed in the SOR are collection agencies who may be representing multiple1
clients to whom the Applicant owes money.
2
The Applicant owes at least 39 different creditors approximately $252,675.11.  He has no
valid, current plans to pay these debts off.  In addition, the Applicant falsified a Government
questionnaire concerning his debt situation.  Adverse inference is not overcome.  Clearance is
denied.
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On September 14, 2005, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 (as amended) and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied
or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on October 10, 2005, and November 25,
2005, and requested a hearing.  The case was received by the undersigned on August 16, 2006, and
Notices of Hearing were issued on August 25, 2006, and September 19, 2006.
A hearing was held by video teleconference on October 4, 2006, at which the Government
presented 14 documentary exhibits.  Testimony was taken from the Applicant, who also submitted
four exhibits.  The transcript was received on October 18, 2006. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 66 and married.  He is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks to
obtain a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, based upon the
allegations set forth in the SOR.  The following findings of fact are entered as to each paragraph and
guideline in the SOR.  They are based on the Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the exhibits and the
live testimony.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial concerns).  The Government alleges in this paragraph that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The SOR alleges that the Applicant owes at least 39 different creditors approximately
$252,675.11.   (SOR allegations 1.a. through 1.mm.)   The available documentary evidence confirms1
3
that all of these debts are in the Applicant’s name.  (Government Exhibits 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 14 and
15.)  
The Applicant made no argument concerning the validity and/or payment status of the
following debts: SOR 1.c., 1.d., 1.f., 1.i., 1.r., 1.s., 1.t., 1.u., 1.v., 1.w., 1.x., 1.cc., 1.dd., 1.ee., 1.ff.,
1.gg., 1.hh., 1.ii., 1.jj., 1.ll.  Accordingly, these specific debts are found to be valid, current
obligations of the Applicant.
The Applicant made specific statements concerning the validity and/or payment status of
several of the debts.  They will be discussed below:
SOR 1.a. The Applicant has been married four times.  When he was divorced from his second
wife in 1988, they agreed that he would pay her $40,235.00 in exchange for the second wife
relinquishing her rights to real property the two of them owned.  According to the written divorce
agreement, the Applicant was to pay his second wife $305.00 per month beginning in April 1988.
(Government Exhibit 2 at 13.)  The Applicant testified that he and the second wife had a verbal
agreement that he would not have to pay her anything as long as he had other outstanding debts from
the marriage.  (Transcript at 31-32.)  There is no written confirmation of this alleged agreement.
(Transcript at 80-81.)  The Applicant did not make any payments and his second wife went to court
in 1992 to have the divorce decree enforced.  A judgement was entered for the second wife on May
27, 1992, in the amount of $17,165.71.  (Government Exhibit 2 at 20-26.)  Many attempts were made
by the second wife’s lawyer to enforce the judgment in the ensuing years.  (Government Exhibit 2
at 54-66.)  Some money was collected during those years.  By 1999, the last year for which records
are available, the judgment debt had grown from $17,165.71 to $22,524.93.  (Government Exhibit
2 at 63.)  In addition to the past due amount, the Applicant still owes his second wife approximately
$25,000.00 from the original agreement.  Based on the available evidence, I find that this is a valid
debt and the Applicant continues to owe a considerable sum to his second wife.  He has no current
plans to pay this debt.
SOR 1.b.  This is the Applicant’s largest creditor, a collection agency.  The Applicant owes
them at least $177,201.11.  The underlying creditors consist of medical and non-medical entities.
Over the years, the records indicate that the Applicant has paid approximately $8,000.00 towards this
indebtedness.  This remains a valid debt of the Applicant.  The Applicant has no current plans to pay
this debt.  (Transcript at 35-36; Government Exhibit 15.)
SOR 1.g., 1.h., 1.j., 1.k., 1.l., 1.m., 1.n., 1.o., 1.p., 1.q., 1.aa., 1.bb.  The Applicant argues that
these particular debts were medical bills run up by his second and third wives, without his
permission, during their marriages.  The Applicant was married to these women at the time that the
expenses were incurred.  He presented no evidence, other than his testimony, that these were not
valid debts of his marriages.  (Transcript at 44-45.)  Under the particular facts of this case, his
testimony is insufficient to show that these debts are not his valid obligations.  
SOR 1.e.  The Applicant admits that he has a judgment against him in the amount of
$15,737.00.  The judgment has grown to $20,000.00.  He further states that $10,000.00 of this
judgment has been paid when he sold two pieces of land in October and November 2005.
(Applicant’s Exhibits A and B.)  The Applicant submitted an Earnest Money Receipt and Purchase
Agreement concerning a third piece of property.  He testified that $5,000.00 of the $41,000.00
4
selling price of that third property will be used to pay this judgment down to $5,000.00.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit C.)  The final $5,000.00 will be paid when he sells another piece of his real property.
(Transcript at 39-40, 45-47.)
SOR 1.y. and 1.z.  These past due debts were property taxes owed by the Applicant to the
local government.  They were paid off under the terms of his first property sale in October 1995.
(Transcript at 47-48; Applicant’s Exhibit A at 1.)
SOR 1.kk.  The Applicant testified that he had made good this past due debt for $186.00,
related to an insufficient fund check.  (Transcript at 50-51, 53.)  
SOR 1.mm.  The Applicant testified that he had made good this past due debt for $120.00,
related to an insufficient fund check.  (Transcript at 53-55.)
The Applicant testified that he would be able to pay all of the debts except those set forth in
SOR 1.a. and 1.b. out of the $40,000.00 proceeds of his current land sale.  (Transcript at 40-41;
Applicant’s Exhibit C.)  Excluding those two debts, the Applicant owes approximately $32,753.00.
However, the fact remains that it was a proposed sale and the Applicant has not produced any
additional documentation showing that the sale was completed or that the bills were paid. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal conduct).  The Government alleges in this paragraph that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he intentionally falsified material aspects of his personal
background during the clearance screening process. 
On April 22, 2002, the Applicant completed an official DoD questionnaire in which he stated
that he had no unpaid judgments within the previous seven years.  (Government Exhibit 1, question
37.)  This was a false answer because, at that time, the Applicant had two judgments against him.
(SOR 1.a. and 1.e.)  The Applicant credibly testified that, at the time he filled out the questionnaire,
he had a good faith belief that the judgment in SOR 1.a. had been paid and he had no knowledge of
the judgment in SOR 1.e.  (Transcript at 20-21, 57-59.)  Subparagraph 2.a. is found for the
Applicant.
In the same questionnaire the Applicant stated that he had not been 180 days delinquent on
any debts within the previous seven years (question 38); and that he was currently 90 days delinquent
only on a medical debt for $25,000.00 as of the date he filled out the questionnaire (question 39).
These statements were false answers to material questions pertaining to the Applicant's financial
situation at that time.
With regards to question 38, the Applicant testified, “It’s obvious the medical bills were out
there, but I was referring to debts like utility bills or rent or car payments and this sort of thing.  And
I had not been delinquent in those.”  (Transcript at 21-22, 59-60.)
The Applicant had no real explanation as to why he did not say he was currently 90 days
delinquent on debts in 2002.  In his testimony, the Applicant admits that some of his past due debts
have existed since 1993, and that he had knowledge of them.  (Transcript at 61-63.)
5
The Applicant’s explanations for falsifying questions 38 and 39 of the questionnaire are
rejected.  His debt situation is extensive, and of long standing.  The Applicant knew, or should have
known, about at least some of these debts.  The explanations he attempted to make about why he did
not answer the questions truthfully are not credible.
Paragraph 3 (Guideline G - Alcohol abuse).  The Government alleges in this paragraph that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses intoxicants to excess.
The Applicant was arrested for Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol in May 2004.  He
plead guilty to a reduced charge of Reckless Driving and received a sentence including suspended
jail time, a fine, one year probation and his driver’s license was suspended for 30 days.  From all
indications, this was a solitary incident which occurred because of unique events that were occurring
in the Applicant’s life.  The Applicant takes responsibility for this incident and credibly testified that
he had not engaged in this conduct previously and would not do so in the future. (Transcript at 22-24,
75-78.)
Paragraph 4 (Guideline J - Criminal conduct).  The Government alleges in this paragraph that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in criminal acts.
As found above, the Applicant knowingly and willfully provided false material information
to DoD during the clearance screening process.  In so doing the Applicant violated the felony
criminal provisions of 18 U.S.C. §1001.
The arrest and conviction set forth under paragraph 3, above, will be considered under this
paragraph as well.
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the Department of
Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992 Directive, has set forth policy factors which must be given
"binding" consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors should be
followed in every case according to the pertinent guideline.  However, the factors are neither
automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can they supersede the Administrative
Judge's reliance on his own common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature and
the ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.  Because each security clearance case presents
its own unique facts and circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm
of human experience, or apply equally in every case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth above,
the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case will be set forth under CONCLUSIONS,
below.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, “In evaluating the
relevance of an individual’s conduct, the [Administrative Judge] should consider the following
factors [General Factors]:
a. The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct
6
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation
c. The frequency and recency of the conduct
d. The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e. The voluntariness of participation
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent
behavior changes
g. The motivation for the conduct
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
The eligibility guidelines established in the DoD Directive identify personal characteristics
and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question of whether it is "clearly consistent
with the national interest" to grant an Applicant's request for access to classified information.
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to civilian
workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information twenty-four hours a day.
The Government is therefore appropriately concerned where available information indicates that an
Applicant for clearance may have past due indebtedness and be involved in acts of falsification of
Government forms, alcohol abuse and criminal conduct that demonstrates poor judgement,
untrustworthiness or unreliability on the Applicant's part.
The DoD Directive states, "Each adjudication is to be an overall common sense
determination based upon consideration and assessment of all available information, both favorable
and unfavorable, with particular emphasis placed on the seriousness, recency, frequency, and
motivation for the individual's conduct; the extent to which conduct was negligent, willful,
voluntary, or undertaken with the knowledge of the circumstances or consequences involved; and,
to the extent that it can be estimated, the probability that conduct will or will not continue in the
future."  The Administrative Judge can only draw those inferences or conclusions that have a
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or
conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, "Any determination under this order...shall be
a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the
loyalty of the applicant concerned."
CONCLUSIONS
It is the Government's responsibility to present substantial evidence to support the finding
of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant's conduct and the granting or continued
7
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then shifts to the
Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation which is sufficient to
overcome or outweigh the Government's case.  The Applicant bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him or her a
security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial evidence that
the Applicant has over $200,000.00 in past due debts that he cannot, or will not, pay (Guideline F);
that he intentionally made false material statements to DoD, in violation of a felony criminal statute
(Guidelines E and J); and that he has one alcohol related arrest (Guidelines G and J).
The Applicant, on the other hand, has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal,
explanation or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome the Government's case against him, except
in part:
Under Paragraph 1 (Guideline F), subparagraphs 1.e., 1.y., 1.z., 1.kk. and 1.mm. are found
for the Applicant as he has paid, or is paying, those specific debts.  
Subparagraph 2.a. under Paragraph 2 (Guideline E) is found for the Applicant as I have
determined that the falsification in this subparagraph was not willful.  
Finally, Paragraph 3 (Guideline G) and subparagraph 4.a. under Paragraph 4 (Guideline J)
are found for the Applicant.  Alcohol Abuse Disqualifying Condition E2.A7.1.2.1. applies to this
incident as it was alcohol-related.  However, there is no evidence indicating that this incident is part
of a pattern.  (Alcohol Abuse Mitigating Condition E2.A7.1.3.1.)  The circumstances relating to the
arrest were unique and, in my opinion, the activity was aberrational on the part of the Applicant and
not likely to be repeated.  (General Factors b. and i.)
The Applicant has an extensive history of past due indebtedness.  It is obvious that he has
had knowledge of the majority of his debt problems for more than ten years.  His attitude appears
to be that, as long as his assets were more than his indebtedness, he was all right.  He further
testified, “[As] long as they [the creditors] weren’t complaining, I was only going to pay what I
absolutely had to pay to get through from one payday to the next.  I would apply what I could.  I
didn’t want to sell the assets [real property] if I didn’t have to.  (Transcript at 83-84.)  The end result
of this attitude was that hardly any of his creditors got paid, and there is little likelihood of their
getting paid in the foreseeable future.  Disqualifying Conditions E2.A6.1.2.1. and E2.A6.1.2.3. apply
to this case as there is “A history of not meeting financial obligations,” and an “Inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts.”  
None of the Mitigating Conditions apply to this case.  The behavior is recent, indeed
continuing.  It is not an isolated incident nor, in my opinion, were the conditions that resulted in the
behavior beyond the Applicant’s control.  The recent sale of two pieces of property, and the expected
sale of a third, does not arise to the level of a good faith attempt to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.  Except as set forth above, Paragraph 1 and its subparagraphs are found
against the Applicant.  
8
The Government relies heavily upon the integrity and honesty of clearance holders, and it is
a negative factor for security clearance purposes where an Applicant has deliberately provided false
information about material aspects of his or her personal background.  Disqualifying Condition
E2.A5.1.2.2. applies to the facts of this case (The deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification
of relevant and material facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement,
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits
or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities).  None of the Mitigating Conditions apply.  Guidelines E and J are found against
the Applicant.
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the Government's
information opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a
finding against the Applicant as to the conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1, 2 and
4 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.  As set forth above, Paragraph 3 is found for the
Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as required by
Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.e.: For the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.i.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.j.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.k.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.l.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.m.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.n.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.o.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.p.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.q.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.r.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.s.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.t.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.u.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.v.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.w.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.x.: Against the Applicant.
9
Subparagraph 1.y.: For the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.z.: For the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.aa.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.bb.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.cc.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.dd.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.ee.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.ff.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.gg.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.hh.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.ii.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.jj.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.kk.: For the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.ll.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.mm.: For the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 2.a.: For the Applicant.
Subparagraph 2.b.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 2.c.: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 3: For the Applicant.
Subparagraph 3.a.: For the Applicant.
Paragraph 4: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 4.a.: For the Applicant.
Subparagraph 4.b.: Against the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
Wilford H. Ross
Administrative Judge
