KEYWORD: Drugs; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant used marijuana from 1991 to 2004, even after applying for a security clearance.
He credibly testified that he last used marijuana in August 2004, and he has no intention to use any
illegal substance in the future. While he furnished information to the United States Government in
a Security Clearance Application (SCA) that was incomplete, it was done inadvertently.  Mitigation
has been shown. Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 05-03941.h1
DATE: 01/12/2007
DATE: January 12, 2007
In Re:
------------------------
SSN: -----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-03941
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MARTIN H. MOGUL
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
2
Applicant used marijuana from 1991 to 2004, even after applying for a security clearance.
He credibily testified that he last used marijuana in August 2004, and he has no intention to use any
illegal substance in the future. While he furnished information to the United States Government in
a Security Clearance Application (SCA) that was incomplete, it was done inadvertently.  Mitigation
has been shown. Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On September 21, 2005, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 (as amended) and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied
or revoked.
Applicant  filed a notarized response, dated October 5, 2005, to the allegations set forth in
the SOR, and requested a hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge. 
This case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on August 3, 2006, to conduct a hearing
and issue a written decision. A Notice of Hearing was issued to the parties on November 22, 2006,
and the hearing was conducted on December 12, 2006. 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered three documentary exhibits (Government’s
Exhibits 1-3) and no witnesses were called. Applicant offered three documentary exhibits
(Applicant’s Exhibits A-C) and offered his testimony and that of his wife. The transcript (Tr) was
received on December 20, 2006.
FINDINGS OF FACT
In the SOR, the Government alleges that a security risk may exist under Adjudicative
Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Directive. The SOR
contains five allegations, 1.a. through 1.e., under Guideline H, and two allegations, 2.a. and 2.b.,
under Guideline E. Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a. through 1.e., and 2.a., and he denied 2.b.
The admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including Applicant's
Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant and his wife, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 32 years old. He is married and has no children. Applicant has received a
Masters Degree in Computer Science and a Bachelors Degree in Psychology. He is employed by a
defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the
defense sector.
3
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance because
he has abused illegal substances. 
Applicant used marijuana from approximately 1991 to 2004.  The frequency of his use
varied, from as often as three to five times a week in 1993 and 1994, to four times a month during
1994 to 1997, and in 1998 to 2000 he abstained completely. During the years 2001 to 2004 Applicant
ingested marijuana 2 or 3 times a year. He purchased some of the marijuana that he used from
friends. Applicant used marijuana after he completed a SCA on March 9, 2004, last using it on
August 2004.
Applicant also used psilocybin mushrooms, on approximately three to five occasions, from
1993 to 2003. He also purchased some of the psilocybin mushrooms that he used. 
Applicant testified credibly that after he met with an investigator of the Office of Personnel
Management and signed an affidavit on November 18, 2004, he made a determination that he would
not use marijuana or any other illegal substance in the future. His reasoning for this decision
included the fact that he is now married and he is contemplating starting a family. Also he feels that
his usage of marijuana is not worth damaging his career.   In his affidavit, he stated that he had no
intention of using marijuana or mushrooms in the future. 
Applicant testified that since his decision to abstain completely from marijuana usage,  he
has been present where marijuana was being used and he was able to abstain from its usage without
any difficulty. His wife also testified that Applicant has made a decision not to use marijuana in the
future. 
 
Finally, Applicant submitted into evidence two Drug Screen Results Forms (Exhibits A and
C) that indicate no illegal drugs were present in Applicant on December 8, 2006, and October 6,
2005, the dates Applicant underwent drug testing.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance because
his conduct shows questionable judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, and lack of honesty.
This concern is based on Applicant using marijuana after completing a SCA, as discussed above, and
allegedly knowingly furnishing incomplete and untruthful information to the Government in a SCA
that he completed on March 9, 2004.
Question #24 of the SCA asked if Applicant had ever been charged with or convicted of any
offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs. Applicant answered "No." Applicant did not list that he was
arrested on July 19, 1994, and charged with Illegal Consumption of Liquor. He was found guilty of
the charge, fined $233 and placed on six months probation.
4
While Applicant admitted that he was arrested in 1994, he averred that his failure to include
this arrest on his SCA was an inadvertent omission, and that he did not intend to conceal information
from the Government. I find Applicant’s explanation credible that he simply failed to remember this
event as it had occurred approximately ten years before he completed the SCA, when he was twenty
years of age.  
Finally, Applicant submitted three letters of recommendation (Exhibit B), from three
individuals who highly recommend Applicant as honest and trustworthy.  
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. Accordingly, the Department of
Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992 Directive, has set forth policy factors which must be given
"binding" consideration in making security clearance determinations. These factors should be
followed in every case according to the pertinent guideline. However, the factors are neither
automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can they supersede the Administrative
Judge's reliance on his own common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature and
the ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision. Because each security clearance case presents
its own unique facts and circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm
of human experience, or apply equally in every case.
As set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, "In evaluating the relevance of
an individual's conduct, the [Administrative Judge] should consider the following factors [General
Factors]:
a. The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation
c. The frequency and recency of the conduct
d. The individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e. The voluntariness of participation
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior changes
g. The motivation for the conduct
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The eligibility guidelines established in the DoD Directive identify personal characteristics
and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question of whether it is "clearly consistent
with the national interest" to grant an Applicant's request for access to classified information.
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to civilian
workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information twenty-four hours a day.
The Government is therefore appropriately concerned where available information indicates that an
Applicant for clearance may be involved in acts of drug usage, alcohol abuse and criminal conduct,
and that demonstrates poor judgement, untrustworthiness or unreliability on the Applicant's part.
5
The DoD Directive states, "Each adjudication is to be an overall common sense
determination based upon consideration and assessment of all available information, both favorable
and unfavorable, with particular emphasis placed on the seriousness, recency, frequency, and
motivation for the individual's conduct; the extent to which conduct was negligent, willful,
voluntary, or undertaken with the knowledge of the circumstances or consequences involved; and,
to the extent that it can be estimated, the probability that conduct will or will not continue in the
future." 
The Administrative Judge can only draw those inferences or conclusions that have a
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record. The Judge cannot draw inferences or
conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature. Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, "Any determination under this order...shall be
a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the
loyalty of the applicant concerned."
CONCLUSIONS
It is the Government's responsibility to present substantial evidence to support the finding
of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant's conduct and the continued holding of a
security clearance. If such a case has been established, the burden then shifts to the Applicant to go
forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome or
outweigh the Government's case. The Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
(Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case. Applicant's improper
and illegal drug abuse, including the use of marijuana and psilocybin mushrooms is of concern,
especially in light of his desire to have access to the nation's secrets.  The fact that Applicant used
illegal substances, after applying for a security clearance must also be considered adversely.
Applicant's overall conduct pertaining to his illegal substance abuse clearly falls within Drug
Involvement Disqualifying Condition (DC) (E2.A8.1.2.1.), any drug abuse, and DC (E2.A8.1.2.2.),
illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution.
Since Applicant last used marijuana in August  2004, Applicant’s conduct could be argued
to come within Mitigating Condition(MC) (E2.A8.1.3.1.),  the drug involvement was not recent. MC
(E2.A8.1.3.3.) also applies because of Applicant’s credible stated intention not to continue using
illegal substances in the future.
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant used illegal
drugs under Guideline H. However, Applicant, has successfully introduced evidence in rebuttal,
explanation and mitigation. I find that the mitigating conditions are sufficient to overcome the
Government's case against him. Accordingly, Paragraph 1, Guideline H, is concluded for Applicant.
6
(Guideline E -Personal Conduct) 
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant furnished to the
Government an incomplete answer in the SCA that he executed on March 9, 2004. However, I find
that Applicant did not knowingly and willfully give untruthful information to the Government.
While Applicant’s use of marijuana after completing a SCA does show poor judgement, it
was done only on one occasion, and he testified that he has realized the folly of such conduct. 
In reviewing the DCs under Guideline E, I conclude that no DCs apply because Applicant
did not deliberately provided false and  misleading information to the Government in a SCA.  I
resolve Paragraph 2, Guideline E, for Applicant
FORMAL FINDINGS
Paragraph 1. Guideline H: FOR  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:  For Applicant 
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: FOR  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
