KEYWORD:  Drugs
DIGEST: Applicant is 36 years old and works for a company that administers government health
care benefits.  From approximately 1996 until 2004, he used cocaine between 40 and 100 times.  He
voluntarily requested an evaluation for substance abuse in 2004, and was diagnosed as cocaine
dependent. However, he did not complete the recommended rehabilitation program or provide
sufficient evidence to document abstinence.  He failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised
by his drug involvement.  His eligibility for assignment to a sensitive position is denied. 
CASENO:  06-11779.h1
DATE: 01/24/2007
DATE:  January 24, 2007
In re:
------------------
SSN: ------------
Applicant for ADP I/II/III Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-11779
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
SHARI DAM
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Edmunds, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
2
Applicant is 36 years old and works for a company that administers government health care
benefits.  From approximately 1996 until 2004, he used cocaine between 40 and 100 times.  He
voluntarily requested an evaluation for substance abuse in 2004, and was diagnosed as cocaine
dependent. However, he did not complete the recommended rehabilitation program or provide
sufficient evidence to document abstinence.  He failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised
by his drug involvement.  His eligibility for assignment to a sensitive position is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On October 25, 2004, Applicant submitted a public trust position questionnaire (SF-85P).  The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant an ADP I/II/III position for
Applicant.  As required by Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, (Jan. 1987), as amended
(Regulation), and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, ¶ E3.1.2 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on August 25, 2006, detailing the basis for
its decisionStrustworthiness concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement) of the Directive.
In a sworn statement, dated September 20, 2006, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations
and requested a hearing.  On October 16, 2006, this case was assigned to me.  A Notice of Hearing was
issued on November 9, 2006, setting the case for hearing on November 28, 2006.  At the hearing
Department Counsel introduced Government Exhibits (GX) 1S3 into evidence without objections.
Applicant testified in his case and introduced Applicant Exhibits (AX) ASB into evidence without
objections.  DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 8, 2006.
PROCEDURAL ISSUES
Prior to the commencement of the hearing Department Counsel filed a Motion to Amend the
SOR as follows:
In subparagraph 1.d., replace “45 days extra duty, 45 days restriction” with “30 days extra duty,
30 days restriction.” Applicant did not object to the Motion and I granted it.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Based on the entire record, including Applicant’s admissions in his Answer to the SOR and
at the hearing, I make the following additional findings of fact:
Applicant is 36 years old and has a seven-year-old child, whom he supports.  After high school,
he enlisted in the Army where he served from June 1988 until July 1992, which included nine months
in Desert Storm. (Tr. 12-14)  Shortly after entering the Army (in November), he was charged with
possessing and using cocaine after a random drug screen tested positive for cocaine.  He admitted he
had smoked a cocaine-laced cigarette the night before at a party.  He claimed he never used cocaine
before that incident.  He received a Field Grade Article 15 punishment, which included 30 days extra
3
duty, 30 days restriction, and forfeiture of $335 for two months.  When he separated from the service
in 1992, he received an honorable discharge.
After returning home in 1992, Applicant began working as a computer specialist for a private
telemarketing firm. (Tr. 15)  He left the company in August 2004 as a result of the change in the laws
affecting telemarketing.  In October 2004, he began his present position as a customer service
representative for a company that administers a government health insurance plan. (Tr. 20) 
In between the time Applicant left his former position in August, and started his new job in
October, he voluntarily entered a Veterans Administration (VA) substance abuse program for an
evaluation for cocaine addiction.  (Tr. 17) Beginning in 1996, he started having unsettling dreams that
he attempted to manage by using cocaine to stay awake.  The dreams occurred about twice a month.
He estimated that he purchased and used cocaine 40 to 100 times from 1996 until July 2004 as a sleep
deterrent, and not for social purposes.  (Tr. 16) After being evaluated, the health care providers at the
VA diagnosed him as cocaine dependent and recommended inpatient treatment.  (Tr. 19) He attended
the first two months of inpatient treatment and the outpatient program from the end of September to
the middle of November 2004.  He stopped participating in the program because he began his current
job at the end of October, and it was incompatible with his work schedule.  He also thought he was
“okay enough to stop going.” (Tr. 20) He has not participated in any sobriety program since that time
and asserted he has not used cocaine since August 2004, when he sought an evaluation.  (Tr. 21)
Applicant continues to have sleep related problems, sleeping only three or four hours a night.  He has
not obtained additional medical assistance because he does not believe it will help him.  (Tr. 22)
Applicant stated that as a former soldier he would never divulge sensitive information relating
to military personnel.  (Tr. 26) He has worked in the area of information systems for 13 years and has
been careful with the information that comes to his attention.  (Tr. 9) He has an apartment, likes his
current job, is paying his child support, and would like to attend the local college.  (Tr. 29, 34) He has
some direction in his life.  (Tr. 39) He has not been involved in any criminal incidents related to drugs
other than the 1988 charge.  (Tr. 31)
Applicant’s performance evaluations from October 2004 to December 2005 indicate that he
meets company expectations in most categories and exceed expectations in a couple areas.  (AX A).
His supervisor credits him with being dependable and trustworthy. (AX B)
POLICIES
Positions designated as ADP I or ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. Regulation
¶AP10.2.1.  ADP III positions are nonsensitive positions. Regulation AP102.3.1.  By memorandum
dated November 19, 2004, the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Counterintelligence and Security
directed DOHA to resolve all contractor cases submitted for trustworthiness determinations, including
ADP I, II, and III, under the Directive.  Thus, even though they are nonsensitive positions, ADP III
cases are treated in the same way and adjudicated under the same guidelines and procedures as ADP
I and II cases.
 
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all
available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that  . . .  assigning
the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation
4
¶ C6.1.1.1. Appendix 8 of the Regulation sets forth the adjudicative policy, as well as the disqualifying
conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) associated with each guideline.  DoD contractor
personnel are afforded the adjudication procedures contained in the Directive. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
Based upon a consideration of the evidence, the following adjudicative guideline is pertinent
to an evaluation of this case:
Guideline H: Drug Involvement:  A trustworthiness concern arises when an individual is
involved with the improper or illegal use of drugs, which raise questions about one’s willingness or
ability to protect classified information.  Drug abuse or dependence may impair social or occupational
functioning, increasing the risk of an unauthorized disclosure of classified information.
CONCLUSIONS
I considered all of the facts in evidence and the application of the appropriate legal standards,
including the “whole person” concept, and concluded the following with respect to the allegations set
forth in the amended SOR:
Guideline H: Drug Involvement
The Government raised a potential disqualification under disqualifiying  condition (DC) 1( Any
drug abuse), which includes cocaine.  Applicant admitted he used cocaine in 1988, and between 40 and
100 times from 1996 until August 2004.
The Government having raised a trustworthiness concern, the burden shifted to Applicant to
mitigate or rebut the allegations.  After reviewing the mitigating conditions (MC) under this guideline,
I conclude MC 1 (The drug involvement was not recent), and MC 3 (A demonstrated intent not to abuse
any drugs in the future), provide limited mitigation.  Applicant stated that he has not used cocaine for
two years, is fulfilling his child support obligations, has some direction, and is performing well at his
job, which he contends are factors demonstrating his decision not to use drugs over the past two years.
While those factors are significant and support the application of two mitigating conditions, they are
insufficient to overcome the Government’s present concern, given Applicant’s extensive use and
purchase of cocaine over an eight-year history. Consequently, I considered the remaining MC’s, and
concluded they do not apply.  MC 2 (The drug involvement was an isolated or infrequent event) does
not provide additional mitigation because Applicant used cocaine in 1988, and on numerous occasions
from 1996 until August 2004, which cannot be construed to be isolated or infrequent.  Although the VA
recommended he participate and (and presumably complete) a substance abuse program, he stopped
attending after approximately four months; hence, MC 4 (Satisfactory completion of a drug treatment
program prescribed by a credentialed medical professional), is not applicable.
Whole Person Analysis
In addition to evaluating the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each guideline, the
adjudicative process requires thorough consideration and review of all available, reliable information
about the applicant, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, to arrive at a balanced decision.
Directive ¶ E.2.2.2. describes the essence of scrutinizing all appropriate variables in a case as the
“whole person concept.” In evaluating the disqualifying and mitigating conduct of the applicant, an
administrative judge should consider: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
5
circumstances surrounding the conduct; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6) the
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence 
I considered the totality of the evidence in view of the “whole person” concept, including
Applicant’s credibility and demeanor while testifying, his candid testimony about his cocaine use and
voluntary submission for a substance abuse evaluation.  I considered the fact that he first tried cocaine
in 1988, and then began using it frequently and extensively from 1996 through July or August 2004.
I gave significant weight to the fact that he was diagnosed as cocaine dependent, but decided not to
complete the recommended substance abuse program or participate in ongoing rehabilitative programs
supportive of sobriety because it was not convenient or necessary.  I also gave great weight to his
testimony that he continues to experience sleep problems (that he previously managed with cocaine),
and chooses not to seek medical treatment.  While I find his accomplishments over the last two years
commendable, I am not convinced that an eight-year addiction can be managed without competent
medical assistance and participation in programs dedicated to maintaining abstinence.  I suspect he held
the same belief when he sought help in 2004.  Until he presents independent corroboration from a
credentialed health care provider, documenting his assertions that he is drug free and has a good
prognosis for remaining abstinent in the future, I am not sufficiently persuaded that he is capable of
maintaining abstinence.  I am concerned there is a strong likelihood that he will relapse into his former
behaviors, especially in view of his current untreated sleep problems.  Hence, Applicant did not mitigate
those security concerns raised by his drug involvement.  Accordingly, Guideline H is concluded against
him.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by
Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows:
Paragraph 1: Guideline H (Drug Involvement) AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. Sd: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly not consistent
with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for assignment to sensitive duties.  His
application for eligibility is denied.
Shari Dam
Administrative Judge
