                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
----------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-13304
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access classified information is granted
Statement of the Case
On June 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant
to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 16, 2010, and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to me on September 16, 2010, and was scheduled for hearing on
October 14, 2010.  A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
2
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. At the hearing, the
Government's case consisted of eight exhibits (GEs 1 through 8); Applicant relied on two
witnesses (including himself) and three exhibits. (AEs A-C) The transcript (Tr.) was
received on October 29, 2010. 
Procedural Issues and Rulings
At the outset of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to strike subparagraph
1.d (both independently and as incorporated in subparagraph 2.c) and 1.c of 2.c of the
SOR. Department Counsel also moved to add subparagraph 1.i to subparagraph 2.c of
the SOR.  For good cause shown, the Government’s motion was granted.
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
afford him the opportunity to supplement the record with documentation of his approved
early release of his probation associated with a covered arrest and conviction.  For good
cause shown, applicant was granted 14 days to explore steps to obtain documentation of
an early release of his probation. Department Counsel was afforded three days to
respond. Within the permitted time, Applicant provided documentation of his early
release from his probation conditions associated with his 2006 conviction for domestic
violence. Applicant’s submission was admitted as AE D.    
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline J, Applicant is alleged to have been arrested and charged on
multiple occasions between 1984 and March 2006: (a) in 1984 for possession of
controlled substance and convicted; (b) in 1984 for driving with suspended license
(drugs/alcohol) and convicted; (c) in 1985 for burglary; (d) in 1986 for driving under the
influence (DUI); (e) in 1988 for inflict injury upon child; (f) in March 1988 for willful cruelty
to a child and convicted; (g) in 1990 for felony wilful cruelty to child and convicted; (h) in
1993 for investigation for cruelty to a child, and, as a result, for violation of probation; and
(i) in March 2006 for corporal injury to spouse/co-habitant/child’s parent and battery:
simple and convicted.
Under Guideline G, Applicant is alleged to have (a) consumed alcohol at times to
excess and to the point of intoxication from his teenage years to at least 2006; (b)
received outpatient alcohol abuse treatment from March 2006 to June 2006 at K facility;
and (c) abused alcohol as alleged in subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.h (since stricken
and replaced with 1.i).
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have (i) falsified material facts in a July
2004 interview with a DoD investigator re: his arrest history, and (ii) falsified material
facts in an April 2007 DoD interview re: his arrest history.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations covering his
alleged arrests and alcohol abuse, but denied any intention to omit material facts in his
DoD interviews. He added explanations to some of his answers. Responding to the
3
allegations covered by Guideline J, he claimed he was innocent of any burglary in
connection with his alleged 1985 arrest, despite a conviction in the matter. He claimed
the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f are related.  He claimed the child
cruelty charges that resulted from a 1993 investigation were based on false allegations
reported by his ex-girlfriend, and were dismissed. And he claimed his alleged March
2006 arrest and conviction on domestic violence charges are alcohol-related. In
responding to the allegations covered by Guideline G, he claimed he had to stop KP
treatment because of conflicts with the days and times available to him.  And, in
response to the allegations covered by Guideline E, he claimed again that the underlying
allegations covered by Guideline E were false and dismissed.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 50-year-old maintenance facility technician of a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant experienced a difficult childhood while growing up. He seldom saw his
mother or father. (GEs 3 and 4) He has limited post-high school schooling. He attended
a vocational school for six months between January and June 1997, and earned an
engineering certificate. (GE 1)
Applicant married W1 in October 1981. He has one child from this marriage, and
divorced his wife in September 1986. (GEs 1 and 3) His daughter from this marriage
lived with W1 while growing up.  Since her mother passed away, she has lived on her
own. (Tr. 138-139) Applicant has not maintained any contact with this daughter. (Tr. 155)
Between 1986 and 1990, Applicant lived with a girlfriend and has two children
(girls, ages 22 and 21, respectively) from this relationship. (see (GE 1; Tr. 154-155)  One
of his daughters serves in the Air Force; the other is a mother who currently does not
work. (Tr. 155)  Besides their two children, his girlfriend had a young son who resided
with them. (see GE 7)  He and his girlfriend separated in 1990. (GE 4)
While in high school. Applicant was introduced to alcohol. (see GEs 3 and 4 and
AE B; Tr. 116).  Between 1977 and 1985, he consumed alcohol regularly, and often to
excess and to the point of intoxication. (GEs 3, 4, and 7; Tr. 116-118, 129). He quit
drinking altogether in 1985 to provide a better example for his daughter and prove to
himself he was not an alcoholic. (Tr. 99, 129-130) Believing at the time he was not an
alcoholic and could safely drink at controlled levels, Applicant resumed drinking in 2001,
mostly in social situations with W2. (Tr. 100) Within a couple of years, though, he
increased his drinking to excessive levels, and to the point of intoxication. (GEs 3 and 4;
AE C; Tr. 98) His medical records revealed that he and W2 consumed up to a fifth of
Tequila daily between themselves while at home, and to the point of intoxication. (see
AE C) Applicant agrees with this medical account. (Tr. 98)
4
Besides consuming alcohol excessively between 1977 and 1985, Applicant
smoked marijuana frequently during this same period, and snorted methamphetamine as
well from age 24 to age 28. (see GE 7) He last used methamphetamines in September
1990.  
Applicant’s arrest history
FBI information reports list three Applicant arrests between 1984 and 1985 on
various grounds. In April 1984, he was arrested and convicted of the charge of
possession of a controlled substance. (Tr. 74-75)  For this charge, he was placed on 36
months probation and fined. (see GE 4 and 5) Shortly thereafter, in June 1984, he was
arrested and charged with driving on a suspended license (drugs/alcohol). He was found
guilty and sentenced to 180 days in jail, placed on three years court probation, and fined
$680. (see GEs 3 and 7)  
In June 1985, Applicant was arrested and charged with burglary. (GE 5)  A vehicle
on a highway that Applicant stopped to check was burglarized. Applicant denies any
knowledge or responsibility for the burglary (Tr. 78), but was convicted of the charge on
the apparent strength of an eyewitness’s account of spotting him at the roadside scene
where Applicant had stopped.
In March 1988, Applicant was arrested and charged with wilful cruelty to a child
and injury to a child. (GE 5; Tr. 82-83). On the day of his arrest, Applicant and his
girlfriend were arguing, which prompted a neighbor to call police. (GE 4). During their
argument, Applicant noted that her young son had wet the bed. (GE 4). Applicant took
the boy to the bathroom to clean up, and when he returned, he found the boy urinating
on the floor. (see GE 4; Tr. 84-85, 90-91) (GE 4). Applicant was subsequently arrested
by investigating police and charged with wilful cruelty to a child and injury to a child. The
court found him guilty of the charges and sentenced him to 365 days in jail (suspended),
placed him on five years of probation, and ordered him to obtain psychological and
parental counseling. (see GEs 4 and 7) Applicant attended parental counseling classes
for six months in 1988, and was enrolled in a drug diversion program during the same
time frame.  (see GE 7) 
While still on probation, Applicant was involved in a second incident of child
abuse.  In 1990, Applicant was arrested at his home for spanking his son while he was
still on probation for a prior arrest (Tr. 93)  On the day of his arrest, he was home with
the woman with whom he was living when her eight-year-old son from another
relationship (Tr. 140-141) ran from the front yard of their apartment to the adjacent
street. (GE 4; Tr. 90-93). Applicant pursued him and yelled at the boy to return. When
the young boy returned to him as he ordered, he spanked him on the rear and directed
him to return to their apartment. (GE 4). The boy obeyed Applicant, and there were no
other incidents with the boy.  However, the boy informed his father of what Applicant had
done to him, and the police came out to Applicant’s home to investigate. (GE 4). Upon
taking a report of the incident from his girlfriend, investigating police arrested Applicant
and charged him with felony wilful cruelty to a child and infliction of injury upon a child.
5
Applicant was found guilty of one count of inflicting injury upon a child.  The court, in turn,
sentenced him to 365 days in jail, placed him on five years of probation, and fined him.
(see GEs 4 and 5) Applicant served eight months of his sentence in jail before being
granted an early release for good behavior. (GE 4) With his release, he was permitted to
continue with his probation, which he completed in May 1996. (GE 7)
Between 1991 and 1996, Applicant was assigned to a local probation officer.
Records show that Applicant enrolled in counseling in September 1991 and maintained
poor attendance throughout 1991 and 1992. (see GE 7)  Periodically, he was warned by
his probation officer that his missing counseling sessions could jeopardize his probation
status, and would be reported to the court, if they persisted. (GE 7) Applicant was
continuously admonished by his probation officer for his lack of participation in
counseling. (GE 7) In a letter of February 1992 to his probation officer, Applicant
attributed his counseling absences to poor finances. He expressed a willingness to
continue his counseling when he found work, but could provide no date certain.  (GE 7)
His letter did not deter his probation officer from asking the supervising court to consider
ordering Applicant to spend 180 days in protective custody. (see GE 7).  In a series of
minute orders in March and August 1992, Applicant was ordered to complete 300 hours
of community service and was credited by the court with doing so. (GE 7).  By its minute
order of March 26, 1992, the supervising court continued Applicant’s probation on the
same terms and conditions and credited him with being in probation compliance. (GE 7)  
In March 1993, police were called to Applicant’s motor home to investigate a
neighbor’s report of a child’s screams in the home. (see GE 7)  The investigating officer
first interviewed Applicant’s youngest daughter (M).  Accounts of the officer’s interview in
the investigation report reveal that M told the officer that Applicant placed her in the
corner and spanked her real hard, “a whole bunch of times.” (GE 7) M related that
Applicant then placed her on the bed and spanked her again. Once he finished his
interview with M, the officer proceeded to interview Applicant in the front yard of the
location. Asked what happened, Applicant told the officer he spanked her for “lying” to
him. (GE 7). He told the officer M was wearing sweat pants at the time and any audible
yelling from his motor-home was likely his own resulting from a slip and fall in the motor
home. (GE7) He then commented to the officer that he was on probation for physical
child abuse.
After leaving Applicant, the investigating officer interviewed the informant who
requested to remain anonymous. This informant described the yelling as continuous over
a ten-minute period, and generally indicative of a very, very angry man. (GE 7). The
investigating officer then spoke with Applicant’s mother and photographed M’s injuries
with the assistance of Applicant’s mother. M’s injuries included red bruise marks on her
upper buttocks at the base of her spine.
When the investigating officer confronted Applicant with his observations of M,
Applicant admitted to lying to the officer in his first interview and attributed his initial false
accounting of the incident with M to his fears of having his probation revoked and his
being returned to jail. (GE 7) Based on his observations of M, the investigating officer
6
then examined Applicant’s other daughter (C) for signs of hard spanking. While he did
see some bruise marks on C’s buttocks area, he could not determine the extremity of the
marks. Although this investigating officer was able to form an opinion that Applicant had
violated his probation conditions with his actions toward M, he noted Applicant’s eventual
cooperation and decided not to take Applicant into custody at the time, pending further
investigation and a determination of Applicant’s probation conditions. (GE 7)
Once the county’s investigation of Applicant’s actions against M in March 1993
was completed, a warrant was issued for Applicant’s arrest for violation of probation
associated with Applicant’s 1990 child abuse conviction. (GE 7) In the state’s probation
revocation application, Applicant’s probation officer described Applicant as a “speed
user, and he abuses his children . . .” (GE 7) His probation officer recommended
revocation of Applicant’s probation. In an initial court hearing in April 1993, the court
granted the State’s preliminary motion to revoke Applicant’s probation, pending the
outcome of an evidentiary hearing on the motion. (GE 7). But at the scheduled
evidentiary hearing (two weeks later) on the probation violation charges, the presiding
court listened to the testimony of Applicant and the investigating police officers and found
no probation violation. (GE 7) The court added conditions to Applicant’s probation
conditions: no use of corporal punishment on any child and  continued counseling.           
                                                                            
On March 2, 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with corporal injury to his
spouse and simple battery. He pled no contest to both counts and was found guilty of
both counts. (GE 6) According to Applicant’s account, he and W2 were experiencing
family issues at the time of his arrest. She had lost her job; their two daughters were
stealing from Applicant; and her son (from another marriage) had threatened Applicant
physically. On the evening of his arrest, Applicant, W2, and C were at their home, and
Applicant had consumed a half bottle of Tequila (or fifth) that evening. (GE 3)  Applicant
became intoxicated from his drinking and blacked out. He recalled going to sleep and
then awaking, after which he screamed and yelled at W2 over something trivial. He
recalled grabbing W2 and throwing her to the floor, but nothing more.  He claims that W2
and C have not been willing to tell him any more about his action that evening, and he
has no further details of his own to add of the evening’s events. (GE 3) He claimed he
was confused about the evening’s events and was told only by arresting sheriffs’
deputies that he was being arrested for domestic violence. (GE 3)
Sheriff’s deputies who took a distress call from C concerning the events of March
2, investigated the incident. Upon arriving at Applicant’s home, the investigating officer
was told by W2 that she and Applicant were involved in an argument over a small matter
when Applicant grabbed her by her upper arm and threw her to the ground. (GE 6)
Applicant (according to W2) then grabbed her by the neck with his left hand and choked
her.  She managed to kick him in the groin/stomach area and gain her release from his
clutches. After releasing her, he yelled at her: “If you don’t give me my (expletive) lighter,
I will (expletive) kill you.” (GE 6) At this point, Applicant’s daughter C tried to intervene on
her mother’s behalf, and was pushed backwards (uninjured by the push).  Fearing for C’s
and her own safety, W2 picked up a baseball bat and yelled at Applicant to leave the
room. Applicant complied until police arrived. Asked for her account of the events of
7
March 2 by the investigating officer, C corroborated her mother’s account. (GE 6) In
addition to obtaining statements from the principals present at the March 2 incident, the
investigating officer examined W2 for body marks and noted dry blood on W2's right
temple area, and redness on her throat. 
Based on the investigation of the March 2 events, the investigating officer arrested
Applicant for injury to W2 and battery (simple), took him into custody, and transported
him to a local police station for booking. (GE 6) A misdemeanor complaint was filed in
the local superior court, charging Applicant with corporal injury to a
spouse/cohabitant/child’s parent and battery: simple. (GE 6) Applicant plead no contest
to both counts and was found guilty of each count. The sentencing court placed him on
probation for 60 months; ordered him to serve 45 days in jail or perform 45 days of work
for a state program; required him to attend a domestic violence batters’ program (VP);
required him to attend 20 Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings; and fined him. (GE 6)
Post-conviction rehabilitation efforts
Applicant enrolled in a recognized violence prevention program (VP) in June 2006
and documents his completion of the 52-week program in July 2007. (see GE 7 and AE
B; Tr. 113) He also completed 20 meetings with a local AA chapter. (AE B; Tr. 114)
Applicant documented his completion of 48 hours of community service, in lieu of serving
45 days of jail time. (see AE B; Tr. 151-152)
Contemporaneous with his enrollment in VP’s domestic violence program
Applicant voluntarily admitted himself to an outpatient treatment program with K facility in
March 2006. Medical records document Applicant’s weekly participation in K facility’s
adult treatment plan between March 2006 and June 5, 2006. (AE B). K facility’s
consultation report included an alcohol and drug history from Applicant. It reports the
absence of any prior diagnosis or treatment for a mental or emotional disorder or
substance abuse problem.  In providing background information to K facility, Applicant
denied any family history of mental illness, but reported a positive family history of
substance abuse with his siblings. He reported the absence of any parental physical and
emotional support during his nurturing years. And he denied any prior hospitalizations.
Citing logistical conflicts with his anger management classes, Applicant ceased
attending his outpatient sessions with K facility in July 2006. (Tr. 137-138). In his
interview with an investigator of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in July
2007, Applicant assured the investigator he could not historically recall any instances of
taking prescribed medications. Nor could he recollect any diagnosis of any kind of
condition. (compare GE 3 with AE B)
Since the Fall of 2008, Applicant has participated in a spiritually-based 12-step
recovery program affiliated with his church. (see GE 3 and AE A; Tr. 141-143) The
program’s ministry leader, and Applicant’s current sponsor, described his church’s
celebrate recovery program as a Christ-centered, biblically-based 12-step recovery
program for men and women “dealing with all kinds of life’s hurts, habits and hang-ups.”
8
(AE A; Tr. 53). His ministry uses a 12-step program similar to the program used by AA
chapters nationally. (AE A; Tr. 53)  Its stated purpose is to encourage fellowship and to
celebrate God’s healing power as they work their way along the road to recovery.
 Both Applicant and his past co-leader of his ministry’s alcohol recovery program
credit the program with helping Applicant to maintain his sobriety and account for and
take more responsibility for his own actions. (Tr.131-134, 143-145)  Like AA, his church’s
12-step program offers chips to celebrate sobriety milestones. The ministry’s pastor
credits Applicant with completing all of the 12 steps in the program, and continuing to
work the same steps as a co-leader of his 12-step ministry with his church pastor and
sponsor since September 2009. (see AE A; Tr. 54-55  
Applicant provided no chips or other documentary evidence to corroborate his
abstinence claims and clean arrest record since March 2006. Nonetheless, the
assurances provided by Applicant and his pastor/sponsor that Applicant, with the aid of
his church’s celebrate recovery ministry, has maintained his abstinence since March
2006 are credible and accepted.  (see AE A; Tr. 50-57, 131-132) 
Afforded an opportunity to explore his obtaining an early release from his
probation condition (then due to expire in March 2011), Applicant successfully moved the
supervising court with continuing jurisdiction over Applicant’s March 2006 conviction to
grant him early release from any continuing probation conditions. (see AE D). The court’s
October 2010 minute order confirmed the court’s termination of Applicant’s probation
upon his motion to modify his probation. The state did not oppose Applicant’s motion.
(AE D)  
Applicant’s E-Qip and OPM interview omissions 
Asked to complete a security application (E-QIP) in March 2006, Applicant listed
his pending charges related to his March 2, 2006, spousal abuse offense. (see GE 1)
However, he omitted his 1993 incident. This incident was potentially includable in the
pertinent information sections of the E-QiIP because it involved an underlying felony
conviction.  Specifically, his 1993 incident covered the investigation of reported cruelty to
a child and warrant for his arrest for violation of probation ordered by the sentencing
court in 1990. However, neither the charging revocation of probation motion nor the
entered orders of the hearing court cited any governing penal authority for probation
revocation, and there is noting in the record to identify the governing standards in the
event Applicant’s probation was revoked. 
Factually, it is not at all clear whether a probation revocation in the jurisdiction
where the 1993 matter arose invoked a felony, or just a misdemeanor. If a violation of
probation is only a misdemeanor in Applicant’s state, then Applicant’s 1993 arrest would
not have required listing in his E-QIP. Uncertainty in classifying the criminal level of a
probation violation covering a felony conviction may best explain why Applicant’s 1993
arrest was not alleged in the SOR.  Since the issuance of the SOR, there has been no
9
Government amendment request to add Applicant’s 1993 arrest as an arrest that should
have been listed in Applicant’s E-QIP. 
Applicant was twice interviewed by Government investigators concerning his
arrest history. In his July 2004 interview with an agent from the Defense Security Service
(DSS), he covered his arrests in 1988 and 1990, but did not mention his receipt of an
issued 1993 warrant for his arrest for probation violation. Applicant denied any intention
to intentionally omit this arrest, but provided no detailed explanations. Without any
established legal certainty that a probation violation related to a felony conviction itself
constitutes a felony, on legal requirement can be ascribed to Applicant to disclose the
1993 warrant and motion. In his E-QIP.
In October 2007, an agent from OPM scheduled an interview with Applicant to
discuss his March 2006 spousal abuse incident with W2. Asked why he did not list the
arrest in his March 2006 E-QIP, Applicant indicated that the incident “occurred after he
submitted his SF questionnaire.” (GE 3) He proceeded to provide background
information preceding the incident, and limited information about his recall of the incident
itself. There are no indications in the summary of interview that the OPM agent asked
Applicant about any other arrests, or that the arrest warranted full voluntary disclosure by
Applicant.  Applicant volunteering that he has “committed no other similar offenses” other
than the ones he was convicted of 1989 and 1990 was not a misstatement, if the
underlying felony conviction did not set the legal parameters for determining the nature
of any probation violation. (GE3) Applicant provided no other pertinent information about
his 1993 arrest. 
Applicant’s explanations of his omissions of his 1993 arrest in both his 2004 and
2007 interviews are not totally reconcilable with his past statements regarding the
substantive charges.  His claim that his girlfriend falsely accused him of striking a child is
not entirely consistent with the police findings following an investigation into claims that
Applicant spanked his girlfriend’s son. Although the anonymous caller’s identity is not
clear from the police accounts of the 1993 incident, accounts of his spanking the child
are fairly settled. What investigating officers could not agree on was the extent of the
injuries incurred by the child, and whether the evidence was sufficient to revoke
Applicant’s probation. 
More persuasive are Applicant’s confusion claims stemming from his
misunderstanding of the significance of the court’s dismissal of the 1993 probation
violation charges.. Contextually, he claimed confusion over the E-QIP question in light of
the dismissal of the probation violation charges based on the developed evidence by
investigating police. His stated reasons for not volunteering information about the 1993
incident without any questions from interviewing agents are plausible and credible under
all of the circumstances considered, and are accepted.  While he does not question the
punishable nature of a probation violation (felony or misdemeanor), it is questionable
whether he had any duty to disclose his 1993 arrest to the interviewing OPM agent.
Only if a probation violation was legally defined as a felony itself would the arrest (older
than seven years) need to be disclosed at all by Applicant. 
10
 Considering all of the circumstances surrounding the statements provided by
Applicant in his 2004 DSS interview and his 2007 OPM interview, inferences warrant that
Applicant’s interview omissions of his 1993 arrest were legally excusable.  In the event a
probation violation associated with an underlying felony conviction could be considered a
felony and subject to disclosure requirements, inferences warrant that Applicant’s failure
to disclose his 1993 arrest in either interview was inadvertent.   
Endorsements and performance evaluations
Applicant is highly regarded by his coworkers. His maintenance facility leads
describe Applicant as trustworthy and dependable. They credit him with integrity and
responsibility. (see AE A)  His church pastor with considerable knowledge of his drinking
and anger issues cites Applicant’s marriage to W2 following his March 2006 incident as a
strong testament of his progress in overcoming the alcohol and anger problems that
contributed to so much of his arrest history. (AE A) Applicant’s pastor credits Applicant
with being an active church member who is trustworthy and honorable.  
Members of Applicant’s celebrate ministry are equally effusive in their praise of
Applicant’s positive efforts in overcoming alcohol and alcohol issues and consider
Applicant an invaluable member of their Celebrate Recovery ministry. (AE A) They credit
him with demonstrated Christ-like qualities, honesty, openness, humility, and a unique
willingness and ability to lead others by serving. Both his pastor and local outreach
minister recommend Applicant for a position of trust.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
11
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy concerns are pertinent herein:
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and
regulations.  AG, ¶ 30.
Alcohol Consumption
The Concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the
exercise of questionable judgment, or the failure to control impulses, and
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.
See AG, ¶ 21.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
Under the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an Applicant's request for
security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly
consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive requires administrative
judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record,
the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in
large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all adversarial
proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and
12
logical basis from the evidence of record. Conversely, the judge cannot draw factual
inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR; and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or his security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.  Because Executive Order 10865 requires that all
security clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, “security-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
Analysis
Applicant presents as a conscientious maintenance facility technician with a
considerable history of assorted arrests and convictions (several alcohol-related) over a
26-year period and recurrent problems with alcohol before turning to a spiritually-inspired
recovery program. Principal security issues raised in this case center on Applicant’s
history of arrests for child and spousal abuse, his recurrent periods of alcohol abuse, and
his omitted accounts of a 1993 arrest in his DSS and OPM interviews that followed his
completion of an E-QIP in March 2006.
Criminal arrest issues
Applicant’s arrests and convictions fall into two principal categories: drugs and
alcohol, driving on a suspended license, and burglary arrests in the 1984-1985 time
frame, and a series of child abuse arrests (three in all) spaced between 1988 and 1993,
and a more recent spousal abuse arrest and conviction in March 2006. All but his 1993
probation violation charges resulted in convictions and extensive probation conditions,
and in one instance (associated with his 1990 child abuse conviction), jail time.
Applicable disqualifying conditions under the criminal conduct guideline include
DC ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” DC ¶ 31(c), “allegation or
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged,
formally prosecuted or convicted,” and DC ¶ 31(e), “violation of parole or probation, or
failure to complete a court-mandated rehabilitation program.” To be sure, Applicant was
never fully prosecuted or convicted of any probation violations.  Nonetheless, e-mail
exchanges between Applicant and his parole officer in 1991 and 1992, and arrest reports
13
associated with Applicant’s 1993 arrest warrant for a violation of probation, reflect prima
facie instances of probation violations. The cited records are enough to justify the
application of  DC ¶ 31(e) to the facts of Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s arrest and conviction history covered over 20 years and included two
serious child abuse incidents in 1988 and 1990 that resulted in jail time and lengthy
probation conditions. More recently, he was convicted of spousal abuse and placed on
five years of probation and required to participate in anger management classes.
Together, they reflect a recurrent pattern of criminal behavior over an extended period of
time.
Since March 2006, Applicant has not been involved in any recurrent abuse
incidents. Applicant attributes his demonstrated rehabilitation to the anger management
classes he completed in July 2007, the counseling he received from K facility in 2006,
the support he has had from W2, and the spiritual growth he has been able to achieve
with the support of his Celebrate Recovery ministry.  The growth and maturing that
Applicant has displayed throughout his rehabilitative efforts are impressive. He has
avoided any incidents with law enforcement since his last reported incident of March
2006, and shows renewed strength in his relationships with W2 and his daughters. His
probation conditions that were not due to expire until March 2011 have been terminated
by the court. As matters stand, Applicant has no remaining probation conditions to
satisfy.
Without any evidence to challenge Applicant’s steady rehabilitative progress he
has shown since his last arrest in March 2006, the criminal conduct concerns that are
based on his history of recurrent arrests between 1984 and 2006 are entitled to crediting
of mitigation. Applicant may rely on MC ¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed since the
criminal behavior happened, or it happened under unusual circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment.” Applicant’s prior convictions are currently aged and are outweighed by
his substantial showing of good judgment and trust demonstrated with his civilian
employers, and family over the past four years. Applicant has also established himself to
be a responsible parent of his two daughters (since emancipated) and stepson.   
In the face of Applicant’s persuasive showing of extenuating circumstances
surrounding his 2006 arrest, his responsible parenting efforts, and his impressive
professional achievements with his civilian employer, his prior arrests and convictions
are not enough to warrant continuing security concerns about his judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness. 
 Based on his own rehabilitative efforts to date (which include anger management
classes, permanent changes in his family environment, and almost four years of
demonstrated responsibility and trust with his children and with his colleagues in the
workplace), the chances of any recurrent domestic actions like the ones that produced
his 2006 conviction are highly unlikely.  Applicant may take advantage of MC ¶ 32(d) of
the criminal conduct guideline, “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including
14
but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive
community involvement.”
Both from a consideration of the applicable guidelines, and from a whole-person
perspective, Applicant demonstrates he  possesses the strength of overall character and
rehabilitation to meet all of the minimum requirements under the criminal conduct
guideline for continued eligibility to hold a security clearance. Applicant maintains the
confidence and trust of past and present leads in his maintenance facility familiar with his
work and behavior within and without the work place. And he has completed all of his
probation conditions and maintains the positive support of his church pastors.
Applicant’s many credits in his life should not be taken to minimize in any way the
seriousness of his actions that resulted in his series of child abuse, spousal abuse, and
other illegal actions over a 20-year period spanning 1984 and March 2006.  Based on
the confluence of corrective steps he has taken to date, he persuasively demonstrates
that he has learned important lessons from his unfortunate lapses in judgment and
familial responsibilities and will work earnestly to avoid any recurrence. Taking into
account all of the facts and circumstances developed in the record, favorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a
through 1.c and 1.e through 1.i of the SOR.
Alcohol issues
Applicant’s recurrent history of excessive drinking and his 2006 alcohol-related
arrest on spousal abuse charges raise important security concerns about his risk of
recurrent alcohol abuse. On the strength of the evidence presented, two disqualifying
conditions (DC) of the AG for alcohol consumption (AG ¶ 21) may be applied: DC ¶
22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent,” and  DC ¶ 22(c), “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the
point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”  
True, Applicant considers himself an alcoholic and attends a church-based 12-
step program.  Still, he has never been diagnosed for alcohol abuse or dependence.  As
a result, DC ¶ 22(f), “relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program is inapplicable to the facts of Applicant’s
case.
Cognizant of his recurrent history of abusive drinking and the seriousness of his
alcohol-related spousal abuse conviction in 2006, Applicant has come to recognize he is
alcoholic and assures he will continue his 12-step Christ-based recovery program
designed to keep him alcohol-free. Since his last and only documented alcohol-related
incident in 2006, he has remained abstinent and is committed to avoiding alcohol in the
15
future. Applicant’s assurances are highly credible based on the progress he has shown
to date, and are  accepted.
Based on the positive steps he has taken to address his problems with alcohol,
since his 2006 offense, Applicant may rely on one of the mitigating conditions of the
alcohol guideline: MC ¶ 22(a),“ so much time has passed, or the behavior was so
infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.”  While four years of demonstrated good behavior is not a significant period of
recovery for an applicant who abused the substance recurrently over the previous 28
years, it is enough considering the quality of his recovery program and the time he has
committed to sustained abstinence. 
Taking into account Applicant’s very limited history of alcohol-related incidents
(defined by his cited two alcohol-related incidents), his rehabilitation efforts with his
celebrate recovery ministry, and his strong work record, the applicable guidelines, and a
whole-person assessment, conclusions warrant that his overall efforts reflect sufficient
evidence of sustained commitment to abstinence (over four years of sobriety) to ensure
that he is not at any risk of recurrent alcohol abuse.  
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant makes a convincing showing that he
has the strength and stability to avert any recurrent problems with judgment lapses
related to alcohol. Applicant’s mitigation efforts are enough to warrant safe predictions
that he is no longer at risk to judgment impairment associated with alcohol abuse.
Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline G of
the SOR. 
Personal conduct concerns
Security concerns over Applicant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness are
raised under Guideline E as the result of his omissions of his 1993 probation violation
arrest in both his 2004 DSS interview and his later 2007 OPM interview. By omitting his
arrest warrant stemming from an investigation into a possible probation violation in 1993,
questions arise over whether Applicant failure to furnish materially important background
information about his arrest history that was needed for the Government to properly
process and evaluate his security clearance application.
Applicant’s omissions are attributable to some misunderstanding and uncertainty
over the listing requirements of the issued arrest warrant in light of (a) leal questions over
the legal nature of a probation violation associated with an underlying felony conviction
and (b) a subsequent favorable court finding on the underlying charges. Because of the
raised uncertainty over the nature of a probation violation covering an underlying felony
(misdemeanor or felony) and Applicant’s accepted confusion over the meaning of the
pertinent E-QIP question in light of the court’s ensuing finding in his favor, no
conclusions of deliberate omission may attach to his failure to disclose the arrest in
either of his two interviews. Accordingly, the falsification allegations are unproven.  
16
In evaluating all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s DSS and OPM
omissions of his 1993 arrest, and his hearing testimony, his explanations are sufficient to
enable him to convincingly refute or mitigate the deliberate falsification allegations.
Overall, Applicant’s explanations about his omissions and misrepresentations are
persuasive enough to warrant conclusions that the falsification allegations relative to his
omissions of his 1993 arrest in his DSS and OPM interviews are unsubstantiated. Taking
into account all of the evidence produced in this record, favorable conclusions warrant
with respect to the Guideline E allegations that Appellant knowingly and wilfully omitted
his 1993 arrest warrant in the DSS and OPM interviews he attended in 2004 and 2007,
respectively.  
Formal Findings
   
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT): FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a -1.c, 1.e -1.i                      For Applicant
:
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION):   FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 2.a -2.c:            For Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT): FOR APPLICANT
Subparas 3.a and 3.b: For Applicant             
       
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is granted.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
17
