KEYWORD: Guideline G
DIGEST: The Judge’s questions were relevant and temperate.  Applicant has not rebutted the
presumption that the Judge was impartial and unbiased.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-07618.a1
DATE: 01/26/2011
DATE: January 26, 2011
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-07618
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Kevin Barry McDermott, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 11, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
2
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On October 21, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Jennifer I.
Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge was biased and whether
the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Consistent with the following discussion, we affirm the decision of the Judge.
Facts
The Judge found that Applicant is an employee of a Defense contractor.  He is married and
has a 14 year-old daughter.  He has held a security clearance for 20 years.  
Applicant, who began consuming alcohol at age 17, was arrested and charged with DUI in
January 2005.  He pled guilty to reckless driving and was given three years of probation.  He was
required to enter into a first offender program and pay a fine.  
After this incident, Applicant abstained from alcohol for two years.  However, he resumed
his consumption of alcohol.  From 1997 until 2007, excluding the two year abstention, Applicant
would become intoxicated two or three time a week and then operate his car.  He would often drink
outside the home because his wife did not approve.  
In November 2007 he was again arrested for DUI.  Convicted, he was sentenced to 48
months of probation, conditioned on participation in an 18-month alcohol recovery program, 49
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings, and one day of confinement in the county jail.  He fulfilled
these requirements but was still on probation at the close of the record.  
Although Applicant has also sought help through an assistance program provided by his
employer.  He attended a 15-week outpatient program, for a total of 125 hours.  Applicant no longer
associates with his drinking friends.  He has never had a sponsor in AA.  Although he completed the
first three of the 12 recovery steps prescribed by AA, he was unable at the hearing to recall what
they were.  He was not able to identify the name of the book relied upon by AA.
Applicant has promised to his wife that he will not drink again, he made a similar promise
after his 2005 arrest, yet, as stated above, returned to alcohol consumption.  He enjoys a good
reputation at his work place.  
In the Analysis portion of the decision, the Judge noted that Applicant had returned to
alcohol consumption in 2007 despite two years of abstinence following his first DUI and that he was
still on probation.  She noted favorable evidence, such as his completion of the alcohol treatment
programs referenced above.  However, she stated that she found Applicant’s testimony that he is
committed to sobriety to be lacking in credibility.  She gave as her reason for this conclusion: (1)
1During Applicant’s testimony, there was some apparent confusion as to the title of the AA handbook.
Applicant stated that it was called the Blue Book.  However, during a brief recess, the court reporter advised that it was
entitled the Big Book.  Tr. at 82.  The court reporter was not a witness and her statement was not evidence.
3
Applicant’s inability to recall the first three AA steps; (2) evidence that he has no AA sponsor; and
(3) evidence that he does not appear to be an active participant in AA.  
She also concluded that Applicant’s wife’s testimony corroborating his claims of abstinence
lacked credibility, in light of record evidence that Applicant had previously consumed alcohol away
from her presence in order not to upset her.  Moreover, she stated that Applicant had been a mature
adult during the times pertinent to his case, and that his admitted incidents of driving under the
influence of alcohol were more numerous than the two occasions upon which he was arrested.
Accordingly, the Judge concluded that Applicant had failed to mitigate the security concerns in his
case. 
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge was biased against him.  Specifically, he argues that the
Judge divested herself of her impartiality by taking an active part in questioning him.  He also argues
that the Judge considered matters outside the record, specifically the name of the AA handbook.  He
also points to the Judge’s statement that she was not convinced of his commitment to sobriety as
demonstrating bias against him. 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial and unbiased, and a party seeking
to overcome that presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion.  See, e. g., ISCR Case No. 08-
01306 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 28, 2009).  We have examined the transcript and the Judge’s decision.
She did question Applicant fairly extensively.  However, in a security clearance hearing, the Judge
is the finder of fact and enjoys considerable latitude in clarifying the record.  A review of the
transcript shows that the Judge’s questions in this case were relevant and temperate.  
Additionally, the Judge reasonably supported the challenged credibility determinations by
citations to record evidence, and we find no reason to disturb them.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1,
which requires us to defer to a Judge’s credibility determinations.  Even if the Judge erred by
considering extra-record evidence concerning the title of the AA handbook, the error was harmless.1
All in all, we have found nothing that would lead a reasonable person to conclude that the Judge
lacked the requisite impartiality.  See ISCR Case No. 03-24632 at 2 (App. Bd. May 19, 2006).
Applicant’s argument on appeal is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the judge was
unbiased.  
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
4
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
Order
 The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields               
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
