                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08529 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are partially the result of circumstances beyond his 
control. He understands the importance of maintaining financial responsibility and what 
is expected of him to be eligible for a security clearance. Given his circumstances, he 
has made reasonable efforts to resolve his financial problems, and given the 
opportunity, he will establish full financial responsibility. On balance, Applicant’s current 
financial problems do not cast doubts on his reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on October 10, 2007. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
On July 19, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant an SOR, which specified the basis for 
its decision – security concerns addressed in the Directive under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
On July 30, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 25, 
2010, to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on August 27, 2010. A second notice of hearing was issued on 
September 15, 2010, rescheduling the hearing for September 27, 2010. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled on September 27, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, and he 
presented Exhibits (AE) 1 through 16, which were admitted without objection. I kept the 
record open, allowing Applicant additional time to submit documentary evidence. He 
submitted AE 15 and 16, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 4, 2010.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 The Government moved to amend the SOR by adding Paragraph 1.o, alleging a 
$130,888 second mortgage in collection. The motion was marked and made part of the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. Applicant did not object, and I granted the motion as 
requested. (Tr. 18-20).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all 15 factual allegations in the SOR, with explanations. His 
admissions are incorporated here as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence of record, and having considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old information technology systems administrator working 
for a government contractor. He seeks to retain his security clearance eligibility to 
continue his job. Shortly after high school, he enlisted in the U.S. Navy where he served 
five years on active duty (1991-1995), and six years in the Reserve (1997-2002). During 
his last 10 months in the Reserve, he was recalled back to active duty. His rate was 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
intelligence specialist, and he achieved the rank of E-5. His service was characterized 
as honorable.  
 
While in the service, Applicant had access to classified information at the secret 
and top secret levels. After his discharge, his access to classified information was 
continued until the present, because of his work for government contractors. There is no 
evidence that he has compromised or caused others to compromise classified 
information, or that he has been involved in any security violations.  
 
Applicant completed an associate’s degree in Computer Information Systems 
from 1993 until 1994. He has never been married, but has a four-year-old daughter. He 
provides $1,100 a month in court-ordered financial support to his daughter. He is 
current in his child support obligation. 
 
Applicant’s employment history shows that he has been consistently employed 
by different government contractors since his discharge from the service. From 
November 2005 until December 2007, Applicant worked full-time simultaneously for two 
different government contractors. He was employed for company “S,” and earned 
around $83,000 a year, working from 03:00 p.m. until 11:00 p.m. He worked for 
company “H,” from 06:00 a.m. until 02:00 p.m., and earned around $95,000 a year.  
 
In early to mid-2007, Applicant entered into a contract to purchase a new home 
for approximately $526,000. He put down $60,000 when he ordered the construction of 
the new home. In July 2007, Applicant was laid off from his job with company H. At the 
time, he had not closed on the purchase of the home. He tried to get out of the real 
estate purchase contract, but he was not allowed to do so without forfeiting his $60,000 
down payment. Applicant made the mistake of going through with the purchase of the 
home with the expectation that he would quickly find another full-time job which would 
allow him to afford the mortgage payments. He closed on the home in October 2007. He 
took a first mortgage with a monthly payment of approximately $3,900 (SOR 1.h), and a 
second mortgage with a monthly payment of about $1,100 (SOR 1.o). Additionally, he 
took a $29,000 consumer loan to make the mortgage payments until he could find a 
second full-time job.  
 
Applicant was not able to find a second job and he could not afford to pay the 
mortgage, his debts, and his day-to-day living expenses. Most of the debts alleged in 
the SOR became delinquent during this period when he was neglecting other debts 
while trying to make his mortgage payments to save his home. His home was 
foreclosed in January 2008, and later sold.  
 
In his October 2007 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed he had 
financial problems. His background investigation revealed, and Applicant admitted, the 
15 delinquent or charged-off debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant explained that his 
financial problems were the result of him losing one of his full-time jobs and his bad 
business decision to purchase a home beyond his financial means.  
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $1,477 charged off consumer credit card that became 
delinquent in 2007, when he lost his second full-time job. In August 2010, he contacted 
the creditor, settled the debt, and established a payment plan. He made a $200 
payment in August 2010 (AE 4), and a $447 payment in September 2010 (AE 15). He 
has another $447 payment due in October 2010. With that payment, the debt will be 
paid in full. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges an $8,508 charged off credit card account that became 
delinquent in 2007, when he lost his second full-time job. In September 2010, he 
contacted the creditor and established a payment plan. He made a $112 payment in 
early September 2010 (AE 5), and a $312 payment in late September 2010. (AE 15)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges the same debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Appellant disputed the 
debt through the credit bureau and it was removed from his credit report. (AE 6, 10, 11) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a $2,398 charged off credit card account that became 
delinquent in 2007. In August 2010, he contacted the creditor, settled the debt, and 
established a payment plan. He made a $198 payment in August 2010 (AE 7), a $400 
payment in September 2010 (AE 15), and a $700 payment in October 2010 (AE 15). 
With two additional payments the debt will be paid in full. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a $1,076 charged off consumer credit card that became 
delinquent in 2007. In August 2010, he contacted the creditor, settled the debt, and 
established a payment plan. He made a $176 payment in August 2010 (AE 8), and a 
$300 payment in September 2010 (AE 15). With two additional payments the debt will 
be paid in full. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a $1,410 charged off debt to a telephone services provider that 
became delinquent in 2007. In September 2010, he contacted the creditor and paid the 
debt in full. (AE 15) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a $406 charged off debt to a telephone services provider that 
became delinquent in 2007. In September 2010, he contacted the creditor and paid the 
debt in full. (AE 9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a first real estate mortgage past due in the amount of 
approximately $32,500, with a monthly payment of approximately $3,900. SOR ¶ 1.o 
alleges a second mortgage on the same real estate property that was foreclosed. At his 
hearing, he claimed he no longer has any financial responsibility for either the first or 
second mortgages because the law of his state does not allow a creditor to recover for a 
mortgage deficiency after a foreclosure. He presented no documentary evidence to 
support his claim. 
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 1.i ($477), alleging a debt to a cable provider, Applicant 
initially admitted in his answer to the SOR that it was his delinquent debt. However, he 
 
5 
 
 
later realized he paid the debt. He presented no documentary evidence to prove it was 
paid. He intends to send a written dispute to the three credit bureaus.  
 
Regarding SOR ¶ 1.j, Applicant claimed he is not familiar with the alleged 
creditor. He believes this is a duplicate allegation of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
and 1.c. The debt appears to have been deleted from the most recent credit reports. 
Applicant intends to send a written dispute to the three credit bureaus. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.l, and 1.m allege Applicant’s unpaid traffic tickets that are in 
collection by a state. He testified he contacted the state and is in the process of 
establishing a payment plan. He presented no documentary evidence to support his 
claim. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.n alleges a $130 delinquent medical account. Applicant paid the 
account in August 2010. (AE 14) 
 
Applicant was sincerely remorseful and contrite about his past financial 
problems. He is earning around $98,000 a year from his current job. He is still looking 
for a second full-time job. With income from two jobs, he will be able to address his 
remaining delinquent debts expeditiously. He has been making changes in his lifestyle 
to save money to pay for his debts. He turned in his leased car and currently drives a 
2004 truck that is paid off. He is living with his girlfriend and his daughter, and they 
share the apartment monthly expenses. Because his real estate property was 
foreclosed and sold, he believes he is no longer legally responsible for the mortgages 
and he will now have some additional money at the end of the month to pay his debts. 
He sought out financial counseling, and also considered consolidating his debts in a 
payment plan, but decided to pay the debts on his own and avoid the expenses 
associated with a commercial payment plan. 
 
Applicant acknowledged he made a mistake by closing on the home after he lost 
his second full-time job. He knew that the income from one job would not be sufficient to 
cover his first and second mortgage payments and pay his remaining debts. He 
believed he would be able to find a second job in a short period of time, but he was not 
able to do so. He also acknowledged that he should have been more diligent in 
contacting his creditors and establishing payment plans. He stated that he was trying to 
refinance the house and include some of his delinquent debts in the refinancing, but that 
did not work out. Additionally, he did not have sufficient disposable income at the end of 
the month to pay for any additional debts and it would not have been reasonable for him 
to attempt to establish payment plans he could not fulfill. Considering the totality of his 
circumstances, Applicant is doing all he can do to resolve his debts.  
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
 
6 
 
 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any expressed or implied determination about Applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996); and ISCR Case 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010).     
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
 
7 
 
 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleged 15 delinquent debts in collection or charged off, which have 
been delinquent for several years. Applicant admitted, and the record evidence confirms 
that SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d-1.h, and 1.k-1.o are his delinquent accounts. His documentary 
evidence shows Applicant settled and is paying the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
1.d, and 1.e. He paid off the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, and 1.n. 
 
Applicant disputed the validity of the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c and it was 
removed form his credit report. He intends to dispute the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, 
because he believes he paid it. He also is in the process of disputing SOR ¶ 1.j, 
because he believes it is a duplicate allegation of SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c.  
 
Concerning SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.o, he claimed he no longer has any financial 
responsibility for either debt because the law of his state does not allow a creditor to 
recover for a mortgage deficiency after a foreclosure and sale of real estate property. 
He presented no documentary evidence to support his claim. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts raise the applicability of AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
 
8 
 
 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant has been consistently employed by different government contractors 
since his discharge from the service in 2002. From November 2005 until around July 
2007, Applicant worked two full-time jobs. In July 2007, he was laid off from one of his 
employers due to a company downsizing. His reduction in income and buying a home 
beyond his financial means caused most of his debts to become delinquent. 
 
Applicant disclosed his financial problems in his security clearance application. 
Out of the 15 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant paid three debts; he 
settled and made at least two payments in four debts; he successfully disputed one 
SOR debt; and he is in the process of disputing two other debts. In sum, Applicant 
resolved eight of the 15 debts alleged in the SOR, he is in the process of disputing two 
debts, and he contacted the creditor for three additional debts (traffic tickets) to 
establish a payment plan. The remaining concern are SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.o, for which he 
claimed he no longer has any financial responsibility because the law of his state 
prevents a creditor to recover for a mortgage deficiency after a foreclosure and sale of 
the real estate property.  
 
Outside of the delinquent debts discussed above, there is no evidence Applicant 
had other delinquent debts, or that he was living beyond his financial means. Applicant 
has a substantial income from his current employment. He is seeking another full-time 
job to accelerate the payment of his delinquent obligations. Because he was able to 
handle two full-time jobs in the past, it is likely he will be able to do so in the future. 
Additionally, with the payment of some of his debts, he will have more disposable 
income available to continue to address the remaining financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
some of the SOR debts are unresolved (recent behavior). It partially applies because he 
resolved eight of the delinquent debts, he appears to have a valid reason to dispute two 
debts, and is making arrangements to pay the three traffic tickets. The evidence 
 
9 
 
 
                                           
established circumstances beyond his control contributing to his inability to pay his 
debts, i.e., he was laid off from one of his full-time jobs and his inability to find another 
full-time position. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially established by the evidence. It only applies 
partially, because Applicant did not exercise financial responsibility when he purchased 
a home beyond his financial means. Applicant presented sufficient evidence showing 
his efforts to contact creditors and pay his debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant participated in financial counseling. He 
demonstrated he has the desire to resolve his debts by paying three debts, establishing 
payment plans for four other debts, and disputing one debt. His actions establish partial 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). He receives only partial credit because he should have 
been more diligent and aggressive in the resolution of his debts. AG ¶ 20(e) partially 
applies because he successfully disputed one debt and is in the process of disputing 
two other SOR debts.  
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant has a viable plan to resolve his 
financial problem. His evidence shows that through the years, he maintained financial 
responsibility until he lost his second full-time job. He also recently paid three debts and 
made payment arrangements for four other debts. He has a viable plan to resolve his 
other SOR debts.3  
 
 Applicant understands the possible adverse security clearance consequences of 
not maintaining financial responsibility. I believe that given time, Applicant will resolve 
the remaining SOR debts and avoid similar financial problems in the future. Although 
Applicant should have been more diligent addressing his debts, and he still has several 
unresolved SOR debts, his past behavior and current financial situation do not raise 
doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Financial 
considerations concerns are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
3 “[A]n applicant is not required to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts 
immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly given his 
circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” 
that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 29, 2009), citing ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
10 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
Applicant served approximately 11 years in the defense of his country. He has 
been successful in his jobs for different government contractors since 2002. He is a 
mature man and a good worker. He has sought counseling to overcome his financial 
problems and understands the importance of maintaining financial responsibility. He has 
held a security clearance during most of his military service and while working for 
government contractors. There is no evidence he has ever compromised or caused 
others to compromise classified information. His financial problems seem to be the 
result of his making the mistake of continuing with the closing of his home knowing he 
just had lost one of his full-time jobs, and his inability to find a new full-time job.  
 
Applicant is doing all he can do under his circumstances to resolve his financial 
problems. He has been working hard at his current job. He recently started to make a 
credible effort to pay his delinquent debts, and has made life-style changes to resolve 
his financial problems.  
 
I find Applicant’s testimony credible. He understands the importance of 
maintaining financial responsibility and what is expected of him to be eligible for a 
security clearance. He disclosed his financial problems in his security clearance 
application. His delinquent debts were partially the result of circumstances beyond his 
control. Considering his circumstances, he has made reasonable efforts to resolve his 
financial problems. He started to resolve his financial problems and given the 
opportunity, I believe he will continue to resolve his financial problems and establish full 
financial responsibility. Under the whole-person concept, Applicant’s current financial 
problems do not cast doubts on his reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment.  
 
The record evidence establishes Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 
11 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.o:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
