                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06954 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
I, Psychological Conditions and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 15, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline I. 
On October 26, 2010, DOHA amended the SOR detailing additional security concerns 
under Guideline I and Guideline E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the original SOR on April 2, 2010, and the amended SOR on 
November 4, 2010. He requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
was assigned to me on November 19, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
December 13, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 12, 2011. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 16. Applicant did not object and they were 
admitted. The Government also offered demonstrative exhibits that were marked as 
Hearing Exhibit I and II. Applicant and one witness testified on his behalf. He offered 
Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objections. He also offered 
Hearing Exhibit III for consideration. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
January 19, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, and 1.f through 
1.h. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 2.a. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old and has worked for a federal contractor since 2007. He 
served in the Army from 1993 through 1997, and received an Honorable Discharge. He 
has been married and divorced three times. He has three children, ages 16, 10, and 4. 
Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in 2007, and is working towards earning a 
master’s degree.1  
 
 In 1999, Applicant had his first manic episode. In March 2006, he was 
hospitalized after he attempted suicide during a manic episode. He drove his car 
approximately 120 miles per hour head on into another vehicle in traffic. He was 
hospitalized in a mental health ward for approximately five days. Sometime later that 
month he was diagnosed by Dr. B, a clinical psychologist, with bipolar disorder, and 
serious depression, chronic in nature. Dr. B, when questioned by an Office of Personnel 
(OPM) investigator, “responded affirmatively when asked whether [Applicant’s] condition 
could impair his judgment or reliability.” He explained to the OPM investigator that 
bipolar disorder generally is considered a serious, chronic condition that has to be 
controlled with medication.”2 When Applicant was released from the hospital, he was 
told to follow up his treatment in a mental health program. He was given an appointment 
for a mental health program. He was given discharge information and a note to provide 
to his employer that he should be excused from work for two weeks. Applicant did not 
follow-up. Applicant testified that he did not recall the hospital recommending he go to 
mental health treatment. He stated he did not enter a program because he had other 
priorities at the time, such as his children and his job.3 
 
1 Tr. 89-93-95. 
 
2 Tr. 29, 39-46; GE 1, 7. 
 
3 Tr. 39-46; GE 7. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant testified that he was treated by Dr. B from approximately March 2006 to 
May 2006. In the results of interview of Dr. B by the OPM investigator, he stated he had 
only seen Applicant one time for short duration.4 
 
 In July 2006, Applicant was hospitalized due in part to his bipolar disorder. 
Applicant stated he did not recall the specific problems he was having at the time, but 
remembered he lost his zeal for life, was depressed, and had difficulty focusing. The 
hospital discharge summary stated: Applicant was suicidal with thoughts of drowning 
himself; his girlfriend told doctors and medical staff that he voiced suicidal thoughts 
more than once, and he has stopped taking his medication.5 He signed himself out of 
the hospital against medical advice for further inpatient psychiatric treatment. He stated 
he did this because he feared he would lose his job. He did not recall the name of the 
doctor he saw. He does not recall how often he sought mental health counseling. 
Applicant did not seek mental health treatment again until July 2007.6  
 
 In July 2007, Applicant sought treatment at a hospital and started therapy. He did 
not start therapy before then because he had other priorities in his life. He did not feel 
like medication would help him. He was focused on his job and taking care of his family. 
He stated he started therapy after he completed his security clearance application on 
July 27, 2007.7 In October 2007, Applicant was evaluated by Dr. C and diagnosed with 
bipolar disorder, nonspecific NOS, and prescribed medication. He recalled telling Dr. C 
that he was concerned that his security clearance might be denied due to his mental 
health. The results of interview of Dr. C by OPM on October 24, 2007 stated: 
“[Applicant] is stable and on medication. [Applicant] is not having mood swings now. 
[Applicant] is on medication now and intends to continue treatment. His prognosis is 
good if he stays on his medication and continues treatment.”8 In response to 
interrogatories requesting if Dr. C had any additional information to provide he stated:  
 
When I said he has a condition that “could” impair his judgment, I meant 
that if he did not follow up with treatment recommendations his symptoms 
could recur. As long as he continues follow-up [and] treatment (until his 
psychiatrist says it’s no longer necessary) the prognosis is good [and] he 
can be expected to function in a stable, productive way.9 
 
Applicant stated he believed he was counseled by Dr. C once a month from July 
2007 to December 2007. 
                                                          
4 GE 9. 
 
5 GE 6, 7. 
 
6 Tr 46-54. 
 
7 Tr. 50-62. 
 
8 Tr. 62-64; GE 10. 
 
9 GE 10. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 Dr. F provided a statement to the OPM investigator. He noted that Applicant first 
sought treatment in 2006, and had been diagnosed with bipolar disorder. Applicant was 
referred to him from the hospital, but Dr. F had only one appointment with him in 
December 2007. Applicant came to Dr. F’s office for medication, which was prescribed. 
No other treatment was provided by Dr. F, and he was uncertain if Applicant was 
attending individual therapy at the time. Dr. F stated that Applicant had a history of 
noncompliance and had canceled appointments with him. He had tried several 
medications; but Applicant did not always take his medications. He opined that there 
was a very high potential for Applicant’s bipolar disorder to impair his judgment and 
reliability and his prognosis was guarded.10 
 
 Applicant admitted that on about November 1, 2007, he told a licensed clinical 
social worker at a hospital that he wanted a “quick fix” to his mental health problem and 
he was unsure of the need for individual therapy. Applicant explained that at times he 
felt really bad on the medication that was prescribed to him, and he was told it would 
make him feel worse before he felt better. He found it difficult to deal with because he 
had a family, a job, and children to support.11 
 
Applicant began seeing Dr. D in 2008. He believes he saw him about two to three 
times that year. Applicant could not recall the specific periods of time he saw different 
doctors. He was not receiving any other therapy, other than the two to three visits with 
Dr. D in 2008. Dr. D provided a statement in June 2008. It stated: 
 
[Applicant] does have major affective disorder (bipolar). He has been 
hospitalized [three] times. The first stay was October 2006. He is now 
stabilized for a year in outpatient treatment. He is compliant on only one 
medication and has an excellent prognosis.12  
 
 Applicant stated that he stopped taking his medications in June 2008, when the 
prescription ran out. He did not attempt to have it refilled. He stopped taking the 
medications about the same time Dr. D provided the above statement. Applicant was 
not told to stop taking his medication by Dr. D. He testified that he stopped taking it 
because he decided he did not need it any longer. Dr. D did not make a determination 
that Applicant no longer needed medication.13  
 
 In September 2008, Applicant was directed by DOHA to be examined by a 
psychiatric consultant for the Department of Defense.14 On October 4, 2008, Dr. G, a 
10 GE 11. 
 
11 Tr. 29-30. 
 
12 GE 8.  
 
13 Tr. 65-79. 
 
14 AE 13. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
board certified psychiatrist interviewed Applicant and reviewed his medical record.15 He 
stated:  
 
In my professional opinion there is evidence of [an] emotional, mental, 
personality disorder which I diagnose as Bipolar Disorder Type I. It is of 
continuing nature. It is not now causing significant defect in judgment or 
reliability. It may cause such defect in the future. It is not causing 
significant defect in psychological, social, or occupational functioning. It 
may cause such defect in the future. The illness is in remission at this 
time. The probability of recurrence is moderate.16  
 
Applicant saw Dr. E, a psychiatrist on May 3, 2010, to obtain another opinion. 
Applicant wanted to see him in anticipation of issues raised regarding him obtaining a 
security clearance. He had not been treated by Dr. E previously. Applicant believed his 
appointment was about an hour long and Dr. E reviewed his medical records and 
interviewed him. Dr. E stated:  
 
Although it is typical for patients with Bipolar Disorder to have frequent 
relapses, especially if not taking psychoactive medications. [Applicant] has 
not demonstrated any symptoms of relapse since December 2007. He 
continued without symptoms since June 2008, when all psychoactive 
medications were discontinued. This clinical course would argue against 
Bipolar Disorder. It is possible that [Applicant] had a Brief Psychotic 
Episode or Major Depressive Disorder with Psychotic Features. 
Regardless of the exact diagnosis, [Applicant] has not been symptomatic 
for greater than 2 years, 23 months of those 2 years, thus far, off 
medication. [Applicant’s] reliability and judgment appear to intact and 
sound.17 
 
 Applicant returned to see Dr. E on December 13, 2010, in anticipation of his 
security clearance hearing. Applicant stated their appointment was about 15 minutes 
long. Applicant had not had any appointments or therapy since meeting with him in May 
2010, for an evaluation. Dr. E provided the following statement: 
 
This is an update to my memo of May 3, 2010. I saw [Applicant] for a 
follow up appointment tonight. He remains without any signs or symptoms 
of Bipolar Disorder. I continue to support his pursuit of a security 
clearance.18 
 
15 Tr. 87-89. 
 
16 GE 14.  
 
17 Tr. 67-69, 93-95; GE 15.  
 
18 AE C. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant stated that he decided that after he received “talk” therapy with Dr. D 
and Dr. E, another psychiatrist, he had addressed his underlying psychological issues. 
He concluded the “talk” therapy helped and he did not need any further therapy.19  
 
 When asked directly if Applicant believed he had a bipolar disorder, he stated he 
did not. He confirmed that he does not take medication because he does not believe he 
needs them. He concurred that three doctors have diagnosed him with bipolar 
disorder.20  
 
 Bipolar disorder is also known as a manic-depressive illness. It is a brain disorder 
that causes shifts in mood, energy, activity levels, and the ability to carry out day-to-day 
tasks. Symptoms are severe, but can be treated. It is a long-term illness that must be 
carefully managed throughout a person’s life. There is no cure for bipolar disorder.21  
  
Because bipolar disorder is a lifelong and recurrent illness, people with the 
disorder need long-term treatment to maintain control of bipolar 
symptoms. An effective maintenance treatment plan includes medication 
and psychotherapy for preventing relapse and reducing symptom 
severity.22 
 
Applicant completed his security clearance application on July 26, 2007. In 
response to section 21 which asked if he had in the last seven years consulted with a 
mental health professional or another health care provider about a mental health related 
condition, Applicant answered “yes.” Applicant listed he had been treated by Dr. B from 
July 2006 to August 2006. He failed to fully disclose the extent of his mental health 
issues, including his inpatient and outpatient treatment for bipolar disorder, his suicidal 
episode and hospitalization in March 2006, his July 2006 hospitalization, his August 
2006 mental health assessment at a hospital, and his February 2007 outpatient 
treatment for bipolar disorder. 
 
 Applicant denied he deliberately failed to disclose his prior mental health 
problems. He stated he completed the SCA to the best of his ability, and because he did 
not have supporting documents regarding his mental health problems, it was his best 
effort, and he answered it the best he could. He denied he failed to disclose the 
information because it might affect his ability to obtain a security clearance. I find 
Applicant’s testimony was not credible and he deliberately failed to disclose all of his 
mental health concerns.23  
19 Tr. 80-81. 
 
20 Tr. 86-89. 
 
21 National Institute of Mental Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institute 
of Health: Bipolar Disorder Brochure. 
 
22 Id. 
 
23 Tr. 30-36, 39-50, 85-87. 
 
7 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 Applicant’s supervisor testified on his behalf. Applicant has worked for him since 
2007. He considers him ambitious, trustworthy, even-tempered, pleasant to work with, 
and an asset to the team. He has never been concerned about Applicant’s conduct. 
Applicant consistently performs above average and has high standards for his technical 
skills. He is considered a valuable, important employee.24  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
 
24 Tr. 99-105. 
 
8 
 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline I: Psychological Conditions 
 
 The security concern for Psychological Conditions is set out in AG & 27:  
 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of seeking mental health counseling.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 28 and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but 
not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, 
paranoid, or bizarre behavior;  
 
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may 
impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness; and 
 
(c) the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a 
diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g., failure to take 
prescribed medication. 
 
In March 2006, Applicant attempted suicide during a manic episode by driving his 
car at 120 miles per hour into two other vehicles in traffic, resulting in his hospitalization. 
He was diagnosed with bipolar disorder and serious depression, chronic in nature. He 
needed medication to control these issues. Applicant was released from the hospital 
and was told to follow up his treatment in a mental health program. He was given an 
 
9 
 
 
appointment for a mental health program. He was given discharge information and a 
note to provide to his employer that he should be excused from work for two weeks. 
Applicant did not follow-up. He stated he did not enter a program because he had other 
priorities at the time, such as his children and his job. I find AG ¶ 28(a) applies  
 
In July 2006, Applicant was suicidal with thoughts of drowning himself; his 
girlfriend told doctors and medical staff that he voiced suicidal thoughts more than once 
and has stopped taking his medication. He signed himself out of the hospital against 
medical advice for further inpatient psychiatric treatment. He does not recall how often 
he sought mental health counseling. Applicant did not seek mental health treatment 
again until July 2007.  
 
In July 2007, Applicant sought treatment at a hospital and started therapy. He 
stated he did this after he completed his security clearance application on July 27, 2007. 
In October 2007, Applicant was evaluated by Dr. C and diagnosed with bipolar disorder, 
Nonspecific NOS, and prescribed medication. Dr. C considered Applicant stable. He 
indicated that Applicant was on medication at the time and that he intended to continue 
treatment. His prognosis was good if he stayed on his medication and continued his 
treatment. He further indicated that Applicant has a condition that could impair his 
judgment, and if he did not follow up with treatment recommendations his symptoms 
could recur. However, as long as he continued to follow-up with treatment, until his 
psychiatrist says it is no longer necessary, the prognosis was good and he could be 
expected to function in a stable, productive way. Applicant saw Dr. C once a month from 
July 2007 to December 2007. 
 
Applicant saw Dr. F one time in December 2007. He failed to keep subsequent 
appointments, has a history of noncompliance and would not take his medication as 
prescribed. He saw Dr. D two or three times in 2008. He was again diagnosed with 
bipolar disorder and appeared to be stabilized while he was taking the prescribed 
medication. Applicant stopped taking the medication shortly after seeing Dr. D because 
Applicant determined he no longer needed it. In September 2008, he was again 
diagnosed with bipolar disorder of a continuing nature that was in remissionby Dr. G. 
Applicant sought another diagnosis from Dr. E, who determined it is possible that 
Applicant had a brief psychotic episode or major depressive disorder with psychotic 
features. 
 
Applicant has been diagnosed with bipolar disorder by different psychiatrists. It is 
not always clear that each successive doctor that has seen or treated Applicant has 
necessarily been aware of what treatment plan was previously prescribed, his full 
psychiatric history, and what medications he was directed to take. What is clear is that 
Applicant has repeatedly failed to follow his doctor’s advice. He decided he no longer 
needed medication so he stopped taking his medication contrary to his doctor’s orders. 
He does not believe he has bipolar disorder, despite numerous diagnoses. I find AG ¶¶ 
28(b) and 28(c) apply. 
 
 
10 
 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG & 29 and the following 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the 
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the 
treatment plan; 
 
(b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment 
program for a condition that is amendable to treatment, and the individual 
is currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis 
by a duly qualified mental health professional; 
 
(c) recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed 
by or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that the 
individual’s previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a 
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation; 
 
(d) the past emotional instability was a temporary condition (e.g., one 
caused by death, illness, or marital breakup), the situation has been 
resolved, and the individual no longer shows indications of emotional 
instability; and 
 
 (e) there is no indication of a current problem.  
 
 Applicant has been consistently diagnosed with a bipolar disorder since 2006 by 
multiple psychiatrists. A U.S. Government approved psychiatrist made the diagnosis in 
September 2008. He determined the condition was in remission, but the probability of 
recurrence was moderate. Although bipolar disorder is treatable Applicant has failed to 
demonstrate ongoing and consistent compliance with a treatment. He has periodically 
volunteered for mental health counseling and treatment, but has an inconsistent track 
record in attending treatment, keeping appointments, and taking prescribed medication. 
He decided to stop taking prescribed medications because he does not think he needs 
them and does not concur with the diagnoses of several psychiatrists. Therefore, I find 
AG ¶¶ 29(a), 29(b), and 29(c) do not apply. There is no evidence to support application 
of AG ¶¶ 29(d) or 29(e). 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
11 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant intentionally and deliberately failed to disclose all of his hospitalizations 
and consultations with mental health professionals on his July 26, 2007 SCA. He 
deliberately attempted to mislead the Government as to the full extent of his mental 
health issues, by listing he had only seen one doctor from July 2006 to August 2006, 
when in fact he had seen several doctors about his condition, had been prescribed 
medication, and had been treated at other mental health facilities. His explanation for 
why he did not disclose all of his mental health issues was not credible. I find the above 
disqualifying condition applies.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 
12 
 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct his 
omission. There is no evidence Applicant’s concealment and omission was caused or 
contributed to by improper or inadequate advice. The concealment and omission is 
serious because Applicant attempted to hide important facts about his mental health. 
There is evidence he was concerned how his diagnosis would affect his ability to obtain 
a security clearance. Applicant disputes his diagnosis, has failed to follow his doctor’s 
treatment plan, and has failed to be honest about his mental health issues. I find none 
of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline I and E, in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant 
was diagnosed with bipolar disorder in 2006 after a suicide attempt. He was diagnosed 
again by different doctors with the same condition. He failed to follow-up with the 
doctors. He stopped taking his medications because he did not think he needed to take 
them. Applicant intentionally omitted and concealed the extent of his mental health 
issues on his SCA. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines 
for Psychological Conditions and Personal Conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline I:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E;    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
