The Government submitted fourteen items in support of its case.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01973
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On August 2, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under Guideline
H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September
2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an administrative
determination. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM),
dated October 21, 2010.  Applicant received the FORM on November 4, 2010, but did1
not submit a response to the FORM. On December 21, 2010, the Director, DOHA,
forwarded the case for assignment to an administrative judge. I received the case
The Government moved to strike this allegation (1.d) in its Argument to FORM.       2
2
assignment on December 23, 2010. Based on a review of the case file, submissions,
and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet his burden regarding the security concerns
raised. Security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations under
Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). I find the
following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school in 1996 and received his undergraduate degree in May 2000. Applicant is
single. He has held a security clearance since April 2001. He has worked for his current
employer since August 2003. (Item 6)
Applicant admits that he used marijuana on several occasions from 1995 to
2002. He also acknowledged that he used ecstasy about four times from about 1997
until April 2009. (Item 3) He acknowledged that he consumed marijuana in a brownie in
September 2009. He explained that he had no prior knowledge of the illegal drug in the
brownie. He admitted that he consumed absinthe in September 2009, but that he did
not “entirely understand” the illegality of the spirit. (Item 3)  2
Applicant completed security clearance applications (SCA) on July 12, 2000,
September 4, 2002, and May 9, 2007. (Items 4, 5 and 6). He did not disclose his use of
marijuana and ecstasy on these applications. In addition, on January 26, 2007, he
signed a company drug policy statement, where he acknowledged illegal drugs as a
basis for ineligibility or removal of a security clearance. (Item 11)
Applicant answered DOHA interrogatories in 2009, and acknowledged his use of
ecstasy in college on two occasions. He admitted use of marijuana in 1997 and 1998.
He reported his last use of any narcotics, dangerous drugs, psychoactive or controlled
substances, to include marijuana or hashish, as April 19, 2009. (Item 7)
On August 25, 2009, Applicant self-reported his recent use of ecstasy (April
2009) to his company security office. When questioned as to why he decided to
disclose the illegal drug use at this point in his career, he stated, “I just figured why not,
it has been 10 years since I tried it.” In his 2010 answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted
to not complying with the rules of Guideline H (Drug Involvement), but stated he had no
intention of leaking classified information or putting himself in a position of possible risk.
He did not deny that he failed to disclose his use of illegal drugs on three separate
SCA’s, but he hoped that “coming clean of all vices voluntarily shall be evidence that he
is willing to comply and follow the rules.”
3
When Applicant was interviewed in January 2010 by an OPM investigator, he
acknowledged the use of marijuana. (Item 8) He elaborated that he was curious and
wanted to experiment with the illegal drug by using a pipe. He smoked marijuana in
social settings with his friends. He reported that he did not enjoy the drugs, but used
them due to social pressure. (Item 8) He continued using marijuana and ecstasy until
2009 with the same friends. 
Applicant stated that he realized his behavior was immature. He also admitted
that he knew that using any illegal drugs while holding a security clearance would result
in revocation of such a clearance. He noted that his priorities and goals have been
changing over the past few years. He stated that he has been in social situations where
illegal drugs were readily available, but he has not used any of the drugs. He hoped to
buy a home and limited his social contacts with the drug-using friends. He does not
intend to use illegal drugs again. He regretted his actions. He stated that he now
understands security regulations regarding drug use. He intends to follow the rules.
Applicant has never incurred financial difficulties as a result of illegal drug use.
He does not believe he was dependent on any drugs. He noted that in 2007, he
voluntarily sought counseling due to anxiety over a failed relationship. Applicant
stressed that the counseling was not due to alcohol or drug use.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government (Government) must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      6
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 Id.      8
4
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is3
something less than a preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion4
is on the applicant.  5
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a8
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can
raise questions about an individual's reliability and
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person's ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
5
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical
compounds identified and listed in the
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as
amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and
hallucinogens), and
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal
drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical
direction.
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use;
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession
of drug paraphernalia;
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g.,
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse
or drug dependence;
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a
licensed clinical social worker who, is a staff member of a
recognized drug treatment program;
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program
prescribed by a duly qualified medical professional;
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and,
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to
clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.
Applicant admitted his use of illegal drugs (marijuana and ecstasy) on an
undetermined number of times from approximately 1995 to 2009. He used these drugs
while holding a security clearance initially obtained in 2001. These admissions in his
6
response to DOHA interrogatories and in his answer to the SOR establish a case under
this guideline. 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the
future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation;
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or
prolonged illness during which these drugs were prescribed,
and abuse has since ended; and,
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment
program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and
aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a
favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional.
Applicant’s last use of marijuana occurred in September 2009, more than one
year ago. Considering his history of illegal drug use, there is doubt about his ability to
abstain from future use. Applicant asserted that social pressure was responsible for his
early use, but in 2009, he was approximately 30 years old. Given he used drugs for
more than ten years, an abstinence of one year is not sufficient passage of time for
rehabilitation. Applicant expressed regret for his behavior and an intention not to use
drugs again, but he still has contact with some of the same friends with whom he used
illegal drugs. Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under drug involvement.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s
7
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under AG ¶ 16(a), a disqualifying conditions exists when there is
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.”
Under AG ¶ 16(b) a disqualifying condition exists when “deliberately providing false or
misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security
official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative.”
Applicant intentionally falsified his SCA’s on three separate occasions while
holding a security clearance. His last SCA was signed in May 2007. Applicant signed
his company drug policy statement in 2007 acknowledging that use of illegal drugs
could be a basis for removal and loss of a security clearance. He did not disclose his
use of any illegal drugs until his responses to DOHA interrogatories in 2009. 
After considering the mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17, I conclude that
none of them apply. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to correct his
falsification or concealment. He provided no information that indicates he was ill-
advised. The intentional omissions occurred as late as 2007, and are too recent and
serious to be mitigated by the passage of time. I have serious doubts about his good
judgment and reliability. He has not provided information in this record to show that he
has met his burden of proof for his personal conduct.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2)
the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency
of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
8
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is 32 years old. He has a history of behavior that involves dishonesty.
He has not shown successful rehabilitation or demonstrated true insight into his
behavior. Although Applicant expresses regret for his behavior, his last offense
occurred just over a year ago. I have doubts about his reliability and judgment based on
the information in the record.
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H and
E, and evaluating the evidence in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant
has not mitigated the security concerns based on his drug involvement, and his
falsifications on his SCA’s. Accordingly, I conclude that he has not carried his burden of
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for
access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: WITHDRAWN
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2., Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
9
