 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-01827   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jim Lane, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Personal Conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 12, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 25, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on July 13, 2010, and reassigned to me on August 4, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of 
 
2 
 
hearing on August 18, 2010, as amended on August 19, 2010, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on September 14, 2010. The Government called two witnesses 
and offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 13, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A1 through M, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 21, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He served 
on active duty in the United States military from 1977 until he was honorably discharged 
in 1988. He served in the reserves from 1988 until 2005. He seeks to retain his security 
clearance. He has a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. He was married and 
divorced three times before he married his current wife. He does not have children.2 
  
 Applicant served as a reservist in a subordinate unified command (SUC) from 
1990 through 2000. He served overseas and also worked at the command 
headquarters, which was located outside the continental United States (OCONUS). His 
officer evaluations indicate that he performed active duty for 17 days in 1995, 17 days in 
1996, 17 days in 1997, and 13 days in 1998. He also “drilled” during other periods 
earning points for retirement. He was promoted to pay grade O-5 in 1996. He worked in 
the military intelligence (MI) field and held various titles and positions within the 
command. For a period, he performed duties as a Special Security Officer (SSO) for a 
task force and assistant SSO for the SUC. Because of his education, background, and 
civilian experience, he was “tasked to identify and implement solutions to intelligence 
collection, analysis and dissemination problems requiring acquisition and employment 
of advanced technology systems.”3  
 
 At some point, Applicant was attached to a reserve detachment that supported 
the SUC. The detachment was located in a state that was far from where Applicant 
lived. The original mission of the detachment was to provide the SUC a pool of reserve 
personnel available to augment the SUC headquarters staff positions during the 
reservists’ two-week annual training periods. The mission of the detachment evolved to 
where their personnel were training and deploying with combat units.4   
 
 The SOR in this case is based upon a letter of reprimand Applicant received from 
his reserve commander in January 2005. The SOR alleged that Applicant executed 
documents and correspondence for the purpose of misleading state and local law 
enforcement offices by 1) issuing courier orders, 2) authorizing military concealed carry 
of weapons, 3) falsely stating the mission of the detachment, 4) assisting in the renewal 
of a civilian concealed carry weapons permit, and 5) misrepresenting that he was 
                                                          
1 AE A has many attachments. They will be referred to as AE A.1.1 through AE A.5.  
 
2 Tr. at 89-94, 182-183; GE 6, 9; AE A.2.1.1. 
 
3 Tr. at 16-17, 21-22, 25, 93, 172-177; GE 2, 6, 9; AE A.2.1.1, A.2.1.2, A.5, E-H. 
 
4 Tr. at 29, 65-67, 106-110, 118-125; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 6, 9; AE A.1.4, 
A.1.4.1-A1.4.5, A.1.6.2, A.1.6.3, A.2.1, A.5, E-L.  
 
3 
 
involved in the test and evaluation of weapons and ammunition on behalf of the SUC. 
The letter of reprimand stated: 
 
[Y]ou executed documents and correspondence for the purpose of 
misleading state and local law enforcement offices. You did this to assist 
another [service member] in obtaining permits to possess illegal weapons 
and to facilitate unauthorized training by members of [detachment]. Your 
actions falsely reflected endorsement by the Department of Defense and 
[subordinate unified command]. 
 
You are hereby reprimanded. You were derelict in your duties when you 
issued courier orders, authorized military concealed carry of weapons, 
falsely stated the mission of the [detachment], and assisted in the renewal 
of a civilian concealed carry weapons permit. You were also derelict in 
your duties when you represented yourself as involved in the test and 
evaluation of weapons and ammunition on behalf of [subordinate unified 
command].5 
 
The specific allegations in the SOR and the letter of reprimand are addressed 
individually below. 
 
 The SOR and letter of reprimand state that Applicant was derelict in his duties 
when he issued courier orders. In 1995, he issued courier orders to an officer from the 
detachment (Officer A), who was then in the pay grade 0-2. The orders authorized the 
officer to carry classified documents between the command’s headquarters and 
necessary destinations. The orders were for an indefinite period. Applicant signed the 
orders as the command’s Deputy Special Security Officer. Applicant admitted that he 
signed the courier orders using the standard form letters that he received from the 
command. The command SSO wrote an affidavit certifying that he was aware that 
Applicant issued the courier orders and he approved of the action. In April 1998, 
additional courier orders were issued to Officer A to transfer computer and hard drives 
from the SUC’s OCONUS location to his detachment’s location in the United States. 
The orders were effective for the day that Officer A flew with the equipment and were 
signed by another SUC officer in the pay grade O-5.6 I find Applicant was acting within 
the scope of his duties as SSO when he issued the courier orders to Officer A in 1995.  
 
 In October 1996, two military cards were issued to Officer A, who had been 
promoted to O-3, authorizing him to carry a concealed .45 caliber pistol and a 9 
millimeter (mm) pistol “in connection with his official duties.” The cards were valid from 
October 1996 through October 1997. The cards bore a signature that is strikingly similar 
to Applicant’s signature. Applicant denied any memory of signing the cards. He stated it 
was very unlikely that he signed the cards because the cards report Officer A as having 
a middle initial, and everyone involved with the unit knew that Officer A did not have a 
                                                          
5 GE 5.  
 
6 Tr. at 53-55, 103-106, 111-112, 137; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5; AE A.1.2, A.1.2.5, E, 
F, I, K, L. 
 
4 
 
middle name. As proof of that assertion, Applicant submitted an officer evaluation for 
Officer A that did not list a middle name or initial. There are other documents in 
evidence, including the federal charges against Officer A and his death record, that 
report officer A with the same initial or a middle name that starts with the same letter as 
the initial on the weapon’s cards. The dates on the cards do not coincide with 
Applicant’s 17 days of active duty in 1996. That does not preclude the cards from being 
signed while drilling. The authority to issue the cards was questioned because the 
cards, even if valid, should only have been issued for the short period that Officer A 
served on active duty with the SUC, not for a full year. The cards were only supposed to 
authorize the carrying of official military weapons. It is unclear if the .45 caliber and 9 
mm pistols were military-issued weapons or Officer A’s personal weapons.7   
 
 The SOR and letter of reprimand state that Applicant was derelict in his duties 
when he assisted in the renewal of a civilian concealed carry weapons (CCW) permit. In 
January 1997, a letter was sent to the chief of police of Officer A’s hometown using 
letterhead with the seals of the Department of Defense and the SUC. The letterhead 
contained the name of the SUC, Applicant’s directorate, and his branch. It also included 
the detachment and that it was “Airborne.” The street address was in the geographic 
location of the detachment. Applicant’s name and rank were printed on the letter and 
the signature appeared to be Applicant’s. The letter thanked the chief of police for his: 
 
personal attention and unequaled professional courtesy in securing a 
concealed weapons permit for [Officer A]. The camaraderie you extended 
to [Officer A] is deeply appreciated by this Directorate and by [SUC]. Your 
actions help to ensure the safety of a highly valued federal officer and 
clearly exemplify the highest standards of mutual respect and cooperation 
which we, as professional officers, strive to achieve.8 
 
The reserve commander who issued the letter of reprimand questioned the designation 
of the detachment as “Airborne,” and several other irregularities in the letterhead.9 
 
 In March 1998, a memorandum “To Whom It May Concern” with the subject 
“Notice to State and Local Authorities” was issued. The memorandum used letterhead 
with the seals of the Department of Defense and the SUC. The letterhead contained the 
name of the SUC and the detachment. The detachment line on the letterhead included 
the designation “ABN,” short for Airborne. Applicant’s name and rank were printed on 
the memorandum, and the signature appeared to be Applicant’s. Applicant denied 
signing the memorandum. Officer A’s name was contained in the memorandum, listing 
the middle initial that was on the military weapons cards.10 The memorandum stated: 
 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 56-57, 112-118, 170-172; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 12; AE A.1.3.1, A.1.3.4, J, 
M.  
 
8 GE 5.  
 
9 Tr. at 57-59, 125-126; GE 5; Applicant’s response to SOR.  
 
10 Tr. at 59-63; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5.  
 
5 
 
During the period 15 March 1998 through 15 March 1999, [Officer A] will 
be on special assignment in the continental United States, conducting 
official business for the [SUC], as commander of the [detachment]. 
 
Local and state officials are requested to extend to [Officer A] the 
courtesies generally granted to a United States Federal Officer. At all 
times, when he is in possession of DD Form 2501, Courier Authorization, 
no attempt should be made to detain the service member, to search the 
service member or his possessions, to confiscate any possession of the 
service member, to view any material being carried by the service member 
other than identifying documents, or to otherwise impede the service 
member in performance of his duties. Such interference or obstruction 
may be deemed a felony under federal law.  
 
[Officer A] may be identified by a valid military identification card, DD Form 
2, Geneva Conventions Identification Card. When armed, he will comply 
with [military regulation controlling carrying of weapons and use of force 
for law enforcement and security duties] and will carry a [military weapons 
card] signed by a field grade officer. The document will be presented to 
legal authorities who question the carrying of weapons.11 
 
 In March 1999, a letter was written with letterhead with the seals of the 
Department of Defense and the SUC. Applicant’s name and rank were printed on the 
letter, and the signature appeared to be Applicant’s. Applicant denied signing the letter. 
The letter requested assistance in the renewal of Officer A’s CCW permit. The request 
stated that Officer A was assigned to the SUC and he served as a “courier of classified 
Department of Defense material in the United States.” The letter stated that Officer A 
was in possession of a military form authorizing him to carry concealed weapons while 
conducting official duties. It further stated that members of the detachment often are 
required to conduct official duties in civilian attire and are required to carry firearms to 
protect documents and materials:12  
 
I wish to avoid chance encounters with Police officers who in the past 
have threatened our couriers with deadly force. To alleviate these 
situations, I have requested all personnel in possession of [military 
weapons card] to also obtain concealed carry permits from local law 
enforcement authorities and I have encouraged close coordination of our 
activities with local law enforcement.13   
 
 The letter of reprimand states Applicant was derelict in his duties when he 
represented himself as involved in the test and evaluation of weapons and ammunition 
on behalf of the SUC. By invitation, Applicant traveled to a weapons manufacturer’s 
                                                          
11 GE 5.  
 
12 Tr. at 64-67, 70-71; GE 5; Applicant’s response to SOR.  
 
13 Id. 
 
6 
 
facility to test fire a prototype firearm and ammunition. In May 1999, he wrote a letter to 
the weapons manufacturer using letterhead with the seals of the Department of Defense 
and the SUC. The letterhead contained the name of the SUC and Applicant’s section, 
but the address was a post office box in Applicant’s city of residence. He requested 
information on the production status of the weapon system. He wrote that he had 
provided some of the ammunition to various components of the SUC for evaluation and 
distributed the unedited videotape of the test firing. Applicant admitted writing the 
letter.14 The letter contained the following warning that Applicant stated was provided by 
a lawyer from the SUC: 
 
Please note that this communication is a simple request for information. It 
is not intended to constitute an offer of any kind or commit the United 
States to the purchase of any material or service. I can state, however, 
with caveat in place, that the [ammunition] and the [manufacturer’s] 
weapon system are of great interest to me and other [SUC] officers and 
men, and that we thoroughly appreciate the lethality and versatility your 
weapons and ammunition offer. 
 
I encourage you to continue your unique and insightful weapons system 
developments and request you provide me with your projected date for 
entry into Low Rate Initial Production for the [weapon].15  
 
 The letter of reprimand included copies of all the documents discussed above 
purporting to be signed by Applicant. It advised Applicant that the commander would 
consider any matters submitted by Applicant before making the decision whether to 
recommend the filing of the letter in Applicant’s Official Military Personnel File (OMPF). 
Applicant sent two letters to the commander. After considering Applicant’s response, the 
commander decided not to recommend filing the letter of reprimand in Applicant’s 
OMPF. The letter would remain in Applicant’s “local” file until he transferred or was 
discharged, at which time it would be destroyed.16 
 
 Officer A, Applicant, several other members of the detachment, and at least one 
civilian were subjects of an investigation conducted by military investigators, state 
investigators, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF), and the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Officer A wrote documents on behalf of his detachment to 
the Defense Reutilization and Marketing Office (DRMO) to obtain equipment. He also 
wrote letters to firearms dealers wherein he requested and received automatic weapons 
under the guise that the weapons would be tested and evaluated for use by Special 
Forces operatives. Officer A used documents to convince local law enforcement officers 
that members of his detachment were authorized to carry automatic weapons while 
performing military training exercises in the area. Officer A worked for a company that 
supplied weapons to be used in the entertainment industry. Officer A stored the 
                                                          
14 Tr. at 71-74, 132-134, 186; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5; AE A.1.6, A.1.6.1-A.1.6.4.  
 
15 GE 5.  
 
16 Tr. at 52, 74-78, 84-86, 102; GE 5, 7; AE A.1.1, A.1.1.2, B, C.  
 
7 
 
weapons obtained from the weapons manufacturers in the company’s armory. In turn, 
the weapons and military property obtained from DRMO were rented to the 
entertainment industry. Officer A forged a signature on one of the detachment member’s 
reenlistment package. He also prepared and forwarded false enlistment packages for 
two other individuals.17  
 
 Officer A was interviewed by military investigators and provided a written 
statement in December 2003. He admitted that he forged a signature on one of the 
detachment member’s reenlistment package. Nowhere in the statement did Officer A 
admit or imply that he forged any of the documents that bore Applicant’s signature. He 
indicated that Applicant was advised of the detachment’s training and where and when 
it would take place, but the approval authority was the SUC. He stated that Applicant 
was aware that the detachment used the company’s armory to obtain and store 
weapons. He stated Applicant was introduced to the owner and toured the armory. 
Officer A stated that he provided to the armory owner documents that were used to 
procure weapons for training. He stated that Applicant received copies of the 
documents.18  
 
 Officer A was asked how he obtained a CCW permit. He stated that Applicant 
and people at the SUC told him about the possibility of standing up the detachment for 
courier duties. Officer A moved to a new city in 1996. The local police department told 
him that he needed a letter from a superior officer in order to obtain a CCW permit. He 
stated that he contacted Applicant and told him that he wanted a CCW permit for his 
work as a gun handler and for his courier duties. He asked Applicant to write a letter on 
his behalf, which he did. Officer A stated that he was “astonished” when he read the 
letter. He stated that in “[his] opinion the letter [Applicant] prepared was false. It was not 
truthful as [their] unit was not designated as couriers and the letter was generally 
exaggerated.” He also stated:  
 
[Applicant] gave me a badge that he said he purchased. He gave it to me 
to use as identifying myself as an MI officer. He gave it to me to use in 
conjunction with my concealed weapons permit to identify myself as an MI 
officer.19  
 
Applicant testified that he never had a “shield” type badge such as a law enforcement 
officer would carry, and that Officer A was describing a standard flat plastic badge like 
one that is used as identification in a command or to enter a SCIF (Sensitive 
Compartmented Information Facility).20 
 
                                                          
17 Tr. at 26-27, 183 ; GE 3, 4, 8, 10.  
 
18 GE 3.  
 
19 Id. 
 
20 Tr. at 155-156.  
 
8 
 
 In March 2006, Officer A pleaded guilty in U.S. District Court to unlawful 
possession of a machine gun, aiding and abetting (18 U.S.C. § 922(o),2(a)); unlawful 
production of identification document (18 U.S.C. § 1028(a)(1)); impersonating a federal 
officer or employee (18 U.S.C. § 912); and false statement, causing an act to be done 
(18 U.S.C. § 1001,2(b)). He was placed on probation for three years. Officer A died of 
cancer the following year.21  
 
 Applicant testified that Officer A worked for the company that supplied weapons 
to be used in the entertainment industry. He stated that Officer A borrowed the 
company’s weapons so that the detachment could do live-fire training. He denied 
knowledge of where the training occurred. He stated there were no government-issued 
weapons kept at the company’s armory. He admitted that he visited the armory on one 
occasion. He also admitted that, at Officer A’s invitation, he visited the chief of police 
who issued the CCW permit.22    
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant cited to his response to the letter of 
reprimand: 
 
Exculpatory evidence exists that frees me from any credible accusation of 
misleading state and local law enforcement offices. [Officer A] gave a full 
confession to forging memoranda, and a variety of other documents, and 
specifically acknowledged my absence of involvement in any wrongdoing. 
His confession was made to [military investigators] and the US Attorney 
prior to his plea agreement. He specifically exculpated me, a fact which 
should be contained within the [military] ROI. While you may have 
overlooked that bit of exculpatory evidence, it is unlikely that you failed to 
notice that [Officer A] was found guilty, pursuant to his guilty plea, of 
Wrongful Acquisition of Machine Guns, Counterfeiting, Making False 
Writings, and Conspiracy to Impersonate Authorized U.S. Military 
Personnel. The counterfeiting and false writings correspond to the 
memorandum and firearms you attribute, incorrectly, to me.  
 
I herein state that, with the exception of the two classified information 
courier documents that were issued as part of my military duties and in my 
capacity as SSO, and, possibly, one of the memoranda, which is a legal, 
and authorized communication, to the best of my knowledge and belief, 
each and every other document attributed to me is a forgery. Some are 
better than others, however, with the exception of the two or three I have 
previously identified, each of the documents you claim I have written were 
forged – and these were among the documents that [Officer A] 
acknowledged he forged when he entered into the plea agreement with 
the United States Attorney. (emphasis in response to SOR) 
 
                                                          
21 Tr. at 127; GE 13; AE M.  
 
22 Tr. at 107, 152, 183-184.  
 
9 
 
 Applicant denied signing the two military weapons cards in 1996, as discussed 
above. He testified that he did not see anything objectionable about the January 1997 
thank you letter to the chief of police, but he did not recall signing it. He stated that he 
signed a document similar to the March 1998 “Notice to State and Local Authorities” 
memorandum, but he did not sign the memorandum in evidence. He testified that he did 
not remember signing the March 1999 letter requesting assistance in the renewal of 
Officer A’s CCW permit. He stated the document was inaccurate because he had never 
issued the military cards authorizing members of the detachment to carry weapons in 
connection with their official duties. He stated that he signed a similar document 
requesting the initial CCW permit, but he believed the March 1999 letter was a forgery 
because he would have more memory of the document if he signed it. He admitted that 
he signed the May 1999 letter to the weapons manufacturer. Despite Applicant’s 
responses to the letter of reprimand and the SOR, he testified that Officer A was an 
outstanding officer, and he did not believe that Officer A forged Applicant’s signature to 
the documents. He testified that he thought it was another officer assigned to the 
detachment. He stated that Officer A told him that he forged the documents, but 
Applicant found it hard to believe that he would do such a thing.23 
 
 After considering all the evidence, I find that Applicant signed all the documents 
in evidence containing his signature. I did not find his statements and testimony to the 
contrary to be credible. I find that the weapons cards were improperly issued for a 
period beyond when Officer A was on active duty. I also find that, in the letter to the 
chief of police requesting assistance in the renewal of Officer A’s CCW permit and in the 
“Notice to State and Local Authorities” memorandum, Applicant intentionally 
embellished, and in parts, fabricated the duties of Officer A and other members of the 
detachment and their requirement to carry concealed weapons for military purposes. I 
further find that Applicant’s response to the commander who issued the letter of 
reprimand, his response to the SOR, and his testimony at the hearing were intentionally 
false.24 Applicant’s motive for providing the false documents is unclear. There is 
insufficient evidence for a finding that Applicant was a co-conspirator to all the illegal 
acts committed by officer A. However, I find that Applicant’s actions, at a minimum, 
were used by Officer A in completing some of his crimes.  
 
 Applicant submitted several letters attesting to his outstanding job performance, 
integrity, professionalism, and trustworthiness. His officer evaluations described him as 
an outstanding officer with a bright future and recommended him for promotion.25 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
23 Tr. at 57-59, 112-116, 125-131, 181, 184-192; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5; AE A.1.5.  
 
24 Any false statements that were not specifically alleged in the SOR will not be used for 
disqualification purposes. They will be used in assessing Applicant’s credibility, in the application of 
mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
25 AE A.4.1-A.4.4, A.5.  
 
10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false and misleading information to law 
enforcement officials about the duties and responsibilities of Officer A and other 
members of the detachment. AG ¶ 16(b) is applicable. He improperly issued concealed 
weapons cards to Officer A for a period that extended beyond when Officer A was on 
active duty. His actions, when considered as a whole, support a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. AG ¶¶ 16(c) is also applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
 
12 
 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant admitted that he signed the courier orders and the letters to the 
weapons manufacturer. Any concerns generated by those documents have been 
mitigated by the passage of time. As discussed above, he has been intentionally 
dishonest about the other documents. Those documents were all generated more than 
11 years ago. Despite the length of time since they were written, without complete 
candor, I am unable to find mitigation.26 No Personal Conduct mitigating conditions are 
applicable to the security concerns raised by those documents. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
                                                          
26 See ISCR Case No. 03-22819 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2006). 
 
13 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable service in the U.S. military. I also considered 
the favorable character evidence. Applicant intentionally provided false information up to 
and during his hearing. As a career military officer, he should have known that the most 
important character trait is integrity. He failed to display that attribute. I have significant 
unresolved doubts about his honesty, judgment, trustworthiness, and willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
