                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10804 
  ) 
           ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s immaturity led to his questionable behavior. He was forthcoming and 
candid during the security clearance process. He received training about ethical 
behavior and the handling of classified and proprietary information. He expressed 
sincere remorse for his past questionable behavior and understands that it could 
adversely impact on his ability to hold a security clearance. He has matured into a good 
husband and responsible employee. His questionable behavior is not recent, it is 
unlikely to recur, and it does not cast doubt on Applicant’s current judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guidelines E and M. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on June 3, 2008. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
On May 18, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), which 
specified the basis for its decision – security concerns under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct), and Guideline M (Use of Information Technology Systems) of the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG).2  
 
On June 1, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 23, 
2010, to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on September 16, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled 
on October 1, 2010.  
 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified, and he presented exhibits (AE) 1 through 9, which were 
admitted without objection. I left the record open for Applicant to supplement it, and he 
timely submitted AE 10. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 9, 
2010.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant testified with the assistance of two outstanding interpreters certified by 
the Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf. 
 
 On Government’s motion, and with Applicant’s consent, I amended the SOR to 
include Applicant’s middle name (Marc). (Tr. 13) 
 
 Applicant agreed to his hearing date 15 days in advance of his hearing. At 
hearing, he also waived his right to 15 days advanced notice of his hearing. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, with explanations. He admitted and 
denied, in part, the factual allegations in the SOR ¶ 2.a, with explanations. His 
admissions are incorporated here as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence of record, and having considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old network security risk assessment and mitigation 
specialist working for a government contractor since March 2008. He received interim 
access to classified information at the secret level in May 2008. He seeks his security 
clearance eligibility to retain his position.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 2000. Between 2000 and 2007, he 
attended several colleges off-and-on in different states. In 2007, he completed his 
bachelor’s degree in business administration with a concentration in information 
technology (IT). He married his wife in July 2008. They have no children. 
 
During a July 2008 interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator, Applicant disclosed that between 2005 and 2008, he frequently attempted 
to and entered private wireless networks without authorization to test his ability to 
penetrate the networks. While in college, he was playing with computers, experimenting 
with what he was learning, and testing security programs and his own abilities.  
 
Applicant used commercially available, specialized computer programs to 
monitor Internet traffic and identify the networks Internet Protocol (IP) addresses or he 
would enter random IP addresses to attempt to access them. He sought out and gained 
access to unsecure or weakly secured networks. He testified that even though he was 
able to break into the networks, he never entered, modified, or accessed the systems. 
Nor did he share this information with anyone else. He averred he emailed the persons 
or companies about their deficient security systems hoping they would fix it.  
 
Applicant mistakenly believed his actions were not illegal because he did not 
enter the subjects systems, nor did he access or manipulate any personal information. 
He claimed he only identified the “key” to entering the subjects’ computer system and 
proceeded no further. 
 
In 2007, he entered the secured network of a real estate company in Hong Kong, 
China. Applicant testified he informed the company of his access to its network and 
advised them that their security was faulty. He never received any acknowledgment of 
his emails to companies or people about their networks’ deficiency. He does not recall 
how many networks he accessed. At some of his friends’ requests, he would also 
access their networks to identify security deficiencies. Applicant disclosed his 
questionable behavior to one of his supervisors. 
 
Applicant stopped his questionable behavior when he started working for his 
current employer in 2008. As a result of his job, he received training about IT ethics and 
the handling of classified and proprietary information. Applicant now understands that 
his questionable behavior was unethical and illegal. Moreover, he now understands that 
such behavior could adversely impact on his ability to hold a security clearance, to keep 
his current job, or to work in the IT field. 
 
Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his past behavior. He has matured 
during the last three years. He is now married and holds a full-time position with a large 
 
4 
 
 
government contractor. He is busy at work and at home and he no longer has the time 
to experiment or play with computers. He is dedicated to his wife and his work. He is 
considered to be technically proficient, and a valuable employee with good 
performance. 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any expressed or implied determination about Applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
5 
 
 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996); and ISCR Case 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010).     
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The facts and circumstances raising security clearance concerns under 
Guidelines E and M are the same. For the sake of brevity, they will be discussed here 
and incorporated by reference in the discussion of Guideline M.  
 
Between 2005 and 2008, Applicant frequently broke into private wireless 
networks without authorization to test his ability to penetrate the networks. Although he 
was able to break into the networks, he never entered, modified, or accessed the 
private systems. Nor did he share this information with anyone else. He emailed the 
persons or companies’  network systems he penetrated and informed them of their 
deficient security systems hoping they would fix it.  
 
Applicant mistakenly believed his actions were not illegal because he did not 
enter the subjects’ systems. He did not access or manipulate any personal information. 
He claimed he stopped when he identified the “key” to entering the subjects’ computer 
systems. In 2007, he entered the secured network of a real estate company in Hong 
Kong, China. His actions trigger the applicability of the following disqualifying conditions: 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative areas that 
is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: . . .  
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal 
conduct security concerns:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
 
7 
 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 Applicant voluntarily disclosed his questionable behavior on his SCA, during his 
interview with an OPM investigator, and to one of his supervisors. The Government had 
no knowledge of his behavior before his disclosure. Since the start of his current job, he 
has received yearly training about his IT ethical responsibilities and in the proper 
handling of proprietary and classified information. In May 2008, he received an interim 
secret clearance. There is no evidence that he has compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information, or that he has failed to follow his job’s rules and 
regulations.  
 
Most of Applicant’s unauthorized intrusions into private networks occurred while 
he was attending college. He accessed the networks to test his ability to penetrate the 
networks. He was playing with computers, experimenting with what he was learning in 
college and testing security programs and his own abilities. He never entered, modified, 
or accessed the systems after breaking into the private networks security systems. Nor 
did he share this information with anyone else. He averred he emailed network’s owners 
about their deficient security system hoping they would fix it. Applicant mistakenly 
believed his actions were not illegal because he did not enter the subjects’ systems. He 
did not access or manipulate any personal information. He only identified the “key” to 
enter the subjects’ computer systems and stopped there. 
 
Applicant stopped his questionable behavior in 2008, when he started working for 
his current employer. He completed courses and received training about IT ethics and 
the handling of classified and proprietary information. He now clearly understands that 
his past questionable behavior was unethical and illegal. Moreover, he also understands 
that such behavior could adversely impact on his ability to hold a security clearance. 
 
Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his past behavior. He is now a 
responsible husband. He is considered to be a good worker and a valuable employee. 
Applicant has matured during the last three years. He is dedicated to his wife and his 
work. He is considered to be technically proficient, valuable employee. 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
AG ¶ 39 articulates the security concern about the misuse of information 
technology systems: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
 
8 
 
 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information.  
 
 Applicant’s questionable behavior, as discussed under Guideline E, also raise 
security concerns under AG ¶ 40(a): “illegal or unauthorized entry into any information 
technology system or component thereof;” and AG ¶ 40(c): “use of any information 
technology system to gain unauthorized access to another system or to a compartmented 
area within the same system.” 
 
  AG ¶ 41 provides three potentially applicable mitigating conditions to the use of 
information technology systems concern:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one's 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and  
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor. 
 
For the same reasons discussed under the Guideline E mitigating conditions, 
incorporated here, I find that AG ¶ 41(a) applies. The circumstances in his life have 
changed and the misuse of his computer is not likely to recur. AG ¶¶ 41(b) and (c) are not 
applicable to Applicant’s behavior because his misuse was not minor and his conduct was 
intentional. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
9 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and M in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(c) were previously addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
Applicant’s questionable behavior is primarily attributed to his immaturity as a 
college student. He voluntarily disclosed his questionable behavior in his 2008 SCA and 
was forthcoming and candid during the security clearance process and at his hearing. 
He stopped his questionable behavior in 2008, when he started working for his current 
employer. He received yearly training about ethical behavior and the handling of 
classified and proprietary information. He understands that his past questionable 
behavior was unethical and illegal. Moreover, he clearly understands that such behavior 
could adversely impact on his ability to hold a security clearance. 
 
Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his past behavior. He is now a 
responsible husband. He has held his full-time job since March 2008, and he is 
considered to be a good worker and a valuable employee. Applicant has matured during 
the last three years. On balance, I find that Applicant’s questionable behavior is not 
recent, it is unlikely to recur, and it does not cast doubt on Applicant’s current judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.:    For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
