KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: In foreign influence cases the nature of the foreign government involved, the
intelligence gathering history of that government and the presence of terrorist activity are
important considerations that provide context for the other record evidence and must be bought
to bear on the conclusions in the case.  Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 08-10099.a1
DATE: 01/28/2011
DATE: January 28, 2011
In Re:
------
 
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 08-10099
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a
trustworthiness designation.  On November 20, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR)
2
advising Applicant of the basis for that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline
B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On September 29, 2010, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran granted Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness
designation.  Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his
application of the pertinent mitigating conditions and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis
was erroneous.  Consistent with the following discussion, we reverse the decision of the Judge.
Facts
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact.  Applicant is an engineer employed
by a Defense contractor.  Born in Iran, Applicant married her Iranian-born husband and immigrated
to the U.S. in the early 1990s.  Her husband was a U.S. citizen at the time of the marriage.
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Iran, as are her four siblings.  Her mother-in-law
and a sibling-in-law are citizens and residents of Iran as well.  None of Applicant’s or her husband’s
immediate family members work for the Iranian government.  Applicant retained her Iranian
passport after she became a U.S. citizen.  She traveled to Iran on this passport twice after becoming
a U.S. citizen, although she has since destroyed it.  
Iran and the U.S. have not had diplomatic relations since 1980.  Iran is attempting to develop
weapons of mass destruction.  Additionally, it is the world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism,
supports violent opposition to the Mid-East peace process, and has a poor human rights record.  It
has provided “lethal support for groups that are directly responsible for hundreds of U.S. casualties.”
Decision at 3.  The government of Iran has committed numerous serious abuses of human rights,
including political killings, disappearances, torture, arbitrary arrest and detention, denial of due
process, and severe restrictions on civil liberties.  Iran does not recognize dual citizenship.
Accordingly, it considers those born in Iran to be Iranian citizens.  The Judge’s findings are not
challenged on appeal.  
Discussion
We may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a trustworthiness designation
if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.  Once the
government presents evidence raising trustworthiness concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant
to establish any appropriate mitigating conditions.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. In deciding whether the
Judge's rulings or conclusions are in error, we will review the Judge's decision to determine whether:
it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate a satisfactory explanation for its
conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts found and the choice made; it does
not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment; it fails to consider an important
aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs contrary to the record evidence;
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(a): “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these
person are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or
government and the interests of the U.S.”
 
3
or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference of opinion.  See ADP Case No.
06-12901 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 31, 2007).
Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s decision extended too much weight to evidence
that none of Applicant’s family members worked for the Iranian government.  She argues that the
Judge did not consider the extent to which Iran could influence Applicant’s family regardless of any
government connections.  Department Counsel’s argument is persuasive.
In Foreign Influence cases, the nature of the foreign government involved, the intelligence
gathering history of that government, and the presence of terrorist activity are important
considerations that provide context for the other record evidence and must be brought to bear on the
Judge’s ultimate conclusions in the case.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-14978 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 11.
2007); ADP Case No. 06-24818 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2007).  The country’s human rights record
is also an important consideration.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6,
2007); ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006).  There is a rational connection
between an applicant’s family ties in a country whose interests are adverse to the United States and
the risk that the applicant might fail to protect and safeguard information entrusted to him or her by
virtue of occupying a public trust position.  See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No. 01-26893 (App. Bd. Oct. 16,
2002); ADP Case 06-24818, supra.  Moreover, in-laws represent a class of persons who are
contemplated by the Directive as presenting a potential risk.  As a matter of common sense and
human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or
obligation to, the immediate family members of the persons’ spouse.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-
26176 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2005). 
In this case, Applicant’s foreign relatives, to include her in-laws, her use of an Iranian
passport to travel to Iran after having acquired U.S. citizenship, and Iran’s status as a nation whose
interests are adverse to those of the U.S. cumulatively established Guideline B trustworthiness
concerns.  However, the Judge’s conclusion under Mitigating Condition 8(a)1 that Applicant’s
relatives have no incentive to bring Applicant to the attention of the authorities fails to address an
important concern under Guideline B.  That concern is expressed in ISCR Case No. 03-24933 at 8
(App. Bd. Jul 28, 2005), in which the Appeal Board observed:
There is no good reason to assume that a foreign country with an authoritarian
government that has been . . . involved in state-sponsored terrorism would have
compunctions about exerting influence or pressure on its citizens just because they
lack prominence or live modest, ordinary lives.
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(b): “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty
or obligation to the foreign person . . . is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and
loyalties in the U.S. that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”
 
4
 Moreover, an applicant’s relatives’ obscurity does not provide a meaningful measure of whether
an applicant’s circumstances pose a risk, when, for example, the relatives are subject to the authority
of a regime that is hostile to the U.S. and has a dismal human rights record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 07-13696 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2009); ADP Case No. 05-17812 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 11, 2007).
The Judge’s discussion does not adequately explain his apparent conclusion that Applicant would
not likely be placed in a position of choice between the interests of her Iranian relatives and the
interests of the U.S., which is crucial to Mitigating Condition 8(a).  Accordingly, the Judge’s
analysis fails to consider an important aspect of the case.  ADP Case No. 06-12901, supra.
Similarly, the record will not support the Judge’s favorable application of Mitigating
Condition 8(b).2  The Judge’s treatment of this mitigating condition is rather cursory.  He states that
Applicant has such longstanding loyalties within the U.S. that she could be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.  However, for similar reasons to those outlined above, he
does not explain how the evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant would necessarily resolve
conflicts of interest against the interests of her own close family in Iran.  The Judge’s favorable
application of Mitigating Condition 8(b) is erroneous.  Furthermore, Department Counsel
persuasively argues that the Judge’s whole-person analysis merely repeats his conclusion under the
mitigating conditions and does not provide an independent basis for his favorable decision.  
After reviewing the record, the Judge’s decision, and the briefs of the parties, we conclude
that the Judge’s decision fails to consider an important aspect of the case and that it runs contrary
to the weigh of the record evidence.  Accordingly, the Judge’s favorable decision is not sustainable
on this record.
Order
The Judge’s favorable trustworthiness determination is REVERSED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                   
5
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
