.                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ICSR Case No. 08-11969 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O'Neil, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. Applicant mitigated security concerns for 
foreign preference and foreign influence. 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaire for Investigative Processing (e-
QIP) on October 24, 2007, for his employment with a defense contractor. On June 7, 
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for foreign influence under 
Guideline B, and foreign preference under Guideline C. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of Defense 
on September 1, 2006. He acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 11, 2010. 
 
 Applicant timely answered the SOR. He admitted all of the factual allegations 
under both Guideline B and Guideline C. Applicant requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 12, 
2010. The case was assigned to me on September 8, 2010. Department Counsel was 
1 
 
2 
 
also prepared to proceed on a companion case concerning the same security concerns 
involving Applicant's wife. Since the facts and circumstances were almost exactly the 
same in both cases, a joint hearing, with the concurrence of Department Counsel and 
both Applicants, was held. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on September 15, 2010, 
for a hearing on October 7, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered five exhibits, marked and received into the record without objection 
as Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 5. Applicant and two witnesses testified on 
his behalf. Applicants offered a combined 25 exhibits marked and admitted in to the 
record as Applicant Exhibits A through Y. Most of the exhibits pertained to both 
Applicants. Any exhibits that pertain solely to one of the Applicants will be clearly 
identified in this decision. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
documents. Applicant timely submitted one additional document admitted as App. Ex. Z. 
The Government had no objections to the document. (Gov. Ex. 6, Memorandum, dated 
December 10, 2010). DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on October 18, 
2010.  
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations raised 
in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant is 64 years old, and has been a principal information systems engineer 
for a defense contractor for over three years. He has a bachelor's degree in electrical 
engineering, a master's degree in computer science, and has completed other post-
graduate courses. He has been married for over 35 years and has three grown children 
all born in the United States. Applicant and his wife reside in the United States. His wife 
is a dual citizen of the United States and Estonia born in the United States of Estonian 
parents who also immigrated to the United States through a refugee camp. She grew up 
in an Estonian household and speaks fluent Estonian. She is a freelance translator of 
Estonian and English and has received translation projects from the United States 
government, Estonian government, and private sources. They frequently attend social 
events at the Estonian embassy. One daughter works for an Estonian government 
agency as a translator and lives and resides in Estonia. Applicant and his wife talk to 
her frequently and see her when they visit Estonia. The other daughter is a doctoral 
student at a United States university. Their son recently left active duty with the Marine 
Corps after serving two tours in Iraq and resides in the United States. Applicant and his 
wife speak Estonian at home, and his entire family is fluent in Estonian. (Tr. 21-25, 45-
50, 56-57; Gov. Ex. 3, e-QIP, dated October 24, 2007; App. Ex. L, Certificate, dated 
February 22, 2008). Applicant provided a detailed affidavit concerning his life story, 
connections to Estonia, and responses to security issues raised in the SOR. (Gov. Ex. 
5, Affidavit, dated July 11, 2008) 
 
 Applicant's parents were originally from Estonia. They fled Estonia during World 
War II when Estonia was occupied for a second time by the Soviet Union. They went to 
a refugee camp in Germany where Applicant was born in 1946. Three years later in 
3 
 
November 1949, the family came to the United States and finally settled a year later in 
permanent location. Applicant grew up in a normal United States community. His father 
was a mechanic at a local plant and his mother was a housewife. He lived in a typical 
United States community, playing with friends and attending and graduating from the 
local schools. He started school not speaking English since it was not spoken at home. 
He quickly learned English and assisted his parents learning the language so they could 
become United States citizens in 1956. He became a citizen in 1960 at the age of 14. 
(Tr. 28-33; App. Ex. A, Citizen certificate, dated May 10, 1984)  
 
 Applicant attended a state university matriculating in electrical engineering as 
well as being a member of the Air Force Reserve Officer's Training Corps (ROTC). His 
parents were refugees from communism and he felt the way to fight back was to join the 
armed forces. His grades and participation in the program was sufficient for him to be 
selected for, and receive, an Air Force scholarship to pay for part of his education. He 
received his bachelor's degree in electrical engineering, was selected as a distinguished 
military graduate, and commissioned in the Air Force in 1968. (App. Ex. B, Transcript, 
dated June 10, 1968; App. Ex. D, Appointment Order, dated June 5, 1968) He applied 
for and received an educational deferment to pursue a master's degree. He received a 
master's degree in computer science in August 1970. (App. Ex. C, Transcript, dated 
August 20, 1970) He entered Air Force active duty, and served two years as a computer 
programmer supporting the air defense system. He had a secret security clearance 
while on active duty. (Tr. 34-39; App. Ex. D, Appointment Order, dated June 5, 1968; 
App. Ex. E, Special Orders, dated June 9, 1971; App. Ex. F, DD 214, dated August 15, 
1972)  
 
 After leaving the Air Force, Applicant worked for defense contractors in the 
computer field, and his clearance was ungraded to top secret. (App. Ex. G, Letter, dated 
July 28, 1980) His clearance was again upgraded based on a special background 
investigation to permit work in the intelligence field. (App. Ex. H, Security Information, 
dated June 16, 1981) Shortly thereafter, he left employment with the defense 
contractors and had no requirement for access to classified information. However, he 
was a contractor working in the nuclear field for the United States Department of 
Energy. He represented the United States in some aspects of the nuclear program with 
the International Atomic Energy Agency and held the equivalent of a top secret 
clearance for them. His defense contractor employer had a contract with the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS). To accomplish his duties, he was granted unescorted access to 
sensitive information by the IRS. However, his 2006 application for a top secret 
equivalent nuclear clearance from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission was denied 
based on guidelines B and C security concerns without explanation in January 2006. 
(Tr. 40-46, 57-58; App. Ex. I, Letter, dated December 18, 2008)  
 
 Estonia became an independent country again when the Soviet Union collapsed 
in 1991. He was considered by Estonia to be a dual citizen of the United States and 
Estonia. He registered for and received a certificate permitting him to vote in the 
Estonian elections in 2002. He also voted in the elections in 2007. His primary reason 
for voting was to vote for very pro-American candidates. He was not encouraged by any 
official in the United States to vote in Estonia. He does not intend to vote in any further 
4 
 
Estonian elections because he feels Estonia has established itself and can stand on its 
accomplishments. Neither he nor his family received any educational benefits from 
Estonia. They are also not entitled to any other benefits from Estonia. The only family 
member who may have received medical benefits from Estonia is his daughter who 
works for the Estonian government. (Tr. 56-57) 
 
 Applicant worked for Estonia in 2006-2007 as a private contractor translating 
cyber defense security documents into English. He was hired by an Estonian friend who 
was president of an Estonian computer company. He was paid in European currency 
(Euros) for his work on the project. He also worked on the computer technology part of 
a project to clean up a former nuclear site in Estonia left by the departing Soviet Union 
forces. Taxes were withheld by Estonia from his payments for these services but were 
refunded when he declared the income on his United States tax returns and paid tax on 
the income in the United States. (Tr. 59-67; App. Ex. Y, Summary Report, dated 
October 5, 2010)  
 
 In 2003, he learned of a potential business prospect working for a company 
doing process reengineering for an Estonian agency. He had to be an Estonian citizen 
to work on the project because funding was provided by the European Union. Applicant 
applied for and was issued an Estonian passport in July 2003. The passport expires in 
July 2013. The process to obtain the passport was difficult and complicated. He had to 
verify his parents were Estonian citizens, provide proof he was their son, and go to 
Estonia to apply. He obtained evidence of his parents' citizenship from Estonian 
records, and his birth to them from German records. He had to go to Estonia to apply for 
and receive the passport. He could not apply at the Estonian Embassy in the United 
States. He did not have to take an oath of affirmation to the Estonian government to 
obtain the passport. He used the passport to enter Estonia as a matter of convenience 
in July 2004, October 2005, December 2005, March 2007, and February 2009. He used 
the passport as identification to purchase a condominium. (Tr. 50-56; Gov. Ex. 4, 
Answers to Interrogatories, date April 16, 2009) He recently surrendered the passport to 
his company's security officer. (App. Ex. M and App. Ex. Z, Affidavit, dated October 6, 
2010) 
 
 Applicant owns a condominium used as a vacation home and a place to stay 
when he visits Estonia. He paid approximately $64,000 for the condominium and made 
over $15,000 in improvements. He obtained a loan from an Estonian bank for the 
purchase. He paid the mortgage using a bank account in an Estonian bank. He has paid 
the mortgage and the property is now valued at approximately $160,000. He still 
maintains the bank account using it to pay for maintenance on the condominium. (Tr. 
66-70, 74-75) Applicant and his wife's total net worth in the United States in property 
and accounts is approximately $1,000,000. 
 
 Applicant has a friendship and relationship with a current high ranking Estonian 
official. The official was born in Europe when his parents were refugees from the Soviet 
forces, and immigrated to the United States and settled in the same state but not the 
same town as Applicant's family. However, they both attended a Boy Scout camp for 
Estonian-American boys and Applicant served as his counselor in the camp because he 
5 
 
was older than him. Before he was elected to his present position in Estonia, he served 
in another high ranking position and Applicant saw him on occasion. He returned to 
Estonia to take another government position. Applicant has had little if any contact with 
him since he returned to Estonia and was elected to the high ranking position. Applicant 
may attend a reception at the embassy for the official but Applicant would be just one of 
the people at the reception. Applicant admits he knows other high ranking people in the 
Estonian government. However since 2008, there have not been any appointees to high 
level positions that he knows. (Tr. 70-74) Applicant is still involved with the Estonian-
American Boy Scout camp as a volunteer caring for the equipment in the camp. (Tr. 78- 
80) 
 
 Applicant was pleased when the yoke of Soviet occupation was lifted from 
Estonia in 1991. He felt a cultural and heredity connection to Estonia and relieved for 
his cousins still in the country. He reads an Estonian-American newspaper on occasion 
but the news is mainly about Estonians in the United States and Canada. He does not 
follow political events in Estonia even though his friend is the president and will be up 
for reelection in 2012. While Applicant is in agreement with the pro-western movement 
in Estonia, he does not have a sense of loyalty to them. Estonia has progressed to the 
point that it has a well-established parliamentary system, follows a rule of law, and has 
a transparent government open to all people. He followed the events concerning the 
Soviet invasion of Georgia and the Estonian president's solidarity against the invasion 
with other presidents from Baltic countries. He does not have regular contact with 
anyone in Estonia other than his daughter. Applicant at one time thought about retiring 
in Estonia but he no longer has the desire. He intends to spend time in Estonia but not 
retire there because the medical care is not as good as in the United States. Applicant's 
connection to Estonia is based on heritage and culture but his loyalty is unequivocally 
with the United States. (Tr. 80-94) 
 
 Applicant's wife gave testimony at the hearing in support of her husband. The 
other witness is a retired Air Force major general of Estonia heritage who served over 
28 years on active duty. She met Applicant and his wife at an Estonian-American 
cultural event in approximately 1998. Applicant's life story is similar to her story since 
she was also born in the same refugee camp as Applicant. Her family settled in another 
northeastern state and she attended school and obtained a degree and a commission 
through the ROTC program. As other refugees, she is so profoundly grateful for the 
refuge given her by the United States and the opportunities presented to her that she 
joined and served in the armed forces. She served as a military attaché in the Baltic and 
has visited Estonia. She knows of no Estonian person who willingly became a United 
States citizen that would choose Estonia over the United States. She knows Applicant 
and he would not choose Estonia over the United States. She has positive feelings 
concerning Applicant's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and loyalty. If she were in a 
position, she would hire Applicant and recommend him for a security clearance. (129-
138)   
 
 Applicant presented a letter of recommendation form one of his former 
supervisors. The supervisor has known Applicant since 1995 and worked closely with 
Applicant on projects until 1998. During this time, they had a close personal relationship 
6 
 
while working and traveling on projects. Since they stopped working together in 1998, 
he has kept in close contact with Applicant. The supervisor holds a security clearance 
and is well aware of the requirements for a security clearance. He is aware of 
Applicant's dual citizenship with Estonia and his activities and trips to Estonia. He knows 
of nothing to doubt Applicant's trustworthiness or loyalty. (App. Ex. J, Letter, dated 
October 3, 2010) 
 
 Estonia is a country of approximately 1.4 million people, with a parliamentary 
democracy under a Constitution in force since 1992. The head of state is the President 
elected for a five-year term. He mainly has a representational role with some executive 
powers. He is the supreme commander of the armed forces. The national legislature is 
a unicameral parliament of 101 members elected for four year terms. The executive 
power is exercised by the Prime Minister appointed by the parliament.  
 
 The United States recognized Estonia in 1922 and continued its recognition 
during the illegal occupation of Estonia by the Soviet Union from 1940 until 1991. The 
United States recognized the legal representative of Estonia and never recognized the 
Soviet annexation. This recognition has been the cornerstone of Estonian-United States 
relationships. The bilateral relationship between Estonia and the United States has 
been steady and strong since Estonia restored its independence in 1991. The 
developing relationship has been constructive and stable. The United States is one of 
Estonia's most important partners. The strong bilateral relationship is corroborated by 
the dialogue between the countries in several matters of great importance to Estonia as 
well as the United States. There is practical cooperation in the areas of defense, 
international fight against terrorism, economic cooperation, and crime prevention. 
 
 Estonia became a member of NATO on March 29, 2004, and a member of the 
European Union on May 1, 2004. These memberships show a strong strengthening 
relationship with Estonia and members of the alliance and the United States. The United 
States played a decisive role in Estonia's approval to be a member of NATO. Estonia 
has participated in the United States led NATO military operations in Afghanistan since 
2002. They also participated in the NATO Kosovo operation in 1999, and in Iraq from 
2003 until 2008. (App. Ex. O, Estonia 2010; App. Ex. Q, Estonia and the European 
Union, dated June 18, 2010; App. Ex. R, Estonia and the United Nations, dated April 2, 
2010; App. Ex S, Estonia and the US, undated; App. Ex. T, Estonia as a full member of 
NATO, undated; App. Ex U, COE Status Map, dated September 29, 2010; App. Ex. V, 
History of Deployments since 1995, undated; App. Ex. W, Country Reports on Terrorism 
2009, dated August 2010; and App. Ex. X, Embassy of the United States, Speeches 
and articles, date June 14, 2010)  
 
Policy 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
7 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in the U.S. 
interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which 
the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including but not limited to, such 
consideration as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
 Applicant's daughter is a dual citizen of Estonia and the United States who lives 
in Estonia and is employed as a translator and press and information officer for the 
Estonian foreign ministry. Applicant's wife is also a dual citizen of Estonia and the 
8 
 
United States but resides in the United States. They have contact with relatives and 
friends in Estonia. They also know and occasionally see high ranking Estonian 
government officials, including legislators. Applicant and his wife have done translation 
work for Estonia government agencies. They also travel to Estonia about once a year, 
own a condominium in Estonia, and frequently attend events at the Estonia Embassy. 
These contacts, relationships, activities, and property ownership are a security concern 
and raise Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions (FI DC) AG ¶ 7(a) (contact with a 
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who 
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion); and FI DC AG ¶ 
7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a 
potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive 
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or 
country by providing that information); FI DC AG ¶ 8(d) (sharing living quarters with a 
person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion); and FI DC 
AG ¶ 8(e) (a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or 
in a foreign-owned or foreign-operated business which could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation). The Government's security concern 
is based on the strength and depth of Applicant's connections to Estonia and people in 
the government, and not any heightened risk created by Estonia. (Tr. 163-164) 
 
 The mere existence of foreign relationships and contacts is not sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. The nature of Applicant’s contacts and relationships 
must be examined to determine whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. “Heightened” is a relative 
term denoting increased risk compared to some normally existing risk that can be 
inherent anytime there are foreign contacts and relationships. A factor that may 
heighten the risk in Applicant's case is the extent, degree, and level of his connection to 
Estonia, its government, its leaders, and its people.  
 
 Applicant raised facts to mitigate the security concerns for contacts and 
relationships with people in Estonia. I have considered Foreign Influence Mitigating 
Conditions (FI MC) AG ¶ 8(a) (The nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.); FI MC AG ¶ 8(b) (There is no 
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest); and FI MC AG ¶ 
8(c) (Contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual or infrequent that there 
is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation). 
 
 The contacts with high level officials in Estonia place a heavy burden on 
Applicant in mitigating the disqualifying conditions and the security concerns. Applicant's 
9 
 
relationship with his daughter in Estonia is, of course, close and frequent as a 
relationship between father and daughter. He talks to her frequently and sees her when 
he visits Estonia. Also of concern is that he knows and does have some contact with 
high level Estonian officials. However, his contact with these Estonian officials is 
minimal, casual, and infrequent at best. There is little if any likelihood that these 
contacts will create a risk of foreign influence or exploitation. Applicant's vacation 
property in Estonia is valuable, but it is only about ten percent of his total worth. The 
nature of Estonian and United States' interests and the small value of the property 
relative to Applicant's total net worth would not place Applicant at a heightened risk of 
foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
 The interests of Estonia and the United States are close since the United States 
was a proponent of Estonian independence even when Estonia was occupied by the 
Soviet Union. The United States strongly backed Estonia for membership in NATO and 
the European Union. Estonia reciprocated for this support by being a strategic partner 
with the United States participating and supporting the United States and NATO in 
defense operations in Kosovo, Iraq and Afghanistan. There is no doubt the United 
States and Estonia are strong allies with close mutual interests. There is a minimal 
difference between the interests of Estonia and the interests of the United States. There 
is little likelihood Applicant will be placed in a position to have to chose between the 
interests of his contacts in Estonia and the interests of the United States.  
 
 More important, Applicant has a strong sense of loyalty to the United States. He 
came to the United States as a refugee and had such a profound sense of obligation for 
the opportunities he received that he served in the armed forces. His sense of loyalty to 
Estonia is minimal and is based on culture and heritage and not from a sense of loyalty 
to Estonia or its government. He can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States because of this strong sense of loyalty to the United States. It 
is inconceivable that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between 
his contacts and interests in Estonia and the interests of the United States. In balancing 
all of the factors mentioned and considered above, I am satisfied Applicant’s loyalty to 
the United States is such that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States interest. Accordingly, FI MC AG ¶ 8(a), FI MC AG ¶ 8(b), and 
FI MC AG ¶ 8(c) apply. Applicant has met his heavy burden to show that his contacts 
and relationships with Estonia do not cause a security concern. I conclude Applicant 
has mitigated security concerns for contacts with Estonia.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign 
country over the United States, then he may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States. (AG ¶ 9) The principal 
goal of the foreign preference assessment is to determine the risk, based on foreign 
associations, that information may be compromised if access to sensitive information is 
approved. It is not a measure of Applicant's loyalty to the United States. 
 
10 
 
 Applicant is a dual citizen of Estonia and the United States. He came to the 
United States as a three-year-old refugee and became a citizen in 1960 as a teenager. 
He affirmatively applied for Estonian citizenship in 2003, and is considered a citizen of 
Estonia because of his birth to Estonian parents. He applied for an Estonian passport in 
2003 to facilitate his entry and permit and enhance business interests in Estonia. He 
uses this passport to be employed in Estonia and other European Union countries. He 
voted in Estonian elections, paid taxes in Estonia, and used his passport and citizenship 
to obtain property in Estonia. These actions raise Foreign Preference Disqualifying 
Condition (FP DC) AG ¶ 10(a) (Exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign 
citizenship after becoming a United States citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a 
family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign 
passport), (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interest in another 
country, and (7) voting in a foreign election.  
 
In response to this disqualifying condition, Applicant raised Foreign Preference 
Mitigating Conditions (FP MC) AG ¶ 11(b) (The individual has expressed a willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship), and FP MC AG ¶ 11(e) (The passport has been 
destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated). 
The United States Supreme Court has recognized a right under the United States 
Constitution for United States citizens to have a dual citizenship with another country. 
(Afroyim v. Rusk, 387 U.S. 253 (1967). The mere fact that a United States citizen is 
eligible for dual citizenship with another country is not a security concern. Applicant has 
not indicated his intent to renounce his dual citizenship with Estonia. His failure to 
renounce dual citizenship is not a disqualifying condition since the renunciation of a dual 
citizenship is very often a meaningless gesture because of the citizenship laws of the 
other nation. The exercise of dual citizenship does create a security concern.  
 
Applicant has exercised his rights as a dual citizen. He applied for foreign 
citizenship, obtained a foreign passport, purchased a vacation home in a foreign 
country, and voted in a foreign election before he applied for a security clearance. 
Applicant has surrendered his passport to the appropriate security authority of his 
company. His business interests in Estonia are limited to his condominium which he 
purchased as a vacation home and a place to stay when he visits that country. While he 
has voted in past Estonian elections, his purpose was to elect candidates favorable to 
United States' interests. He does not intend to vote in future Estonian elections. As 
noted under the Guideline B analysis, Applicant has a profound sense of loyalty to the 
United States and his loyalty to Estonia is based only on culture and heritage. His 
exercise of any rights and privileges of Estonian citizenship was for business and 
economic reasons and does not show any conflict between his loyalty to the United 
Stews and his loyalty to Estonia. Applicant has, therefore, mitigated security concerns 
for his exercise of foreign citizenship with Estonia. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
11 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I carefully considered all of the 
circumstances discussed above in regard to disqualifying and mitigating conditions as 
well as the following factors in light of the whole person concept. I considered that 
Applicant is a refugee from communism who came as a youth to the United States and 
became a citizen. I considered that he received an Air Force commission and served on 
active duty with a security clearance. I considered that he was granted access to 
classified information and sensitive information from other government agencies, but 
was also denied access to sensitive nuclear information by a government agency under 
the same circumstances presented here.  
 
The whole-person concept requires consideration of all available information 
about Applicant, not a single item in isolation, to reach a determination concerning 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. Applicant has relationships and 
contacts with officials in Estonia. His daughter is also a citizen and resident of Estonia. 
These facts alone might be sufficient to raise security concerns for Applicant’s potential 
vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, or pressure. However, Applicant has established 
his strong loyalties to the United States. He also established he has no real loyalty to 
Estonia. Estonia is a strong ally of the United States with mutual interests and concerns. 
Applicant's strong loyalty to the United States and the relationship between the United 
States and Estonia counters any contacts and relationships he has with Estonia and 
people who reside there or are in the government. Overall, on balance, the record 
evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for access to classified information. Applicant's connections to Estonia do not 
create a heightened risk related to national security. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has met the heavy burden of mitigating all potential security concerns arising 
from his contacts in Estonia, as well as his exercise of citizenship in Estonia. Applicant 
has mitigated the security concerns arising from foreign influence and foreign 
preference, and is granted access to classified information. 
 
 
12 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraph 1.b (1-6):    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 2.a - s:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
