1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-06498
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nicole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On June 4, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). DOHA took action under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
In a July 30, 2010, response, Applicant admitted four of the 10 allegations raised
under Guideline F and requested a hearing before a DOHA administrative judge. DOHA
assigned the case to me on October 8, 2010. The parties proposed a hearing date of
December 15, 2010. A notice setting that date for the hearing was issued on November
5, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Applicant gave testimony, introduced two witnesses, and offered 10 documents,
which were accepted into the record without objection as exhibits (Exs.) A-J. The
Government introduced four documents, which were accepted into the record without
objection as Exs. 1-4. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on December
 Tr. 25-28. Applicant’s stated strategy for addressing his delinquent debts from smallest to largest is      1
reflected in his satisfaction of these debts. The remaining debts at issue, discussed below, are for larger
balances. 
 Tr. 40.      2
 Tr. 45. Applicant and his estranged wife amicably devised payment amounts which were later adopted by      3
the court. Child support was assessed at $500 a month.
 Tr. 37.      4
 Tr. 32.      5
2
28, 2010, and the record was closed. Based on a review of the testimony, submissions,
and exhibits, I find Applicant met his burden of mitigating security concerns related to
financial considerations. Clearance is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 35-year-old researcher who has worked for the same government
contractor since April 2009. He served in the United States Army from 1994 until 2001,
when he received a medical discharge. Applicant is currently completing a bachelor’s
degree in multi-disciplinary studies with the goal of starting a master’s degree by the
end of 2011. Applicant and his ex-wife share custody of their three-year-old child. 
At issue in the SOR are 10 debts, noted at SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a-1.j. In denying
allegations ¶ 1.a and ¶¶ 1.e-1.i, Applicant provided evidence that the debts at issue
were previously paid. Before proceeding with Applicant’s direct testimony, the
Government expressed its agreement that these alleged debts, amounting to
approximately $2,135, were satisfied.  Consequently, remaining at issue are those four1
debts noted at SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.b-d and ¶ 1.j, all of which are attributable to
essential medical care, as noted below.
Applicant met his wife in 2006. They dated for a few months before she
discovered she was pregnant. She had no health insurance. Although she was unsure
of the father’s identity, Applicant tried “to be the better person” and offered to marry
her.  They got married and the child was born under Applicant’s health insurance policy.2
The baby was determined to be his child, and the couple settled down to try to make a
family despite his hectic travel schedule. During this time period, Applicant often felt
sick and tired, a condition that adversely affected his work. For unrelated reasons, his
wife requested a separation and prepared to relocate to a distant state in mid-2007. 
Applicant’s estranged spouse earned a modest salary, and Applicant
immediately began providing for her and their baby.  Shortly thereafter, in late August or3
early September 2007, Applicant lost his job. At the time, Applicant still maintained
excellent credit.  Although he found a new position as a financial advisor by the end of4
October 2007, the salary was based on commission. Consequently, Applicant went
without a paycheck for about four months.  He received his first paycheck “of5
 Tr. 44. Applicant’s January 2008 paycheck was for about $1,200 to $1,500.      6
 Id.      7
 Tr. 34.      8
 Tr. 35; Ex. C (Letter of Oct. 30, 2009) regarding SOR allegation ¶ 1.c.      9
 Tr. 33.      10
 Id. During the four months of radiation treatments, Applicant was without medical coverage for three      11
months. Tr. 45.
 Tr. 46. Applicant’s form of cancer necessitated a a particularly costly procedure offered by a private      12
institution with particular expertise in the treatment provided. 
 Tr. 60.      13
 Tr. 46.      14
3
substance” in about January 2008.  Despite his financial distress and poor health, he6
maintained his child support payments, supplementing them when he could with
additional, but modest sums.   7
In the interim, in about late September 2007, Applicant was diagnosed with
cancer. To help meet his obligations, he cashed out his former employer’s version of
stock options.  This gave him access to about $23,000, of which he used $11,000 to8
satisfy a business loan previously taken on behalf of his estranged wife, and he
reserved the balance for his on-going expenses.  About a month after losing his job, his9
health insurance expired and he did not have a COBRA policy.  10
Meanwhile, Applicant’s cancer treatment continued. By the end of the year, he
was receiving the first of two aggressive and costly rounds of radiation treatments,
payment for which was expected out of pocket.  The radiation component of his11
treatment was conducted over a four-month span, extending into the early months of
2008. Lacking health insurance for this essential treatment, Applicant incurred an
estimated $30,000 to $50,000 in personal debt.  He depleted his 401k account to keep12
up with the medical costs and put some of his medical bills on credit cards.  The13
mounting medical costs led him to seek multiple loans.14
Applicant and his wife were granted a divorce in April 2008. They built an
amicable relationship while Applicant recovered from his treatments and received
appropriate medical attention. In 2009, he relocated to be closer to his daughter and to
live in a region with a lower cost of living. He sees his child almost every day. Applicant
is now in remission and fully employed. 
Using his background as a financial planner and advisor, Applicant has followed
the same advice he gives to clients in addressing the debts he acquired between 2007
and 2008. He no longer uses credit and “will never use a credit card for anything other
 Tr. 60.      15
 Ex. G (Budget).      16
 Id.      17
 Tr. 29.      18
 Tr. 46, 64, quoting Department Counsel’s summation of Applicant’s separation, unemployment, and      19
diagnosis. 
 See Answer to the SOR, dated Jul. 30, 2010.      20
 Tr. 31-32, 34. W hen asked specifically as to the origin of the debt, Applicant referenced his period of      21
unemployment and battle with cancer.
 Tr. 29.      22
 Id      23
 Ex. B (Bank statement, dated Dec. 8, 2010).      24
4
than to survive,” a lesson he learned from experience.  He currently generates a net15
monthly income of about $8,400, comprised of salary and GI Bill/VA benefits. Upon
receipt of each paycheck, he pays himself first for his essential obligations. To this end,
he maintains a particularly detailed and workable budget that includes repayments on
the debts at issue, child support, and other anticipated expenses.  He has addressed16
the debts at issue by paying off the smaller ones first, a process he still follows.  He17
also consulted an attorney regarding strategies for approaching creditors in his efforts
at debt resolution.18
Remaining at issue are the debts noted at SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.b-d and ¶ 1.j,
amounting to approximately $48,800. These debts are mostly the result of Applicant’s
medical care, although they also represent the “perfect storm of events” occurring in his
life in 2007-2008.  Through Applicant’s repayment strategy, the sum captured by the19
June 2010 SOR is a reduction from an original sum balance in excess of about
$62,000.  The debts remaining at issue are: 20
1.b: 2008 Judgment for approximately $20,644 – In repayment. The origin of this debt is
related to medical, pre-divorce marital, and general debts acquired between 2007 and
2008.  There is no evidence as to how much of this sum reflects interest and fees. This21
creditor originally wanted monthly payments of $617 to establish a payment plan. At the
time, that sum was too unwieldy. On advice of counsel, Applicant counter-offered to
make smaller payments and his payments have been accepted.  He reduced the22
original debt by about $700 through various payments before relocating.  Since then,23
Applicant has been in regular monthly repayment since early November 2010.  24
1.c: Bank debt of approximately $10,935 – In repayment. This account is an employee
account through the employer Applicant was with until September 2007. The original
obligation was created by a business loan Applicant had taken on behalf of his former
 Tr. 34; Ex. C (Letter, dated Oct. 30, 2009) reflecting payment of $11,311.34.      25
 Tr. 36; Ex. D (Statement, dated Dec. 8, 2010).      26
 Tr. 38; Ex. F (Statement, dated Dec. 8, 2010).      27
 Tr. 37.      28
 Ex. E (Statement, dated Dec. 8, 2010).      29
 Ex. A (Letter, dated Dec. 15, 2010).      30
 Tr. 14-21.      31
5
wife before their estrangement. After Applicant was terminated, he sold his stock
options and paid approximately $11,311 toward a total debt to this creditor of about
$23,000. This payment reduced the balance to approximately $11,800.  Applicant25
provided evidence that he has been in regular payment on this account since at least
July 1, 2010.  26
1.d: Collection account for $6,333 – In repayment. Between his marital estrangement,
period of unemployment, and medical treatments, Applicant needed funds in late 2007.
He applied for and received a loan from the entity represented by this collection agent.
Applicant provided evidence he has been making regular $50 payments every two
weeks since at least August 2010.  27
1.j: Collection account for $11,832 – In repayment. This debt is also the result of a debt
incurred when Applicant was faced with a period of unemployment and undergoing
cancer treatment during his 2007 separation.  Applicant provided evidence of regular28
monthly payments on this debt since July 1, 2010.29
Applicant’s employer described Applicant as a “stellar employee” whose
reliability, discretion, and trustworthiness should not be questioned due to his
finances.  The employer emphasizes Applicant’s demonstrated dedication to repaying30
his debt. Two character witnesses spoke about Applicant’s personal qualities in the
highest terms.31
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      32
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      33
 Id.      34
 Id.      35
6
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a32
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  33
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified
information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access34
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.35
Based upon consideration of the evidence, Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) is  the most pertinent to this case. Conditions pertaining to this AG that
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would
mitigate such concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
 AG ¶ 18.      36
 Id.      37
7
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
Under Guideline F, “failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”  It36
also states that “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.”  Although he demonstrated satisfaction of six37
of the 10 debts at issue, Applicant admitted four of the debts cited in the allegations
raised under this guideline. The remaining debt is sufficient to raise Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts) and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).
With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and
mitigate security concerns. 
In this case, Applicant provided significant evidence of mitigation. The debts at
issue were incurred due to Applicant’s marital estrangement, loss of employment, and
cancer. While any of those circumstances could potentially recur in a lifetime, the nearly
simultaneous confluence of three such traumatic events is unlikely to recur. Moreover,
since overcoming this “perfect storm” of adverse events, Applicant has demonstrated
sound judgment and responsibility in handling the resultant financial distress they
caused.  Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. 
As noted, Applicant’s debt was largely the result of debts incurred after losing his
job in the summer of 2007. Separated, without regular income for several months and
lacking health insurance for the majority of the time he received essential radiation
treatments, Applicant resorted to credit to meet his obligations. In doing so, he first
cashed in stock options, then depleted his 401k account before seeking third-party
loans. Once his health, employment, and situation stabilized, he started making
payments on his debts, ultimately satisfying six of the ten at issue and commencing
repayment on the remaining four. Such facts are sufficient to raise FC MC AG ¶ 20(b)
(the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control
(e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a
death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances).
Applicant is a trained and experienced financial planner/consultant. He has also
consulted legal counsel in addressing his delinquent debt. While his personal
background presents a unique situation for consideration under this guideline, his
8
training, experience, and legal counsel provided him with the essentials to successfully
address his debts in an organized and effective manner. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications
that the problem is being resolved or is under control) applies. 
Applicant satisfied six of the 10 debts at issue. He is now addressing the four
remaining debts. Applicant demonstrated that he is currently in regular repayment on
those obligations. FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. None of the other FC MCs apply.
The burden for mitigation in these proceedings is placed squarely on Applicant.
This case is not one of an individual living beyond his means, investing in risky
ventures, or failing to understand basic personal finance. Applicant presented unique
facts and adequate evidence sufficiently mitigating the creation of the debts at issue.
More importantly, he articulated and demonstrated an organized, methodical approach
to repaying his debts. To date, a majority of the debts at issue have been satisfied. The
remaining debts are in timely repayment. Applicant has both the resources and
demonstrated resolve to continue making such payments until his remaining debts are
satisfied. I find that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2 (a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is a 35-year-old researcher who has been a trusted employee for his
current employer for nearly two years. He is well-regarded and respected by his peers.
Applicant is a veteran of the United States military. Divorced, he has honored his
financial commitments to his young child. He relocated to both be closer to that child
and to live in an area with a lower cost of living. He has considerable experience as a
financial counselor and analyst. He demonstrated his prowess in this area in satisfying
the debts he incurred when marital separation, unemployment, and cancer
unexpectedly coincided to create a “perfect storm” of adverse events in the summer of
2007. Prior to that time, Applicant had no financial issues of note and maintained
excellent credit.
Throughout his adverse circumstances, Applicant has acted honorably and
responsibly. He first faced financial adversity with his marital separation and the loss of
a job. When his wife left, he immediately started providing child support. When he lost
his job, he cashed out his stock options to start addressing mounting debts. When his
cancer treatments created rising debts not covered by health insurance, he depleted his
9
401k. He resorted to a reliance on credit only when it became essential to maintaining
his necessary medical treatment, for which he incurred an unwieldy amount of debt.   
Since his health has stabilized and Applicant resumed employment in his new
state in mid-2009, he has utilized his knowledge of finances to employ a systematic
method for repaying his debts without resorting to bankruptcy. Six of the 10 debts at
issue in the SOR are fully satisfied. He has reduced the total sum balance of the
remaining four debts at issue substantially. Applicant is making regular payments on
those remaining account balances. Given his demonstrated commitment to addressing
his debts, his improved health, his current income, improved circumstances, and his
continuing resolve to honor his debts, there is no indication that Applicant will not
continue to do so. Given all these considerations, there is sufficient evidence to mitigate
Guideline F security concerns. Clearance is granted.       
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance granted.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
