                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 09-03362 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
J, Criminal Conduct, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 15, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines J 
and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 In undated responses received on June 7, 2010, August 30, 2010, and 
November 1, 2010, Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The 
case was assigned to me on December 6, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
December 8, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 6, 2011. The 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 25. Applicant did not object and they were 
admitted. The Government also offered an exhibit list that was marked as Hearing 
Exhibit I. Applicant and one witness testified on his behalf. He offered Exhibits (AE) A 
and B, which were admitted without objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on January 13, 2011.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶1.o to read as follows: “You were 
arrested and incarcerated in [State] on two convictions for felony stealing.” Applicant 
was made aware of his right to delay the case to provide him with proper notice and 
time to prepare. He waived the notice requirement and elected to proceed. The motion 
was granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.o, and 2.b. He denied 
the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 37 years. He is married a second time and has two children, ages 
four and two years old, and his wife is pregnant with their third child. Applicant is in the 
process of determining the paternity of two children from his first wife. Applicant has 
worked for a federal contractor since 2008.1  
 
 Applicant enlisted in the Army in February 1993. In November 1993, he pled 
guilty pursuant to a pretrial agreement, at a general court-martial, to the offenses of 
forgery, disobeying a lawful order, and breaking restriction. Applicant stole 25 checks 
from a fellow soldier, forged them, and cashed them. He was sentenced to 48 months 
confinement and a dishonorable discharge. Under his pretrial agreement he was to 
serve 39 months confinement. He estimated he cashed checks in the total amount of 
$6,000 to $7,000. He was released on parole after he served 18 months confinement 
and was required to make restitution. He failed to make restitution and his parole was 
suspended.2  
 
 In approximately March or April 1996, Applicant was arrested for stealing a check 
from his grandfather. He forged the check, obtained cash, and made purchases for his 
girlfriend. Applicant pled guilty and was sentenced to a year and three months in jail. He 
went to a correctional facility and completed six months of the sentence before he was 
released.3  
 
1 Tr. 26-28. 
 
2 Tr. 28-32, 34. 
 
3 Tr. 32-34. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 In May 1996, Applicant was arrested for felony burglary. He was accused by his 
girlfriend of breaking into her house and stealing items. She failed to appear for the 
hearing and the charges were nolle prosequi. In April 1996, Applicant was charged with 
misuse of a telephone. He stated his girlfriend accused him of the offense. The charge 
was later nolle prosequi.4  
 
 In May 1996, Applicant was charged with four counts of theft for less than $300, 
one count of theft over $300, and unlawfully taking a vehicle. He pled guilty to both theft 
charges. He admitted he stole a car. Inside the car there was a briefcase that contained 
stock certificates. He was arrested at the airport attempting to buy a plane ticket. He 
was sentenced to 12 months in jail, 6 months was suspended, and he was placed on 
probation for two years.5  
 
After Applicant’s parole was suspended, officials from the Army apprehended 
him and returned him to confinement. There is confusion about when his apprehension 
actually occurred. His testimony is that he was incarcerated from May 1996 to July 
1997. He had his parole hearing on August 1997, and was required to complete the 
remaining months of his court-martial sentence. His parole was suspended because he 
failed to make restitution and he failed to comply with the terms of the probation. He 
stated he was apprehended at the correctional facility where he was serving his 
sentence. He was then returned to the military to complete the terms of the court-martial 
sentence.6  
 
Applicant was charged in October 1996 with six counts of forgery, six counts of 
uttering false documents, and theft over $300. Applicant explained that he knowingly 
wrote checks on accounts that did not have sufficient funds. He explained that because 
he was already going to jail the jurisdiction decided to nolle prosequi the charges.7  
 
In August 1999, Applicant took his sister’s car without her permission. He was 
charged with tampering. The charge was later nolle prosequi.8  
 
In September 1999, Applicant was charged with two counts of uttering a check 
without sufficient finds under $300. He was found guilty of one count. He did not recall 
the sentence.9 
 
4 Tr. 35, 47. 
 
5 Tr. 36-40. 
 
6 Tr. 40-45; GE 15. 
 
7 Tr. 46-48. 
 
8 Tr. 46, 48-49; GE 2 
 
9 Tr. 51-53. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant was arrested in about September 1999, and charged with burglary-first 
degree, theft over $300, burglary-4th degree theft, malicious destruction of property 
valued more than $300, and unauthorized removal of property. In November 1999 he 
was found guilty of felony theft over $300. The burglary charge was nolle prosequi, and 
the remaining charges were not pursued. Applicant stole his sister’s car. He was 
sentenced to 18 months in jail, with 389 days suspended, and he was placed on 
probation. He stated he spent about three to four months in jail and was on probation 
until 2001.10  
 
Applicant stated that in approximately September 2000, he and was charged with 
stealing the night deposits from his employer. He stated he was charged with two felony 
counts of theft. This lead to a fugitive warrant being issued. He stated he was sentenced 
to seven years in jail, with five years suspended. He was to pay $250 a month for seven 
years, as restitution. He made one payment and failed to report for probation as 
required. He stated he was aware at the time he was violating his probation. Applicant’s 
failure to abide by the terms of his probation is the subject of the violation of probation 
warrant alleged in SOR ¶ 1. k. Applicant explained that the fugitive warrants alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.l dated January 2001, and 1.m dated July 2001, were issued for his failure to 
pay restitution as was ordered by the court.11  
 
In December 2001, after Applicant was released from jail, he was at a hotel with 
friends. The people he was with had a vehicle with stolen tags. Applicant was arrested 
and released on his personal recognizance. He stated he thought the charges had been 
dismissed. In approximately 2006 or 2007, he learned the charges were still pending. 
He hired an attorney and the charge was nolle prosequi in 2007.12 
 
Applicant continued to violate the terms of his probation and additional warrants 
were issued for his arrest. In March 2002, he was apprehended on a fugitive warrant 
and returned to jail. He stated he was released from jail in October 2004 and remained 
on parole until October 2008. He stated that from October 2004 to the present he has 
not committed any criminal offenses. He has not had any association with people 
involved in criminal activity.13 
 
Applicant signed his security clearance application on December 16, 2008. He 
estimated it took him about two weeks to complete. In response to question 23f, which 
asked Applicant if in the last seven years he had been arrested for, charged with, or 
convicted of any offenses not previous listed, he answered “no.” Applicant answered 
10 Tr. 53-56. 
 
11 Tr. 56-62; GE 24; I have not considered any of the arrests, charges, or convictions that were not 
alleged for disqualifying purposes. I have considered them for mitigation purposes, analyzing Applicant’s 
credibility, and when considering the “whole-person” concept. 
 
12 Tr. 62-65; GE 23. 
 
13 Tr. 59-67; SOR ¶ 1.k. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
“yes” under question 23a that asked if he had been charged with or convicted of any 
felony offenses. He answered “yes” under question 23e that he had been subject to a 
court-martial. In the section requesting Applicant provide an explanation, he listed that 
in October 1993 he was court-martialed for larceny. He added the following comments: 
“in the early 1990s I had problems with the law [b]ut that chapter is now closed now.”14 
Applicant did not list any of his other felony convictions. He stated he could not list his 
other felony convictions because he could not remember the dates and the details. He 
stated he disclosed on his employment application that he had a criminal record. 
Applicant denied he intentionally failed to disclose the fugitive from justice warrants as 
alleged. Applicant listed he was employed from October 2001 to November 2004, when 
in fact he was incarcerated. He listed as his place of residence from November 2001 to 
September 2004, a residence where he was not living because he was incarcerated 
during this period. Applicant also failed to disclose he had been fired from a job. 
Applicant stated he was not trying to hide anything, but rather had difficulty with the 
electronic questionnaire. He stated he was required to put some entry into the space or 
he could not complete the application. Applicant completed the terms of his parole in 
October 2008, six weeks before completing his SCA.15 
 
Applicant admitted that if people he worked with were aware of his criminal past it 
would affect his professional standing. He has not discussed his criminal background 
with his supervisor or security officer. When asked what he thought would happen if 
they became aware of his criminal background, he stated he thought he would lose his 
job.16 
 
Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator in January 2009. In July 2009, 
he was provided a copy of the interview summary and given an opportunity to correct 
and make changes to his statement. He signed the document indicating it was accurate 
and did not make any changes or corrections to it. Applicant had an opportunity to 
disclose to the OPM investigator that he omitted on his SCA his arrests after December 
2001, his felony fugitive warrant, and to correct his other omissions. He did not disclose 
the accurate information or make changes. I find Applicant deliberately failed to disclose 
his felony fugitive warrant and other arrests after December 2001 on his SCA.17  
 
Applicant admitted that he had problems with the law in the past, but he is now a 
changed person. He pays his taxes, he is a home owner, and he has a wife and 
children. He stated he is different than he was ten years ago. He has a good job and 
has received a promotion. He stated he no longer associates with others involved in 
14 GE 1 at 34. 
 
15 Tr. 70-88; 93-94; GE 1. I have not considered the information Applicant provided regarding his 
residence and employment for disqualifying purposes, but I have considered them when analyzing his 
credibility, for mitigating purposes, and the “whole-person” concept.  
 
16 Tr. 88-89. 
 
17 Tr. 90-92. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
criminal activities. He stated because he served the remainder of his sentences and ws 
released from probation, he was no longer required to pay restitution.18  
 
A friend of Applicant’s testified on his behalf. He met Applicant 11 years ago, but 
has really gotten to know him in the last five years. He is aware of Applicant’s past. The 
witness serves as the associate pastor at the church where Applicant attends. It is also 
the church where Applicant’s father is the pastor and the witness’ supervisor. He 
believes Applicant is a changed person. He believes Applicant has changed his life and 
is now on the right track.19 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
18 Tr. 24-25, 67-69, 92. 
 
19 Tr. 96-100. 
 
7 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern for criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offense;  
 
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable 
conditions; 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
(d) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program; and 
 
(e) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year. 
 
Applicant has an extensive criminal history. He was court-martialed and was 
convicted of forgery and other offenses. He was awarded 48 months confinement and a 
dishonorable discharge. He served 39 months in confinement before being released on 
parole. He was arrested other times for theft, burglary, unlawful taking of a motor 
vehicle, uttering false documents, forgery, malicious destruction of property, and 
unauthorized removal of property, which were both felony and misdemeanor offenses. 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant’s parole was suspended and he violated his probation on several occasions. 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose on his SCA his criminal arrest that occurred after 
December 2001. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
 Applicant has a significant criminal record. It began in 1993 and extended until 
his most recent criminal violation under Title 18 United States Code § 1001, when he 
intentionally failed to disclose on his SCA his arrest in 2002. Although Applicant’s last 
arrest was in 2002, he was incarcerated until 2004, and he failed to be truthful on his 
SCA, raising doubts about his rehabilitation. He was released from incarceration in 2004 
and from parole in October 2008. I have considered Applicant’s long pattern of arrests, 
convictions, incarcerations, and parole and probation violations. I have also considered 
that he is attempting to change his life, has a job, and attends church, and no longer 
associates with people involved in criminal activity. I am concerned that Applicant failed 
to be honest on his SCA, which raises questions about his rehabilitation and 
trustworthiness. Not enough time has passed to conclude that Applicant’s criminal 
conduct is in his past. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant is 
successfully rehabilitated. Therefore, I find none of the above mitigating conditions 
apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered:  
 
 
9 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant intentionally and deliberately failed to disclose all of his criminal activity. 
Applicant has an extensive criminal background that includes numerous arrests, 
multiple convictions for felonies and misdemeanors, and significant periods of 
incarceration. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant’s personal 
conduct.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
 
10 
 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with person involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct his 
omission. There is no evidence Applicant’s concealment and omission was caused or 
contributed to by improper or inadequate advice. The concealment and omission is 
serious because it was accompanied by Applicant also listing false information about his 
employment and residence during a time when he was actually incarcerated. This 
supports the fact that Applicant was attempting to hide some of his past conduct. 
Applicant’s convictions are serious. He has a 15-year history of criminal conduct, from 
1993 to 2008. He failed to be completely honest on his SCA, and his criminal arrests 
and convictions for crimes of forgery, theft, and burglary cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. Although Applicant has made changes in his life and 
appears to no longer associate with people involved in criminal activity, his extensive 
criminal history, his relatively recent release from parole, and his failure to be honest on 
his SCA causes continued concern. I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant 
 
11 
 
 
was convicted by a general court-martial and received a dishonorable discharge. 
Pursuant to his pretrial agreement he was to be confined for 39 months, and was 
released on parole after 18 months. He violated his parole and it was suspended. 
Applicant was arrested, charged, and convicted of numerous felony and misdemeanor 
offenses. He was incarcerated for significant periods. He failed to abide by the terms of 
his probation. When confronted with providing accurate information about his past, he 
concealed information. Although Applicant stated he is a changed man, it is too early to 
come to that conclusion. His recent failure to be truthful on his SCA continues to raise 
questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Applicant failed to meet 
her burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guidelines Criminal Conduct and Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
