 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02577 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding criminal conduct and 
personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 12, 2008, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing version of a Security 
Clearance Application (e-QIP).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) furnished him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on March 8, 2010.2 On April 28, 2010, DOHA issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (e-QIP), dated December 12, 2008.  
 
2 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated March 8, 2010). 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (effective 
within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006) (AG) for all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive. The SOR alleged security concerns 
under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons 
why DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 10, 2010. In a sworn, written 
statement, notarized on May 12, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed on June 25, 2010, and the case was assigned to 
me on June 28, 2010. A Notice of Hearing was issued on July 1, 2010, and I convened 
the hearing, as scheduled, on July 14, 2010.3  
 
 During the hearing, three Government exhibits were admitted into evidence, 
without objection.4 Applicant testified. I offered to keep the record open to afford 
Applicant the opportunity to supplement it, but he declined the offer.5 The transcript (Tr.) 
was received on July 22, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted nearly all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to Criminal Conduct in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c., and 1.e. through 1.g.). 
He denied the remaining allegation (¶ 1.d.), as well as all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to Personal Conduct (¶¶ 2.a. through 2.d.). 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
an electronic technician6 installing radio mounts.7 He is seeking to obtain a security 
clearance. A high school graduate,8 he has never served in the military.9 He had 
previously worked in a variety of positions, including self-employment as a framer and 
3 Applicant had been apprised of the hearing date by Department Counsel before the actual notice of 
hearing was issued, and on July 14, 2010, he signed a waiver of the established notice requirement and indicated he 
was willing to proceed with the hearing. Tr. at 12. 
 
4 Applicant offered no exhibits. 
 
5 Tr. at 68. 
 
6 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 10. 
 
7 Tr. at 19. 
 
8 Id. at 18-19. 
 
9 Id. at 19. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
painter for a construction company, a drywall framer with a home builder, and a floor 
stocker for a gasoline station.10 He has been with his current employer since November 
2008.11 
 
Applicant has never been married,12 but does have four children (born in 1993, 
2003, 2005, and 2006, respectively).13 They all reside with him.14  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
During the period 1996 until 2007, Applicant was involved in seven different 
incidents with local police authorities. He was charged with criminal offenses falling 
generally into three categories: drug-related, alcohol-related, or assault-related. In July 
1996, Applicant was arrested and charged with felony possession of cocaine.15 He 
offered two versions of the circumstances. He told an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator in January 2009 that he had been at his girlfriend’s residence and 
was driving home when he was stopped by an unmarked police car for reasons never 
explained. He said the police asked for permission to search his vehicle, and he granted 
it. Nothing was found. Additional officers arrived and the vehicle was searched four 
additional times, each time by a different officer. The last officer found a bag containing 
an unspecified amount of cocaine on the roadside by the vehicle and Applicant was 
arrested despite denying any knowledge or ownership of the cocaine. Applicant hired an 
attorney, never went to court, and the case was dismissed.16 
 
His testimony at the hearing was that he was washing his truck at his girlfriend’s 
house when he observed a vehicle with tinted windows driving past the house on five or 
six occasions. On the last occasion, he got into his truck and drove after the passing 
vehicle to see who was driving it. The vehicle stopped and he stopped. It turned out to 
be an unmarked police car and the police asked him for permission to search his truck. 
A marked police car soon arrived. After several fruitless searches by different officers, 
the last officer found a bag of cocaine under the truck by the rear tire.17 The remainder 
of the story is essentially identical to the other version. 
 
10 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 11-13. 
 
11 Id. at 10. 
 
12 Id. at 14. 
 
13 Id. at 16-18. 
 
14 Tr. at 19. 
 
15 Id. at 20. 
 
16 Personal Subject Interview, dated January 28, 2009, at 1, attached to Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2. 
While the interview was conducted on January 27, 2009, the unsworn declaration was not printed until the following 
day. 
 
17 Tr. at 20-30. 
 
4 
                                      
 
              
In December 1996, Applicant drove to a store after consuming an unspecified 
quantity of beer at his sister’s residence. He was arrested for driving under the influence 
(DUI). He initially testified that he was at a stop sign when a state trooper cruiser 
coming from the opposite direction made a u-turn and came up behind him. The 
trooper–who had married Applicant’s cousin and had disputes with Applicant–said 
Applicant had been observed swerving before he had been stopped. Applicant was 
administered a breathalyzer test, which he failed, but he was able to pass the dexterity 
test. He was processed and released that same day, and was eventually found guilty of 
the charge and fined.18 His license was suspended,19 he was placed on unsupervised 
probation for 12 months,20 and was ordered to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meetings.21 Applicant denied he was drunk22 or that he had swerved,23 and contends 
the trooper had a grudge against him.24 Although Applicant admitted the allegation, 
upon reflection, he retracted all of the above about the trooper and why he had been 
stopped, claiming he was confused, and instead claimed he could not remember why 
he had been stopped.25 Regardless of Applicant’s memory, the official record supports 
the charge and the punishment. 
 
In about 1998, Applicant was charged with assault on a female and 
communicating threats. Applicant doesn’t recall the specific event because there were 
several such instances.26 The charges were dismissed, and the complaining witness 
was charged with frivolous prosecution and “taxed” with costs, $80.27 
  
In July 2000, Applicant was charged with assault on a female.28 Once again, 
Applicant doesn’t recall the specific event because this one was one of several such 
instances. He was convicted of domestic violence.29 He was fined $120, sentenced to 
60 days in jail, reduced to 30 days, and placed on supervised probation for 12 
                                            
18 Id. at 30-34; Government Exhibit 2, supra note 16, at 1.  Applicant recalls the fine being $120 (Id. 
Government Exhibit 2), but compare Government Exhibit 3 (State Criminal Record Search, undated) at 4, wherein the 
record re eals he was fined, with costs, $265. 
 Tr. at 34. 
 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 18, at 4. 
 Tr. at 34. 
 Id. at 30. 
 Id. at 31-32. 
 Id. at 32-33. 
 Id. at 43-44. 
 Id. at 37. 
 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 18, at 3. 
 Id. at 4. 
 Id. 
v
 
19
 
20
 
21
 
22
 
23
 
24
 
25
 
26
 
27
 
28
 
29
 
 
5 
                                      
 
ention.  
                                                          
months.30 Applicant contends he never spent any time in jail31 and there is no evidence 
to refute his cont
 
In 2001, the incident described above, initially identified by Applicant as the 
December 1996 incident, occurred. Applicant was eventually found guilty of the charge 
of driving while impaired (DWI).32 His license was suspended, initially for 30 days, but 
after it was briefly restored, he lost it for an entire year.33  
 
In February 2009, Applicant was again interviewed by an OPM investigator. In 
April 2002, according to his subsequent statement to the OPM investigator, some five or 
six hours after Applicant had consumed two or three beers, he was driving in a rural 
area when he was again stopped by a state trooper. Applicant refused to take a 
breathalyzer test and was arrested and charged with DWI. The case was eventually 
dismissed.34 His testimony at the hearing was that he denied he had been drinking, and 
could not recall the circumstances of the incident.35  
 
In September 2007, Applicant was charged with assault on a female. He and his 
girlfriend got into a physical dispute where she slapped him so he slapped her and she 
called the police.36 The charge was eventually dismissed.37  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
On December 12, 2008, when Applicant completed and submitted his e-QIP, he 
responded to two separate questions set forth in the e-QIP. The SOR alleges Applicant 
deliberately failed to disclose complete information in response to § 23d: Your Police 
Record – (Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to 
alcohol or drugs?), to which he answered “yes,” and listed a December 2000 DWI (for 
which he stated he had been convicted) and a January 2001 DWI (which he stated was 
dismissed.)38 He did not list his 1996 arrest for felony possession of cocaine (which was 
dismissed) or his 1996 arrest for DUI (for which he was convicted). Applicant did not 
think that incidents in which the charges were dismissed had to be listed or would show 
 Id.; Tr. at 40-42. 
 Tr. at 40. 
 Id. at 44-46. 
 Id. at 46. 
he interview was conducted on February 26, 2009, the unsworn declaration was not printed until March 3, 
2009. 
 Tr. at 47-49. 
 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2, at 5. 
 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 18, at 5. 
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 21-23. 
30
 
31
 
32
 
33
 
34 Personal Subject Interview, dated March 3, 2009, at 1, attached to Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2. 
While t
 
35
 
36
 
37
 
38
 
6 
                                      
 
n.”  
e denied the omission was deliberate or an attempt to falsify the material facts.41 
 
and he denied the 
omission was deliberate or an attempt to falsify the material facts.42 
 them.  He denied 
the omission was deliberate or an attempt to falsify material facts.45 
list incidents within the past five or seven years, but because he didn’t have a copy of 
                                                          
up on his record, so he did not list the cocaine arrest.39 The DUI conviction was not 
listed because he “probably didn’t remember it, [he] didn’t know what date it was o 40
H
The SOR also alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose complete 
information in response to § 23f: Your Police Record – (In the last 7 years, have you 
been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) not listed in response to 
a, b, c, d, or e above? (Leave out traffic fines of less than $150 unless the violation was 
alcohol or drug related.)), to which he answered “no.” He did not list the 2007 charge of 
assault on a female (which was dismissed). His reasons for the failure to include the 
charge were the same as those offered for the other omission, 
 
As noted above, Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator in January 
2009. The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his entire criminal 
history. While he admitted the 1996 arrest for felony possession of cocaine (which was 
dismissed) and his 1996 arrest for DUI (for which he was convicted), he denied any 
other criminal offenses.43 He cannot recall why he did not discuss the 1998 charges for 
assault on a female and communicating threats (which were dismissed), the 2000 
charge for assault on a female (for which he was convicted of domestic violence), or the 
2007 charge for assault on a female (which was dismissed). He was not afraid to 
discuss those incidents, but does not know why he failed to mention 44
 
Also, as noted above, Applicant was interviewed by the OPM investigator in 
February 2009. The SOR again alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his 
entire criminal history. While he admitted the 2002 arrest for DWI (which was 
dismissed), and the 2007 charge for assault on a female (which was also dismissed), he 
denied any other criminal offenses.46 He cannot recall why he did not discuss the 1998 
charges for assault on a female and communicating threats (which were dismissed), or 
the 2000 charge for assault on a female (for which he was convicted of domestic 
violence). He believes he remembers someone at work telling him that he only had to 
 
39 Tr. at 58, 60-61. 
 
40 Id. at 61. 
 
41 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated May 12, 2010, at 2. 
 
42 Id. at 2-3. 
 
43 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 16, at 1. Applicant was of the impression that he did not think he 
had stated such, but the denial appears in the unsworn declaration. Tr. at 63. 
 
44 Tr. at 63-64. 
 
45 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 41, at 3. 
 
46 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 34, at 1. 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
his criminal record to refer to, he could not remember all of the incidents.47 He denied 
the omission was deliberate or an attempt to falsify material facts.48 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”49 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”50   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”51 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
 
47 Tr. at 64-65. 
 
48 Id. at 66; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 41, at 3. 
 
49 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
50 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
51 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.52  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”53 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”54 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30:       
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(c), an Aallegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted,@ may raise security concerns. As noted above, during the period 1996 until 
2007, Applicant was “involved” in seven different incidents with local police authorities. 
He was charged with criminal offenses falling generally into three categories: drug-
52 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
53 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
54 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
9 
                                      
 
related, alcohol-related, or assault-related. Of those seven incidents, Applicant was 
found guilty of three: a 1996 DUI, a 2000 domestic violence, and a 2001 DWI. The 
remaining charges were dismissed. Nevertheless, even considering his vague memory 
of the various incidents, he did admit that the essential facts of arrests and charges, 
while being unable to specifically recall the actual events leading up to those arrests. 
Accordingly, AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) have been established.  
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Aso much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.@ Also, when there is “evidence that the person did not commit the offense,” 
AG ¶ 32(c) may apply. Similarly, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply where “there is evidence of 
successful rehabilitation: including but not limited to the passage of time without 
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, 
good employment record, or constructive community involvement.”  
 
Applicant, a single parent with custody of four minor children, has maintained 
steady employment since high school, but somehow seemed to be in the wrong places 
at the wrong times, sometimes with the wrong people. The evidence merely establishes 
that the incidents occurred, but because of Applicant’s inability to separate the incidents 
in his memory, he was unable to discuss the underlying facts with any specificity.  
 
As it pertains to the 1996 arrest for felony possession of cocaine, from the facts 
he could recall, it appears Applicant was the innocent victim of inappropriate police 
activity. In the absence of any other evidence of his involvement with drugs, and his 
steadfast denials, it appears that the dismissal of the charge should eliminate the 
characterization of the incident as Applicant’s criminal activity. As it pertains to the 1998 
charges of assault on a female and communicating threats, those charges were also 
dismissed, and the complaining witness was charged with frivolous prosecution. Under 
those circumstances, once again, it appears that the dismissal of the charges should 
eliminate the characterization of the incident as Applicant’s criminal activity. 
 
The most recent charge for which he was found guilty occurred in 2001 with 
Applicant’s conviction of DWI. The more serious charge, assault on a female, occurred 
in 2000. There has been no more recent criminal conduct for which he was convicted. I 
recognize that there were two other incidents, a dismissed DWI in 2002 and a 
dismissed assault on a female in 2007, but without more information pertaining to the 
underlying circumstances, I am unable to conclude that those two incidents were also 
Applicant’s criminal activity. Considering the nature of Applicant’s “criminal conduct,” 
and the 10 years since his most recent incident for which he was convicted occurred, I 
believe AG ¶¶ 32(a), 32(c), and 32(d) fully apply.  
 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                          
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:  
      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), a “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used 
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities,” is potentially disqualifying. Also, under AG ¶ 16(b), “deliberately 
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government 
representative,” may raise security concerns. Similarly, under AG ¶ 16(e), “personal 
conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if 
known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. . . ” may 
raise security concerns.  
 
Applicant’s omissions in his responses to inquiries in the e-QIP and the OPM 
interviews, of critical information pertaining to criminal conduct, provide sufficient 
evidence to examine if his submissions were deliberate falsifications, as alleged in the 
SOR, or were the result of simple oversight or negligence on his part, as he contends. 
Applicant repeatedly claimed he had a bad memory and omissions by him were caused 
either by that bad memory or by his misinterpretation of what information was required. I 
had ample opportunity to evaluate the demeanor of Applicant, observe his manner and 
deportment, appraise the way in which he responded to questions, assess his candor or 
evasiveness, read his statements, and listen to his testimony.  
 
During the hearing, his recollections and explanations created extensive 
confusion, as he was unable to separate incidents and facts, and consistently mixed up 
names and occurrences. It is my impression that his confusion regarding his personal 
conduct was real and his explanations are consistent. Considering the quality of the 
evidence before me, his testimony has the solid resonance of truth. I find Applicant’s 
explanations are credible in his denial of deliberate falsification.55 AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(b), 
and 16(e) have not been established. 
55 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of proving 
falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. During the period 
from 1996 until 2007, he was involved in seven different incidents with local police 
authorities. He was charged with criminal offenses falling generally into three categories: 
drug-related, alcohol-related, or assault-related. While the charges in four of those 
instances were dismissed for various known or unknown reasons, he was found guilty of 
DUI in 1996, assault on a female in 2000, and DWI in 2001. When asked to list all of his 
criminal incidents on his e-QIP, and discuss them with an OPM investigator, he omitted 
several such incidents, subsequently claiming he had forgotten the incidents or 
misunderstood the parameters of the inquiries. 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is substantial. Applicant 
has a rather stale history of criminal conduct for which he was convicted, including 
incidents in 1996, 2000, and 2001. The most recent incident in which he was involved 
purportedly occurred in 2007, but the charges were dismissed.   
 
Applicant is a single parent with custody of four minor children, and he has 
maintained steady employment since high school. Somehow he seemed to be in the 
wrong places at the wrong times, sometimes with the wrong people. Regarding the 
1996 arrest for felony possession of cocaine, it appears Applicant was the innocent 
victim of inappropriate police activity, and the charge was dismissed. As for the 1998 
 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the 
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally 
permissible for the Judge to conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case 
under Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10390 at 8 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2005) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
12 
                                      
 
                                                          
charges of assault on a female and communicating threats, those charges were also 
dismissed, and the complaining witness was charged with frivolous prosecution. Under 
those circumstances, it appears that the dismissal of those charges should eliminate the 
characterization of the incidents as Applicant’s criminal activity. 
 
I am mindful that any one factor, considered in isolation, might put Applicant’s 
criminal history, with emphasis on his repeated incidents with police authorities, in a 
less than sympathetic light. I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of 
the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal 
analysis.56 His unblemished record since 2007 (when the charge of assault on a female 
was dismissed), and particularly since 2000 (when he was found guilty of domestic 
violence), are sufficient to mitigate continuing security concerns. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) 
through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct 
and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
 
56 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
