1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 09-07194
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Greg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
In 2004, Applicant was laid off from his job as an airline mechanic. Six months
later he discovered his son had dyslexia. Because the school did not have the
resources to educate the child with this condition, Applicant’s wife decided to give up
her employment and continue to educate the child at home. Applicant exercised good
judgment in trying to establish payment plans for the delinquent debts. However, he
demonstrated poor judgment in not seeking alternative courses of action after incurring
the large, delinquent debt he could not repay, and learning the creditors would not
negotiate with him. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations
Processing (Item 5, e-QIP) on June 11, 2009. He was interviewed by an investigator
from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on July 8, 2009. In his interrogatory
answers submitted to the Government on March 1, 2010 (Item 6), Applicant agreed with
the investigator’s summary of his July 2009 interview, and acknowledged the summary
 However, Applicant’s e-Qip (Item 5) shows no gap in employment while Applicant was working for this1
employer. The e-Qip reflects that Applicant worked for the airlines from May 2001 to April 2005, then he was
hired as an overhaul technician in April 2005, and worked there until June 2006, when he began working as
a maintenance technician. According to his e-Qip, in January 2008, he began employment at his current
position. 
2
could be used in a security clearance hearing to determine his security suitability. (Id.)
On August 3, 2010, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security
concerns under financial considerations (Guideline F). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented by the Department of
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant’s undated answer to the SOR was received by DOHA on September 1,
2010. He requested a decision be made on the record in lieu of a hearing. A copy of the
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM, the government’s evidence in support
of the allegations of the SOR) was sent to Applicant on October 1, 2010. He received
the FORM on October 8, 2010. In an attachment to the FORM, he was advised he could
object to the information in the FORM or submit additional information in explanation or
extenuation. His response was due on November 7, 2010. No response was received.
The case file was assigned to me on December 15, 2010. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR contains six allegations (delinquent debts) under the financial
considerations guideline. Applicant admitted all allegations. Applicant is 38 years old.
He has been married in a common-law relationship since May 1995, and has two
children, ages 13 and 9. He served in the United States Air Force (USAF) for four years,
and was honorably discharged in May 1995, the same year he established his common
law marital relationship with his wife. He has been employed as a mechanic for a
defense contractor since January 2008, and has been employed consistently since
2001. (Item 5)
In 2004, Applicant was a mechanic with a commercial airline company. The
company laid him off.  Six or seven months later in 2004, his son was diagnosed with1
severe dyslexia, and his school did not have the resources to educate him. His wife
decided to discontinue her employment, where she earned about $2,000 month, and
return home to educate the child. When his wife stopped working, earnings for the
household fell from $4,000 to Applicant’s net monthly income of approximately $2,000 a
month. After falling behind on the listed debts, Applicant contacted the creditors and
explained his plight, with an offer to repay the accounts at reduced amounts. The
creditors were not accommodating. Applicant’s vehicle was repossessed. He
considered financial counseling and debt consolidation, but decided against either
option because of the cost. (Item 6) Applicant repeatedly stated he wanted to repay the
3
creditors when he was able. (Id.; Item 7) Applicant’s monthly income is $2,948. After
monthly expenses ($1,723) and debts ($1,075) are subtracted, his discretionary,
monthly income is about $149 a month. (Item 7)
The credit reports (Items 8, 9, and 10) confirm that the six accounts listed in the
SOR are delinquent. Of the six delinquent accounts, five are credit cards, and the sixth
is a medical debt. The accounts became delinquent between December 2005 and
October 2008. The total amount of delinquent debt is $46,230.
Character Evidence
Applicant had an opportunity to respond to the FORM with objections to the
contents of the FORM, or by submitting additional material he wanted me to consider.
He could have furnished more information on his decision not to seek assistance for his
financial problems. Furthermore, he advanced no character statements from individuals
or supervisors on his job, or individuals in the community. Applicant decided not to
submit other kinds of character evidence, such as awards, certificates of recognition
and/or letters of commendation. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant's suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the AG. Each guideline lists potentially disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be used to the extent they
are deemed necessary in evaluating an applicant's eligibility for access to classified
information.
The administrative judge's ultimate goal is to reach a fair and impartial decision
that is based on common sense. The decision should also include a careful, thorough
evaluation of a significant period of a person’s life with a number of variables known as
the "whole-person concept" that brings together all available, reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. I have
avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Decisions
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of the potential, rather than actual, risk of
compromise of classified information.
Under Directive ¶ E3.l.14., the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.l.l5., the applicant is
responsible for presenting "witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel . . . ." The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
4
Analysis
Financial Considerations 
The security concern for financial considerations is set forth in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Applicant owes $46,230 to six creditors, and is unable to repay the debt.
Applicant did not accumulate these debts at one time but over a five-year period
beginning in December 2005. AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts),
and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply.
Four mitigating conditions are potentially applicable. No mitigation is available
under AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment). This mitigating condition
does not apply because there are six delinquent debts that have fallen delinquent under
circumstances that are likely to be repeated. 
AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances) calls for two items of proof to be established. In order fo this mitigating
condition to apply, the condition causing the financial problem should be largely beyond
the applicant’s control, and the applicant should act responsibly under the
circumstances following his recognition of the problem. The medical condition of
Applicant’s son in 2004 was an unforseen event largely beyond Applicant’s control. He
and his wife exercised good judgment when they decided that she would remain at
home to educate their son. Applicant showed good judgment by explaining his son’s
condition to the creditors, and by trying to negotiate revised payment plans. But after
realizing the creditors would not agree to his plans to repay, Applicant should have
considered counseling or other publicly available organization to help his son. Instead,
he took no other action. In sum, Applicant only receives limited mitigation under AG ¶
20(b).
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control)
does not apply because Applicant has never had financial counseling and there is no
evidence of payments to the creditors. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply.
5
AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Demonstrating good-faith means more than
trying to negotiate payment plans. The term includes action that shows that delinquent
accounts are actually being repaid under some kind of plan. However, when the creditor
indicates he does not agree with the repayment terms, then the applicant has to resolve
his debts in another way as defined by the mitigating condition. Based on his decision
not to seek counseling or a debt consolidation, Applicant receives no mitigation under
AG ¶ 20(d). With only AG ¶ 20(b) partially supporting his case in mitigation, Applicant’s
financial problems are still a serious concern under the financial guideline. 
Whole-Person Concept 
I have examined the evidence under the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in
my ultimate finding against Applicant under the financial considerations guideline. I have
also weighed the circumstances within the context of nine variables known as the
whole-person concept. In evaluating the relevance of an individual's conduct, the
administrative judge should consider the following factors:
AG ¶ 2(a) (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and, (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant is 38 years old. Based on his answers to the SOR, the information he
provided in his (e-Qip), and the interrogatory answers he provided, he is a mature adult
who has worked for his current employer since January 2008. 
In 2004, after learning their son’s school lacked the resources to address his
dyslexia, Applicant and his wife made a praiseworthy decision by having his wife
discontinue her employment so that she could continue to educate their son at home.
However, this decision meant that there was only one income (instead of two) to pay the
day-to-day expenses and listed debts. After learning that his creditors would not accept
his repayment proposals, Applicant should have considered alternative courses of
action, including assistance from other public entities or the bankruptcy laws.
Accordingly, Applicant has not met his burden of showing it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him access to classified information. 
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a through 1.f Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                      
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
