 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06672   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 27, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has an inability to satisfy his financial indebtedness. He currently has 
ten delinquent debts, and has failed to submit proof that any of them are satisfied or are 
being adequately addressed. He has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the Statement of Reasons (SOR) in writing on June 14, 
2010, and elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on September 18, 2010. 
The Government’s submission included Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 12, and 
two documents for administrative notice, including the Equifax Training Brochure (GE 
13) and a copy of DoD Directive 5220.6 (GE 14). Applicant expressed no objection to 
the Government’s submissions and they were admitted. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was received by Applicant on September 30, 2010. He was 
afforded a 30-day opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. On October 13, 2010, Applicant responded with a 
seven page submission (Reply 1); and on November 10, 2010, he provided an 
additional two page submission (Reply 2). The Department Counsel had no objection. 
The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since November 2001. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is married 
and did not identify any children on his security clearance application. (GE 4.) 
 
 The SOR alleges ten delinquent debts, which are all substantiated in the record. 
(GE 6; GE 7; GE9; GE 10; GE 11; GE 12.) Applicant admitted owing allegations 1.a., 
1.c., 1.d., 1.g., and 1.i., and indicated that he neither admitted not denied 1.b., 1.e., 1.f., 
1.h., and 1.j. as alleged in SOR because they had all been charged off by the creditors. 
Applicant’s delinquent debt as listed in the SOR totals $190,475.  
 
 In his Replies and Answers to the Interrogatories, Applicant admitted he had an 
inability to satisfy his debts at the current time. He attributes his large indebtedness to 
his participation in a real estate investment program. Applicant and his wife joined a real 
estate investment group in 2006, which “finds its members properties, brokers the loans 
via their mortgage company, finds tenants for the properties and manages them.” They 
acquired two out-of-state investment properties for approximately $200,000 each 
through this program. In approximately 2007, when the real estate market took a 
downturn, they discovered that the equity in one of the investment properties had been 
greatly overestimated and they could not take any equity out on the investment 
property. Additionally, a renter in one of the properties moved out of the property. 
Applicant was forced to rely on his credit cards to make ends meet and satisfy his 
mortgages. Eventually, the lenders foreclosed on the two real estate properties. The 
case file does not indicate the terms of the mortgages Applicant had on the two 
investment properties or contain any foreclosure documentation. Appellant has spoken 
with an attorney who advised him that he was subject to “predatory lending,” but he 
cannot afford to file a law suit. He admits that he is “currently insolvent” but plans to 
revisit the idea of debt consolidation after he is able to refinance his mortgage on his 
primary residence, the equity of which he used to make his real estate investments. He 
began working on the loan modification for his primary residence in 2008, but has met 
with significant bureaucratic problems in the banking industry. He also noted that his 
wife has taken a recent reduction in pay. (Reply 1; Reply 2; GE 8.) His debts are as 
follows: 
 
 
3 
 
 Allegations 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., 1.e., and 1.f. all allege that Applicant is indebted to the 
same bank on five separate accounts in the amounts of $10,845; $11,034; $17,636; 
$15,210; and $14,296, respectively. The total owed to this creditor is approximately 
$69,201. In his adopted report of investigation, he indicated he only had two credit cards 
with this bank, which he used to support his real estate investment properties, prior to 
foreclosure. In his Answer, Applicant claims that he had three accounts with this 
creditor. However, each of the five debts to this creditor appears separately on 
Applicant’s credit reports in evidence. Applicant produced a letter from this creditor 
entitled “Next Payment Due” indicating that by September 17, 2010, the creditor 
expected a payment based on a previous payment agreement. The letter only identified 
one account number. It appears that the account number on the letter matches up 
partially with the account number for the debt alleged in allegation 1.a. The letter fails to 
establish if a payment was actually made, the amount of that payment, and if any 
previous payments had been made. It does not appear that the debts in allegations 1.b., 
1.d., 1.e., and 1.f. are being addressed through this or any other agreement. (GE 3; GE 
6; GE 7; GE 8; GE 9; GE 11; GE 12; Reply 2.) 
 
 Allegation 1.c. alleges that Applicant is indebted to a bank for a credit card in the 
amount of $7,992. Applicant used this credit card to help keep his investment properties 
“afloat before foreclosure.” A letter from this creditor dated October 27, 2010, indicates 
that Applicant contacted the creditor and arranged to make a $100 payment on this 
account on November 5, 2010. Applicant failed to offer documentation establishing this 
scheduled payment was actually made. (GE 3; GE 6; GE 7; GE 8; GE 9; GE 11; GE 12; 
Reply 1.) 
 
 Allegation 1.g. alleges that Applicant is indebted to a bank for a line of credit in 
the amount of $52,357. A letter from this creditor, dated September 23, 2010, indicates 
that Applicant submitted a $200 check to this creditor that was post-dated by five or 
more days at the time it was received and was scheduled for deposit on the date 
indicated. Applicant failed to offer documentation establishing this scheduled payment 
was actually debited from his account, or provide any other documentation about prior 
or subsequent payments to this creditor. (GE 3; GE 5; GE 6; GE 7; GE 9; GE 11; GE 
12; Reply 1.) 
 
 Allegation 1.h. alleges that Applicant is indebted to a collection agent for a bank 
in the amount of $9,114. Applicant, in his Answer, indicates he has not been contacted 
by this creditor. In his adopted report of investigation, he identified the original creditor 
as the lender he used to purchase two “quad” vehicles. He indicated that he agreed to a 
$9 monthly payment, however, after a year, the payments increased to $300 per month. 
In his Answer, he indicated the agreed upon fee was $50 per month and it went up to 
$350 per month. He disputed the increase, claiming that he only agreed to the $9 per 
month fee. Applicant renegotiated a fee of $125 per month with the creditor, but found 
that he could not afford these payments after he began experiencing problems paying 
the mortgages on his investment properties. He defaulted on the loan. Applicant failed 
to introduce any documentation to establish he is taking any actions to repay this debt. 
(GE 3; GE 6; GE 7; GE 8; GE 9; GE 11; GE 12.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Allegation 1.i. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a second mortgage that is 
120 days or more past due in the approximate amount of $3,427 on a balance of 
$90,243. It is unclear from the record if this debt was incurred for Applicant’s primary 
residential mortgage or for an investment property. He produced no documentation 
establishing he is taking any action with regard to this debt. (GE 3; GE 6; GE 7; GE 9; 
GE 11; GE 12.) 
 
 Allegation 1.j. alleges that Applicant is indebted on a real estate mortgage for 
$48,564. Applicant denies this account claiming that the lender charged off the account. 
He indicated that it was for one of his foreclosed investment properties, but failed to 
produce any documents to substantiate his claim. (GE 3; GE 6; GE 7; GE 9; GE 11; GE 
12.) 
 
 Applicant’s financial statement, completed as part of his Answers to 
Interrogatories in 2009, indicated that his household net income was approximately 
$7,974 per month and that his monthly expenditures totaled $10,350. He was operating 
at a monthly deficit of $2,376. He listed savings of $1,500 and noted that he owned a 
boat and two horse trailers. Applicant did not provide an updated budget with his 
Replies. (GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant is a member of his local county Sheriff’s volunteer mounted posse and 
a member of his local emergency animal rescue system. (GE 8; Reply 1.) He failed to 
submit any reference letters or work performance evaluations to support his character. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts, totaling $190,475, and is 
unable to pay his obligations. Further, his financial problems have been ongoing for at 
least the past 3 years, without resolution, and his 2009 budget showed he was 
operating with a monthly deficit of $2,376. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
6 
 
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The evidence does not show that Applicant has resolved any of the ten debts 
alleged in the SOR. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. Applicant contends that his debts were caused by 
circumstances beyond his control as a result of his failed investments and his wife’s 
reduction in pay. However, he failed to present any documentation in support of this 
claim. He made claims of fraud against the investment group, but failed to provide 
documentation to support his assertions. Applicant has the burden to present mitigating 
evidence and he failed to do so. Further, to be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires 
that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. While he submitted 
evidence of promises to pay on the debts listed in allegations 1.a; 1.c; and 1.g., he did 
not submit evidence of any actual payments. He did not present a plan on how he will 
address his delinquent debts, other than to indicate in his Replies that he is in the 
process of getting them consolidated, as he indicated he intended to do in his Answer. I 
am unable to make a determination that he acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant did not produce any evidence to suggest he attended any financial 
counseling. Further, there is little indication that Applicant’s delinquent accounts are 
being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve his delinquent debts. 
The record fails to establish that any actual payments have been made on any of his ten 
debts, despite the documentation of his promises to pay on the debts listed in 
allegations 1.a; 1.c; and 1.g. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant disputes owing the debt alleged in 1.e. and 1.f. claiming that he only 
had three accounts with this creditor. He also denies the debt in 1.g. claiming that the 
property had been foreclosed upon and the debt had been charged off. Applicant’s 
Answer with respect to 1.h. seems to dispute the debt, although in his adopted report of 
investigation he admitted the underlying debt and acknowledged he failed to keep up 
with his negotiated payments. With respect to these disputed accounts, Applicant failed 
to present any evidence to show that he was in the process of disputing these debts 
formally with the creditors or that he had successfully disputed these debts in the past. 
AG ¶ 20(e) is inapplicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
48-years old. He is clearly aware of the need to be financially responsible. He has had 
ample opportunity to address his financial delinquencies, but has failed to do so. While 
his work with the local county Sheriff’s volunteer mounted posse and a member of his 
local emergency animal rescue system is commendable, it fails to mitigate the financial 
concerns presented by the Government. 
 
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
