 
 
1
                                                
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 09-02821 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the hearing transcript, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude 
that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for 
use of information technology systems and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request 
to continue his security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing, 
which he signed on May 18, 2007. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
 
2
                                                
On February 4, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline M (Use of Information Technology Systems) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 Applicant signed his notarized Answer to 
the SOR on March 6, 2010. Applicant requested a decision before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 10, 2010, and the case 
was assigned to me on August 23, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
September 1, 2010, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 15, 2010. 
 
Department Counsel offered four exhibits, marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and offered 15 
exhibits, marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through O. Department Counsel objected 
to exhibits A through H and K as irrelevant. His objections go to weight rather than 
admissibility of the documents. I admitted Applicant's exhibits A through O. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on September 22, 2010. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 I take administrative notice of a federal statute, Title 18 U.S.C. § 704. I marked 
Department Counsel’s brief related to the statute as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and 
Applicant’s reply brief as HE II.3 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, except 2.b. and 2.d., 
which he did not clearly admit or deny. At the hearing, he admitted both allegations. 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings and the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. (Tr. 17-18) 
 
Applicant is 65 years old. He divorced from his first wife in 1993. His three sons 
and one daughter from his first marriage are now adults, living independently. He 
remarried in 1995. He holds two masters degrees and a doctorate degree. His law 
degree was awarded in 2010. Applicant served as an Army officer in the National Guard 
from 1967 – 1978, after which he served in the reserves until 1994. His status changed 
to medically unqualified reservist from 1994 until his retirement in 2005, because of 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines that were implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines 
listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness 
determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 In response to my order, Department Counsel submitted a post-hearing brief regarding 18 U.S.C. § 
704. Subsequently, Applicant submitted a reply brief. (HE I, II) 
 
 
 
3
orthopedic problems. He retired as a lieutenant colonel. During his military career, he 
did not serve overseas or in combat. He has held a security clearance continuously 
since at least 1970, including a top secret clearance since 1989. He has worked for his 
current employer since February 2007. (GE 1, 2; AE A, C, D; Tr. 46, 55, 77-78, 83-84) 
 
In 1999, federal government agency A considered Applicant for the position of 
scientist in the computer-vulnerabilities section. Subsequently, an agent conducting 
Applicant's investigation spoke with Applicant's ex-wife and friends. In December 1999, 
the job offer was withdrawn. Wishing to learn the reason why the offer was withdrawn, 
Applicant submitted a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request in January 2000, and 
received a redacted copy of his investigative file. The file stated that he was being 
discontinued “based on his financial irresponsibility (reasons for filing bankruptcy, DFAS 
outstanding debt).” It also noted that “Applicant appears to pay child support only when 
taken to court and forced to do so. Also, he misrepresents his actual military 
accomplishments.” (AE A; Tr. 42-43, 82) 
 
In 2005, Applicant was assigned by his contractor-employer to work at federal 
agency A, the same agency that had previously rescinded its job offer. His job as a 
database designer and researcher at agency A involved reviewing cases and 
developing searches for information contained in computer files. For this position, 
Applicant was submitted for an upgrade to his clearance to permit access to sensitive 
compartmented information (SCI). His position gave him access to the automated files 
of members of the general public. Applicant used his position to search files, without 
authorization, to learn who had told agency A in 1999 that he failed to pay child support. 
Applicant gathered personal data “…by searching for himself; family members, prior 
employers, ex-wife and prior references” and also “misused [agency] systems on a 
regular basis…” He testified that he accessed the personal files of approximately 18 
individuals. By searching these files, he learned that it was his ex-wife who had stated 
that he did not pay child support unless he was forced to do so through court action. At 
the hearing, he denied this accusation and submitted a 2010 letter from the attorney 
who handled his custody and child support case during the period 1996 to 1997. The 
attorney stated that Applicant met his child support obligations. Applicant submitted 
several documents related to his divorce proceedings. (GE 3; AE D-H; Tr. 41-46, 74-76, 
80) 
 
During the background investigation for this SCI upgrade, Applicant had a 
polygraph interview and examination in June 2006. The following month, Applicant was 
again interviewed, specifically in regard to the polygraph results. During this interview, 
Applicant denied that he searched his own or others’ private computer files. The agency 
reported that Applicant “…failed to disclose his actions even when directly questioned.” 
Later in the interview, Applicant admitted his unauthorized use of agency A’s files. In 
September 2006, agency A’s security program manager denied Applicant “further 
access to [agency A] facilities/information and projects/contracts.” He cited Applicant's 
misuse of agency A’s computer systems for personal data gathering, and referred the 
case to the DOD security clearance office. In the fall of 2006, his SCI access was 
 
 
4
                                                
denied and he was released from his employment by the defense contractor. (GE 2, 3, 
4; Tr. 44, 76) 
 
 Applicant testified that in the 1980s and 1990s, he told friends, family, and his 
children that he was a veteran of combat action in Vietnam, although he had never 
served there. The agency A interviewers in July 2006 said that Applicant 
 
…would retell stories that he heard from fellow Guard and Reserve 
members who had served in Vietnam and would replace his name in the 
story as if he had experienced the events. He stated that he told stories 
about being ambushed and how he “got out” when in reality it was a story 
that had been told by a Sergeant in his Guard unit. (GE 4) 
 
 Applicant also admits that, during the 1980s and 1990s, he bought military 
medals and ribbons at flea markets and pawn shops, and wore them as if they had 
been awarded to him. He embellished his military background because he had 
volunteered for duty in Vietnam, but he had not been selected. He also noted that 
telling these stories “fed his ego.” At the hearing, he admitted that, as a military officer, 
he knew he was not allowed to purchase or wear military medals he had not earned. 
However, he also testified that he was not aware his actions violated the Uniform Code 
of Military Justice (UCMJ)4 or federal law.5 (GE 2, 4; Tr. 68-69, 76-77, 79) 
 
 Applicant testified that immediately after his July 2006 polygraph interview, he 
prepared a list of the issues raised during the interview and provided it to his 
supervisors and security manager. The list includes two statements about the conduct 
alleged in the SOR:  
 
4 Under Article 134 of the UCMJ, it is a criminal offense for those subject to the UCMJ to wear 
unauthorized decorations on a uniform or civilian clothing. Applicant contends in his brief that he was not 
subject to the UCMJ during most of his life. Violation of Article 134 is not alleged in the SOR, and 
therefore, will only be considered as part of the whole-person analysis. (See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 
4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); HE I, II) 
 
5 In 2006, Congress passed 18 USCS § 704, commonly called the Stolen Valor Act. It expanded a 1948 
law that prohibited wearing unearned military medals and decorations. It added a prohibition against 
making false verbal or written claims about such awards (subsection [b]). In 2010, the 9th Circuit Court 
of Appeals found subsection (b) unconstitutional on free speech grounds. (See U.S. v. Alvarez, 2010 
U.S. App., LEXIS 17135, Aug 17, 2010) Also in 2010, a federal district court in Colorado dismissed 
charges against a man who claimed to have been awarded the Purple Heart and Silver Star. The court 
found subsection (b) unconstitutional on the same grounds as the Alvarez court. (See U.S. v. Strandlof, 
2009 WL 5126540 (D.Colo. Dec. 18, 2009). Neither of these decisions discussed subsection (a), which 
concerns the wearing of military decorations. Subsection (a) was challenged in U.S. v. McGuinn, 2007 
U.S. App., LEXIS 77059 (SDNY). The court held that § 704(a) is not unconstitutionally vague or 
overbroad. Applicant states in his brief that the statute was not in effect in the 1980s and 1990s when he 
engaged in the subject activity. Although subsection (b) was not enacted until 2006, the earlier version of 
18 USC § 704, which prohibits wearing unearned military decorations (and corresponds to the current 
subsection ]a]), has been in effect since at least 1948. Violation of 18 USC § 704 is not alleged in the 
SOR, and therefore, will only be considered under the whole-person analysis. (See ISCR Case No. 03-
20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); HE I, II) 
 
 
5
                                                
 
Researched my [agency] file in ACS [computer system] and tried to see if 
it was being updated. Viewed file and associated files, thought I covered 
issue but not to [agency] satisfaction. 
 
Did embellish military history in unofficial settings. (GE 2) 
 
He met with his supervisor and security manager for about one hour to discuss the 
polygraph interview. He thinks he told some friends about his military fabrications, but 
could not provide names or dates. At his current company, he also provided the same 
one-page list to his supervisor and security officer, but has not discussed the 
allegations in the current adjudication. (GE 2; AE M; Tr. 39-41, 63-68) 
 
 Applicant has not received counseling. He has engaged in “a lot of reflection” 
and realizes his behavior was “stupid,” “idiotic,” and “problematic,” and stated that it will 
not occur again. During the course of his investigation, he did not provide the 
underlying reasons why he lied about his service or wore unearned decorations 
because, “I felt that the act had happened and the reasons that it happened at the time 
and under those circumstances of questioning were largely irrelevant.” At the hearing, 
he explained that the underlying cause was his feeling of inadequacy growing up, 
which led him to join the National Guard and volunteer for active duty. He did not 
serve on active duty because “I would have had to resign my commission and go 
through OCS again, which I chose not to do.” (GE 2; AE M; Tr. 39-41, 65-72) 
 
 Applicant provided a character reference from his supervisor at the company 
where his SCI was revoked. He has known Applicant for six years. Applicant is his 
friend and his landlord. When Applicant’s SCI access was suspended, the writer did 
not observe any adverse or security-significant behavior. He does not know why 
Applicant's access was suspended. He finds Applicant to be a tireless worker and 
notes Applicant's work with volunteer organizations. He believes Applicant has a zeal 
to achieve and a sense of dedication. Applicant's performance reports from 1980 to 
1996 describe him as a top performer, leader and manager, and a loyal and dedicated 
officer, with ethics beyond reproach. (AE I, L; Tr. 51) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the revised AG.6 
Decisions must reflect consideration of the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
Guidelines. 
 
 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
6
                                                
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.8 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the 
national interest as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information in favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern about use of information technology 
systems:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern, 
including the following relevant condition:  
 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
7
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system. 
 
 While assigned to work at a federal agency, Applicant had access to the personal 
files of the general public. Although he was not authorized, Applicant accessed his own 
file, and the personal files of prior employers, prior references, family members, and his 
ex-wife. Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 40(e) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 41 provides the following relevant mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one's 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and  
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of a 
supervisor. 
 
 Applicant used a government agency computer to view other people’s personal 
files in 2005, which is not recent. Given the repercussions of his actions, he is unlikely 
to engage in such actions again. However, Applicant use of his position to satisfy his 
personal desire to see information about his former wife, family, and friends, indicates 
a lack of trustworthiness. His actions occurred during the course of his routine duties, 
not in unusual circumstances. Only partial mitigation is available under AG ¶ 41(a). 
Moreover, Applicant's conduct was neither minor nor inadvertent: he violated the 
privacy of approximately 18 individuals to satisfy his own desires to determine the 
source of certain information. He committed serious and intentional breaches of the 
trust placed in those with access to private information. Applicant made no effort to 
inform authorities at the time he accessed these files. Only as a result of his polygraph 
interview in 2006 did he inform his supervisor and security officials. Although this 
conduct occurred several years ago, the deliberate nature of Applicant's actions and 
the gravity of his breach of trust outweigh their distance in time. Partial mitigation under 
AG ¶ 41(a) is insufficient to find for Applicant under Guideline M. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
 
 
8
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following conditions are relevant: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing…; 
 
 In 2005, Applicant deliberately searched computer files containing private 
information which he was not authorized to access. He did not inform his employer, or 
federal agency A, of his unauthorized actions. During his 2006 agency A interview, he 
initially did not disclose his actions to the investigators, even when directly asked. He 
only disclosed it subsequently, when asked again during the interview. He did not 
disclose his actions to his employer until after that same interview. Applicant's conduct, 
both in searching private files, and in hiding his behavior, demonstrate 
untrustworthiness, lack of candor, and unwillingness to follow rules. His false tales of 
his combat experience, and wearing medals he had not earned, underscores his poor 
judgment and willingness not only to engage in falsehoods, but to continue the 
fabrications over many years. AG 16(c) applies. 
 
 During the time between 2005 and 2006, before his disclosures, Applicant was 
vulnerable to exploitation or coercion, because disclosure of this information would 
have had a significant negative effect on his reputation and career. Moreover, over the 
course of two decades, he was vulnerable to coercion because any revelation that he 
embellished his military accomplishments, related false tales of his combat service in 
Vietnam, and wore military medals and decorations that he did not earn, would have 
tarnished his community standing and reputation. AG ¶ 16(e) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns under 
the Personal Conduct guideline. The following conditions are relevant: 
 
 
9
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply, for the reasons discussed under Guideline M. Regarding 
mitigating condition AG ¶ 17(e), Applicant testified that he revealed his conduct to his 
employer in 2006, and to his current employer as well. It appears he is no longer 
vulnerable to exploitation. However, his disclosure must be viewed in light of its timing. 
He disclosed the behaviors listed in the SOR to his supervisor and security officer only 
after he was questioned about them at his interview in 2006. His lack of disclosure until 
until that point indicates that he was acting in response to the security clearance 
process rather than as a good-faith effort to be forthright about his behavior.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guidelines, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant was a mature and responsible adult of approximately 60 years of age 
when he abused his position of trust and accessed the private files of 18 people. Each 
time he knowingly accessed private files, he placed his own desires above the 
government’s need for reliable and trustworthy conduct. His rationale that he wished to 
discover who had supplied false child-support information, and that his ex-wife had lied 
 
 
10
about his support payments, does not justify his actions. He failed to disclose his 
behavior until the SCI investigation forced him to do so.  
 
 Applicant wore military medals that he purchased at flea markets, and held 
himself out as a man who had earned them. Violation of 18 U.S.C. § 704 is not alleged 
in this case; however, the fact that wearing unearned military decorations has been 
defined by Congress as improper for decades indicates the gravity of this falsehood. 
The two decades that Applicant maintained his false boasts about being in combat in 
Vietnam raises concerns about his credibility and judgment.  
 
 Finally, the fact that Applicant’s untrustworthy conduct occurred while he held a 
security clearance is most troubling. He was aware of the obligations placed on those 
who hold security clearances, but that knowledge was not enough to prevent him from 
engaging in untrustworthy behavior to satisfy his own desires.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.   Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.d.   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 2.e.10   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant's request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
10 The information stated in SOR allegation 2.e. is not disqualifying conduct under the Directive. 
