KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board and the Judge are bound by the provisions of the Directive.  The Board
does not have authority to waive provisions of the Directive.  Nor does it have authority to
entertain challenges to the wisdom or legality of the Directive.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 09-01280.a1
DATE: 01/10/2011
DATE: January 10, 2011
In Re:
---------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-01280
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On March 11, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
2
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On September 7, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Jennifer I.
Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following discussion, we affirm the Judge’s
decision.
The Judge made the following factual findings: Applicant is 47 years old and is currently
married to his fifth wife.  The SOR alleges 39 delinquent debts totaling $42,919.  Applicant admits
all of the debts with some qualifications.  Applicant has not made payments on 32 of the debts.
Applicant is indebted to a state Attorney General for $22,000 for delinquent child support.
Applicant currently makes child support payments through payroll deductions and has disputed the
amount of the arrearage with the state, but the state has not reduced the amount of his debt.
Applicant attributes his financial situation to “bad spending habits,” i.e., buying things on the
internet which he did not need.  Decision at 3.  Applicant’s financial difficulties are ongoing, and
his monthly expenses exceed his income.  Applicant intends to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, but
cannot do so until he pays his attorney’s full retainer fee.  
Applicant maintains that the Judge did not give adequate attention to his case and makes
general comments about the fairness of the decision.  To support his argument, Applicant points to
the Judge’s statement that she had not reviewed Applicant’s case before the hearing.  Applicant also
contends that the Judge incorrectly stated the dates of his marriages and divorces.  The fact that the
Judge did not review Applicant’s case before the hearing is not indicative of error, since Applicant’s
testimony and the parties’ evidence submitted at the hearing and afterward were important parts of
the record which were not available to the Judge prior to the hearing.  Applicant’s attribution of error
with regard to the dates of his marriages and divorces is clearly without basis, since the Judge did
not include any marriage or divorce dates in her decision.  Likewise, Applicant’s comments on the
fairness of the decision, especially concerning the clearances granted to others who he says were
later convicted of espionage, do not establish error, since the Board and the Judge are bound by the
provisions of the Directive as they apply to Applicant’s case.  The Board does not have the authority
to waive provisions of the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-08012 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 20,
2009).  Nor does the Board have the authority to entertain challenges to the wisdom or legality of
provisions of the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-03724 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2010); and
ISCR Case No. 04-01961 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2007).   
Applicant contends that he has mitigated any concerns that might exist under Guideline F
and that the Judge either did not consider or did not give adequate weight to  his evidence of
mitigation.  In his appeal, Applicant restates some of the mitigating evidence that is contained in the
record.  In particular, Applicant states that he submitted documentation (Applicant Exhibits (AE)
B-D) after the hearing, according to the Judge’s instructions; yet he does not believe that the Judge
mentioned those materials in her decision.  There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge
considered all the record evidence, unless the Judge specifically states otherwise; and there is no
3
requirement that the Judge mention or discuss every piece of record evidence when reaching a
decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-18303 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2008).  Applicant submitted
one exhibit at the hearing and three while the record was held open afterward.  The Judge cited all
four exhibits in her decision, specifically mentioning Applicant’s dealings with his bankruptcy
attorney (AE C) and his current child support payments (AE D). 
                        
Applicant admitted, with some qualifications, the SOR allegations against him.  The burden
then shifted to Applicant to extenuate or mitigate the security concerns raised by those allegations.
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The Judge concluded that Applicant did not present evidence sufficient to
overcome the security concerns raised.  The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions
and whole-person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the
particular facts of a case.  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel
the Judge to make a favorable security clearance determination.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has
to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the
unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  Here, the Judge did not give as much weight to Applicant’s
mitigating evidence as Applicant would have liked.  However, a party’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a
manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-01105 at 2 (App. Bd.
Dec. 15, 2008).
Applicant points out that being denied a security clearance would have an adverse impact
on his career and his continued ability to improve his financial situation.  However, the effect that
an unfavorable decision may have on an applicant is not a relevant or material consideration in
evaluating his or her security eligibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-07528 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 29,
2009).
A review of the record indicates that the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by
Applicant against his financial history and considered the possible application of relevant mitigating
conditions and whole person factors.  Decision at 5-7.  The Judge reasonably explained why the
evidence Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome all of the government’s
security concerns.  The Judge made favorable formal findings concerning two of the debts alleged
in the SOR.  Id.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by
Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4,  2007).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for her
decision,  “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Dep’t of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  A history of financial
problems is a circumstance that raises security concerns.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4
4
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  In light of the record here, the Board concludes that the Judge had a
rational basis for concluding that Applicant’s history of financial difficulties raised such concerns
and that Applicant did not present evidence sufficient to extenuate or mitigate those concerns.
Accordingly, the Judge’s decision is sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple        
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                  
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields               
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
