 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 09-04561 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On March 12, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 19, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 14, 2010, and requested that the case be 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On August 12, 2010, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing eight Items and mailed 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant a complete copy on August 16, 2010. Applicant received the FORM on 
September 1, 2010, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. He did not submit any additional documentation. On October 26, 
2010, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response, Applicant admitted all 19 allegations contained in Paragraph 1 of 
the SOR. His admissions are accepted as factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was honorably 
discharged from the U.S. Marine Corps in June 1993. After working for the post office 
for seven years, he decided to obtain a college education. In June 2001, he enrolled in 
an associate’s program and earned his degree in 2003. In June of 2007, he completed 
his bachelor’s degree in electronics engineering. He funded his education with student 
loans because he was not earning enough money to pay his living expenses and attend 
school. In January 2009, he was hired as an associate technician by his current 
employer.  
 
 In April 2009, Applicant met with a government investigator to discuss his 
delinquent accounts. During that interview, he indicated that he was unaware of several 
accounts, including a $1,021 judgment, and was working on a plan to consolidate his 
student loans. He stated he would contact the Department of Treasury to resolve the 
outstanding $186 and $1,024 debts. (Item 6.)  In October 2009, he completed a set of 
Interrogatories inquiring into the status of 18 debts. He noted that he had not done 
anything at that time. (Id.) Along with his responses, he submitted a budget that listed 
his monthly net income as $2,556 and expenses as $2,340, which included a $1,000 
payment on his mother’s mortgage. (Id. at 7.)  In an attached letter, he wrote that he is 
“presently not capable of paying off any of my accumulated bills, but my plan is to pay 
off all of them gradually as soon as I can.” (Id. at 10.)  
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated March 2009, January 2010, and 
August 2010, the SOR alleged 19 delinquent debts totaling $60,837, which began 
accruing in 2003. Ten of those debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.f. through o.) are delinquent student 
loans and total $48,152. The remaining nine debts, totaling $12,685, are owed to other 
creditors, including two judgments and two tax debts.  Applicant submitted a document 
with his answer to the SOR stating that on May 28, 2010, he paid $208 toward some 
consolidated student loans. (Item 3.) No other documentation was provided to 
document any payment toward or attempt to resolve these debts. He did not submit any 
documentation that he has participated in credit counseling or budget education. He 
provided no evidence concerning the quality of his job performance. He submitted no 
character references or other evidence tending to establish good judgment, 
trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or 
character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Based on three CBRs and his admissions, Applicant has been unable or 
unwilling to satisfy his delinquent debts that began accruing in 2003 and continue into 
the present. The evidence is sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20 set forth conditions that could mitigate financial security 
concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Applicant’s financial delinquencies began accruing in 2003 and remain unpaid or 
unresolved. Because the problems are ongoing and not isolated, there is insufficient 
evidence to support a finding that the indebtedness is unlikely to recur or continue. 
Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  He did not present sufficient credible evidence that 
the accumulation of $60,837 of debt was due to conditions beyond his control or that he 
attempted to responsibly manage that debt once they accrued, as required under AG ¶ 
20(b). 
 
Applicant established no mitigation under AG & 20(c) or AG & 20(d). He did not 
submit evidence that he received credit counseling or that he paid or resolved any debt, 
which would indicate that the situation is coming under control. Nor, did he present 
adequate evidence that he made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve any of the 19 
debts. Despite his statement in April 2009 that he was unaware of some of the debts 
and a judgment, Applicant did not provide documentation verifying that he formally 
disputed or investigated those debts, which is necessary to trigger the application of AG 
& 20(d). There is no evidence to support the application of AG & 20(f). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
6 
 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
has worked for a defense contractor since January 2009.  In April 2009, he learned of 
the Government’s concerns relating to his financial delinquencies, and indicated his 
willingness to resolve the matters. In October 2009, the Government again notified him 
of its concerns and inquired into the status of his delinquent debts. In May 2010, DOHA 
filed a SOR. In August 2010, the Government filed the FORM. For more than a year, he 
has been on notice that his delinquent debts were creating security concerns and 
potentially affecting his employment.  Despite that knowledge, he did not provide proof 
that he has taken sufficient steps to address the delinquent debts, including paying off 
the small $166 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.e, or the two tax deficiencies listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.d 
and 1.s for $186 and $1,024 respectively. Applicant failed to demonstrate financial 
rehabilitation, which is required to assure the Government that the recurrence or 
continuance of unaddressed obligations is unlikely. The record contains insufficient 
other evidence about his character, trustworthiness, or responsibility to mitigate these 
concerns or make their continuation less likely. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.s:             Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
