 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05419 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 20, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 9, 2010, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 30, 2010. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant and he received it on October 1, 2010. Applicant was given an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
provided additional information. The case was assigned to me on December 10, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, but denied ¶ 1.c. 
He also admitted the underlying conduct concerning the falsification allegations stated 
in SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.c, but failed to address the falsifications themselves. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He is single, has never been married, and has no 
children. He has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since 1993. He is 
a security officer. He currently holds a secret security clearance and held one while 
serving in the Army. He served in the Army for seven years and was discharged with an 
other than honorable discharge. This was an administrative discharge processed in lieu 
of court-martial.1   
  
 The debts listed in the SOR are supported by a credit report dated May 21, 2010. 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is a collection account for a credit card for approximately 
$5,198. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a collection account for a deficiency balance 
on an automobile repossession for approximately $7,990. Applicant contacted a credit 
consolidation service to set up a payment plan for these two debts. Although he 
provided the detailed payment plan which has him making monthly payments of $239 
over a three-year period, he failed to provide proof that he has made any of the 
payments. These debts remain unresolved.2 
  
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is a defaulted mortgage. Applicant became 
delinquent on his $1,200 monthly condominium payments. He defaulted in December 
2008. The lender pursued foreclosure action and Applicant was ordered to surrender 
possession of the property pursuant to a court order on May 19, 2010. There is no 
information in the record about whether Applicant is responsible for any deficiency 
amount.3 
 
 Applicant’s current income and expense statement shows net monthly income of 
about $1,945, net expenses of $800, and a remainder of $1,145. Applicant claims his 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 6. 
 
2 Items 5, 6; Applicant’s Response to FORM. 
 
3 Id. 
 
 
3 
 
 
financial difficulties are attributable to lack of income. Other than contacting the debt 
consolidation service, there is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling.4  
 
 The personal conduct concern arises because of answers Applicant provided to 
three questions on his security clearance application. The allegation states that he 
falsified answers to his security clearance application (e-QIP) on March 23, 2009, by 
answering “no” to the questions concerning whether he had ever received a discharge 
from the military that was not honorable, whether he had ever used drugs while holding 
a security clearance, and whether he had ever been charged with an offense related to 
alcohol or drugs. Applicant admitted that he gave the answers as indicated, but he 
believed that the drug use and alcohol-related offense questions only required 
affirmative answers if the events happened in the last seven years. He did not give an 
explanation for why he answered negatively to the other than honorable discharge 
question.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
4 Item 6. 
 
5 Items 3, 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. He also lost his 
home through foreclosure because of nonpayment. I find both disqualifying conditions 
are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that he paid or resolved his delinquent debts. 
Therefore, his behavior is recent and remains a concern. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s debts remain unresolved. Applicant’s 
explanation that his financial troubles were caused by his lack of income does not 
constitute conditions beyond his control. He could have sought a different job or an 
additional job, or cut back on expenses. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant 
apparently entered into an agreement with a debt-consolidation service to pay the debts 
listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. However, he provided no proof that he has made any 
payments under that agreement. Applicant failed to present evidence of financial 
counseling and there is no clear evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are being 
resolved or under control. There was no documented evidence that he has made a 
good-faith effort to pay or has attempted to resolve any of the debts. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire. 
Applicant’s explanation for his false answers on his security clearance application 
is unpersuasive. He clearly was aware of his drug use while holding a clearance, his 
alcohol-related arrest, and his other than honorable discharge. The questions on the 
application are unambiguous. I conclude from the evidence that Applicant deliberately 
provided false information concerning these questions. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.   
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 The record is absent any evidence that Applicant made any efforts to correct his 
false answers before being interviewed by an investigator. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
Falsification of material information on a security clearance application calls into 
question Applicant’s trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s lengthy 
service to his current employer. I also considered his explanation for his financial 
problems. I also considered Applicant’s military service, including his other than 
honorable discharge. Applicant did not supply documented proof of a payment 
arrangement for his debts. He has not shown a track record of financial stability. 
Additionally, he deliberately falsified his security clearance questionnaire. Therefore, he 
failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
