 
 1
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-03870 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
_____________ 
 
Decision 
_____________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant successfully mitigated drug involvement and related personal conduct 
concerns, but was unable to mitigate personal conduct falsification and related criminal 
conduct concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 2, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines E (personal conduct), H (drug abuse), and J (criminal conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 4, 2010, and DOHA received his answer on 
May 7, 2010. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 20, 2010. The case 
 
 2
was previously assigned to another administrative judge on July 27, 2010, and was 
reassigned to me on August 6, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 7, 
2010, scheduling the case for September 28, 2010. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
received without objection. Applicant did not offer any exhibits, but did testify on his own 
behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 6, 2010. I held the record 
open until October 12, 2010, to afford Applicant the opportunity to submit additional 
evidence. Applicant submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were received 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 6, 2010. The 
record closed on October 12, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 2.a. and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 2.b., 2.c., and 
3.a.  His admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
   
Applicant is a 24-year-old field engineer, who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since January 2009. He is a first-time applicant for a security clearance. 
Successfully vetting for a security clearance is a condition of his continued employment. 
He testified that he held an interim secret clearance from March 2009 to March 2010, 
which was revoked as a result of these proceedings. (GE 1, Tr. 12-15.) 
 
Applicant’s parents are career U.S. Army personnel. His mother retired from the 
Army in February 2007 as a first sergeant (pay grade E-7) and his father is currently 
serving on active duty as an Army warrant officer (pay grade W-3). Applicant 
understands that his father will be deployed to Iraq before he retires from the Army. (Tr. 
16-17, 21.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 2005. He attended a community 
college and a four-year college and has earned 41 credit hours. He intends to pursue 
his degree when he has more discretionary free time. (GE 1, Tr. 15-19.) Applicant 
married in August 2010. He wife is attending a university majoring in political science. 
They do not have any children. (Tr. 19-21.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleged two separate incidents under this concern. The first incident 
occurred in November 2008 and the second incident occurred in March 2009. 
Summarized they are: 
 
In November 2008, at age 22, Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) DUI 
(2) DUI with BAC of .08 or more, (3) possession of drug paraphernalia, and (4) 
possession of an open liquor container. The case was dismissed. Applicant has very 
little memory of this arrest. He testified that he had been drinking and passed out in the 
back seat of his car when he was approached by the police. When the police searched 
 
 3
                                                          
his car, they found drug paraphernalia and an open container. Applicant testified that his 
co-workers from a convenience store were smoking marijuana in his car. (Tr. 23-26.) 
Since then, Applicant has disassociated himself from his former friends, and is working 
at his current job. This arrest left a significant impression on Applicant. He expressed 
sincere remorse and regret that he had allowed himself to get into such a situation. 
Applicant’s consumption of alcohol since his arrest has been very moderate. (SOR 
Response, Tr. 23-26, 38-39, GE 2, GE 3.)  
 
Applicant provided false information when he completed his March 2009 e-QIP 
when queried about past drug use. When asked whether he illegally used drugs in the 
last seven years or since the age of 16, he answered “no,” when in fact he had used 
drugs, discussed infra. Applicant denied falsifying his e-QIP with “malicious intent.” 
(SOR Response.) He explained: 
 
Well – I mean – the whole purpose or what I had originally thought when I 
was advised when filling out my SF86, which wasn’t much, it was initially 
an SF86 from what I thought of was just a form to get me inside the door 
in terms of a clearance and I thought any adverse information that was on 
there would – I’d be denied on the spot and therefore, out of a job. And it 
wasn’t until much later when I realized how significant an SF86 really is 
because – I mean – honestly you’re swearing that this is who you are and 
what you’ve done. And nobody explained that to me. I mean – to me it 
seemed like an arbitrary form. (Tr. 27.) 
 
In addition to claiming that he did not receive proper advice on how to complete 
his e-QIP, Applicant was concerned that he would not get the job if he told the truth 
about his past drug use. During his Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview in 
April 2009, Applicant further stated that his misrepresentation on his e-QIP was 
deliberate, but denied his misrepresentation was done maliciously. (Tr. 28-32.) 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 Applicant admitted using marijuana three times – twice while in high school in 
2003 and once with his friends from the convenience store in 2008. He “was dissatisfied 
with the effects of marijuana as it was nauseating and counterintuitive to the goals in my 
life.” He stated that each time he used marijuana, he was under peer pressure to try it. 
He no longer associates with anyone who uses “illegal and legal intoxicating 
substances.”1 (SOR Response.) 
 
 The allegation under SOR ¶ 2.b. of this concern is cross-alleged under personal 
conduct, SOR ¶ 1.a. The facts regarding this allegation discussed supra are 
incorporated under this concern. Applicant added that, “I deny to the best of my 
1 Applicant’s testimony differs from his SOR Response regarding past marijuana use. In his SOR 
Response, he stated he used marijuana two times in high school in 2003 and one time with his co-
workers from the convenience store in 2008. He testified that he used marijuana one time in high school 
and two times with his co-workers from the convenience store. He did not deviate from the total number of 
times he used marijuana. (Tr. 32-33, 38.) 
 
 4
knowledge that I was under the influence of an illegal substance when I was arrested (in 
November 2008).” (SOR Response.) Applicant has not used marijuana since 2008. (Tr. 
32.) 
 
 Lastly, Applicant allowed his co-workers from the convenience store to smoke 
marijuana in his vehicle. He explained: 
 
I allowed my co-workers to smoke marijuana inside my car for the fear of 
someone seeing them outside, peer pressure from my co-workers, and as 
a means to isolate their bad behavior away from myself. At the time, I 
thought this was the best decision, but have since realized how stupid 
such behavior was. 
 
Applicant again reiterated that he has since disassociated himself form these 
individuals. (SOR Response, Tr. 32-34.) 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
The sole allegation under this concern cross-alleges SOR ¶ 1.b. (March 2009 e-
QIP falsification) under SOR ¶ 3.a., and alleges Applicant’s falsification is a felony under 
18 USC § 1001. Applicant stated that he “did not understand the vast implications 
placed on [his] character by omitting data, nor was it my intent to hide anything.” He 
reiterated that he feared he would not be granted a security clearance “for having any 
negative information on [his] form.” (SOR Response.) 
  
Character evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted four reference letters and a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any drug violation. His reference letters were from 
his father, his wife, his mother-in-law, and a work supervisor. All references vouched for 
Applicant’s good character and supported him for a security clearance. (AE A through 
E.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
 
 5
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole-person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism.  
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
  
Conclusions 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are raised under Guidelines E (personal conduct), H (drug involvement), and J 
(criminal conduct) with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
 
 6
                                                          
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information.  
 
Applicant failed to disclose his past marijuana use. Such disclosure was clearly 
required under the e-QIP instructions. Furthermore, his conduct surrounding his 
November 2008 arrest involving drugs, drug paraphernalia, and alcohol identifies 
concerns regarding Applicant’s judgment and willingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(c) both apply.2 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
2 Deliberate and materially false answers on a security clearance application may violate 18 
U.S.C. § 1001. The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 
(1995) as a statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of influencing, the decision 
making body to which it is addressed.” See also United States v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 
2004). If Applicant had provided accurate answers on his security clearance application, his accurate 
answers are capable of influencing the government to deny his security clearance. His drug involvement 
is sufficiently serious to potentially jeopardize approval of his security clearance. Making a false statement 
under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony (the maximum potential sentence includes 
confinement for five years and a $10,000 fine).  
 
 7
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
With regard to Applicant’s November 2008 arrest, Applicant was 22 years old 
and relatively young at the time. He expressed considerable regret and remorse over 
this arrest. It has been two years since any similar episodes involving drugs or alcohol, 
he has disassociated himself from the individuals who were with him at the time of the 
arrest, he rarely drinks, and he is now married requiring him to show a greater sense of 
responsibility. AGs 17(c), 17(e), and 17(g) fully apply. 
 
I am unable to reach a similar conclusion with regard to the falsification concerns 
as a result of Applicant’s failure to list his past marijuana use. Applicant explained that 
he did not receive sufficient guidance when completing his March 2009 e-QIP, that he 
believed if he answered the question truthfully, he would have been ineligible for the job, 
and added that his misrepresentation may have been deliberate, but was not done 
maliciously. Considering the record as a whole, I am convinced Applicant deliberately 
failed to disclose his past marijuana use. Numerous factors weighed in my analysis to 
reach that conclusion, including Applicant=s age, his level of education, his employment 
history, his motive to cover up his conduct, and overall lack of credibility as it pertained 
to falsification concerns. The truth is constant and had Applicant provided accurate and 
complete answers on his e-QIP, he would not be in a position of trying to explain them 
today. He knew or should have known of the importance of providing accurate answers 
 
 8
                                                          
and nevertheless failed to provide information that was material to making an informed 
security decision. None of the mitigating conditions apply to the falsification concern.  
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug involvement-related conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Two drug involvement disqualifying conditions could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug 
abuse,”3 and “(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.”  
 
    Applicant’s alcohol- and drug-related November 2008 arrest and marijuana use 
three times4 warrant application of AGs ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c). When arrested, Applicant 
was severely inebriated and had an open container and drug paraphernalia in his car. 
Although he was not convicted of any offense stemming from this arrest, his culpability 
is quite serious.  
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
3AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
4AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
 
 9
                                                          
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR 
Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana 
occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence 
shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
“changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.”5 
 
AGs ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply. Applicant has submitted a signed statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any drug violation and it has been over 
two years since Applicant’s last marijuana use or drug involvement in 2008. At the time, 
5 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board 
stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the Administrative Judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The Administrative Judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
 10
                                                          
he was 22 years old and relatively young. He has completely disassociated himself from 
his former convenience store co-workers. He no longer works at the convenience store 
and has a responsible job. Applicant appears sincere in his commitment to remain drug-
free. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under AG ¶ 30, the Government’s concern is as follows: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline J by showing that 
Applicant falsified his e-QIP. I find, as discussed above under Guideline E, that 
Applicant deliberately falsified material facts on his e-QIP that he signed in March 2009. 
The falsification of his e-QIP is material, serves to undermine the security clearance 
adjudication process, and is a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001, a felony.6 
 
AG ¶ 31. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying include: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable 
conditions; 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; 
 
e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program; and 
 
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year. 
6 It is a criminal offense to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent statement or representation, or knowingly make or use a false writing in any matter within the 
jurisdiction of the executive branch of the Government of the United States. Security clearances are 
within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the Government of the United States. Egan, 484 U.S. at 
527 (discussing 18 U.S.C. § 1001.) 
 
 
 11
                                                          
Of the criminal conduct disqualifying conditions listed supra, two are applicable: ¶ 
31(a): “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;” and ¶ 31(c) “allegation or 
admission of criminal conduct regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
 Applicant’s recent falsification brings to the forefront the criminal conduct 
concerns raised by his past behavior. I am required to consider Applicant’s overall 
questionable behavior when evaluating the seriousness of the conduct alleged in the 
SOR to determine factors such as the extent to which his behavior is recent; the 
likelihood of recurrence; Applicant’s explanations concerning the circumstances of the 
incidents alleged; and his rehabilitation.7 
 
 AG ¶ 32. Conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Under the totality of the circumstances, I find Applicant’s criminal behavior is 
recent and not isolated. Considering the nature and seriousness of his misconduct, I 
find his favorable information insufficient to mitigate Guideline J security concerns. His 
behavior raises questions about his ability and willingness to follow the law, and 
ultimately, to protect classified information. His recent falsification and lack of candor 
weigh against a finding of rehabilitation and positive behavioral changes. I find that none 
of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
7 ISCR Case No. 04-09959 at 3 (App. Bd. May 19, 2006). 
 
 12
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept. Applicant receives credit for service as a Government 
contractor. He has shown maturity and resolve to remain drug and alcohol free. 
Applicant also submitted evidence of good character. 
  
  Applicant’s deliberate failure to disclose information on his security clearance 
application is serious, recent, and not mitigated. His falsification of his March 2009 e-
QIP is the sole remaining unmitigated concern. Accordingly, I have serious questions 
about his current ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, he has mitigated security concerns 
pertaining to personal conduct related to drugs and alcohol and mitigated security 
concerns pertaining to drug abuse. He has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to 
personal conduct related to falsification and corresponding criminal conduct concerns.    
 
 I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole-person factors” and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the guidelines. Applicant has 
failed to mitigate or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
        Subparagraph 2.a. – 2.c.:  For Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 3, Guideline J:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
         Subparagraphs 3.a.:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
