                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-04539 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) lists eight debts, totaling $54,210. He did 
not provide proof of any payments to his SOR creditors. He failed to make sufficient 
progress in resolving his SOR debts, and financial considerations concerns are not 
mitigated at this time. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 16, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86) (Item 6). On 
April 13, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interests to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
On May 10, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing. (Item 4) On September 22, 2010, he requested a decision without a hearing. 
(Item 5) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated November 15, 
2010, was provided to him on November 22, 2010. He was afforded an opportunity to 
file objections and to submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on January 11, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.h.3 
He denied responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a without elaboration. His admissions 
are accepted as factual findings.   
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old computer technician employed by a government 
contractor since early 2008.4 He attended a university from 1996 to 2003 and he 
majored in film and video production as well as management information systems. He 
earned a bachelor’s degree. He has never served in the military. Applicant has never 
been married, and he does not have any children.     
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists eight debts totaling $54,210. Of this total, $25,919 relates 
to overdue mortgage payments on a $178,644 mortgage, which is in foreclosure status. 
When Applicant became unemployed in March 2007, he was unable to make the 
mortgage payments on his condominium. (Item 8 at 4) Applicant tried to sell his 
condominium using a short sale; however, he was unsuccessful. (Item 8 at 4) He 
informed the creditor that he was moving out of his condominium. (Item 8 at 4) Applicant 
said he has not been notified that the property is in foreclosure. (Item 8 at 5)  
 
 
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated November 16, 2010, and Applicant’s receipt is dated 
November 22, 2010. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt 
to submit information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3Unless stated otherwise, the information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s SOR response. 
(Item 2) 
 
4Unless stated otherwise, the information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s SF 86. (Item 6) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Applicant’s SOR debts are as follows: ¶1.a credit card collection ($2,654); ¶1.b 
bank collection ($1,640); ¶1.c collection ($1,659); ¶1.d collection ($49); ¶1.e bank 
collection ($3,021); ¶1.f telecommunications collection ($254); ¶1.g vehicle 
repossession collection ($19,014); and ¶1.h foreclosure ($25,919 overdue on $178,644 
mortgage).  
 
Although Applicant denied responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶1.a in his SOR 
response, during his Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview 
(PSI), he recognized the debt in SOR ¶1.a and indicated he stopped making payments 
in March 2007. (Item 8 at 3) He told the OPM investigator that he was attempting to 
establish a payment plan until the debt in SOR ¶1.a is paid in full. (Item 6 at 9-11, Item 7 
at 3; FORM at 4) On October 26, 2009, he responded to DOHA interrogatories and in 
connection with the debts in SOR ¶¶1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, and 1.h, he stated, “Due to the 
reduction of working hours, I cannot make payments on the account at this time. My 
income is not sufficient to cover the bills.” (Item 7 at 2-3)  
 
Applicant explained at his OPM PSI that he was financially stable until March 
2007, when he became unemployed from his job in the real estate industry. (Item 8 at 3-
5; FORM at 5) In his OPM PSI, Applicant said he was attempting to establish payment 
plans; however, he did not provide proof of any payment plans or payments to the SOR 
creditors. (Item 8 at 3-5; FORM at 5) There is no evidence of financial counseling. (Item 
6 at 5; FORM at 5)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline F (financial considerations).  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) 
a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, his OPM PSI, his responses to DOHA interrogatories, and his SOR 
response. Applicant’s SOR lists eight debts totaling $54,210. Some of his debts became 
delinquent in March 2007, when he became unemployed. The Government established 
the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about 
the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants very limited application of AG 
¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d).5 There is no evidence of financial counseling. He showed 
 
5The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
some good faith when he admitted responsibility for his SOR debts in his OPM PSI and 
his SOR response. Applicant’s financial situation was damaged by insufficient income, 
and his unemployment in March 2007, as well as his underemployment as noted in his 
response to DOHA interrogatories. However, Applicant’s financial circumstances have 
been relatively stable since early 2008, and he has not provided sufficient information 
about variations in his income over the last three years to fully establish any mitigating 
conditions.    
 
Applicant did not establish that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
The file lacks proof that he maintained contact with all of his creditors.6 There are no 
receipts or account statements from creditors, establishing any payments to his SOR 
creditors. There is insufficient evidence that his financial problem is being resolved and 
is under control. The file lacks evidence that he has acted responsibly on any of his 
SOR debts.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
6“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of his access to classified information. Applicant is a 32-year-old computer 
technician, who has retained employment by the same government contractor since 
early 2008. He earned a bachelor’s degree with two majors. He is sufficiently mature to 
understand and comply with his security responsibilities. He deserves some credit for 
volunteering to support the U.S. Government as an employee of a contractor. There is 
every indication that he is loyal to the United States and his employer. There is no 
evidence that he abuses alcohol or uses illegal drugs. Applicant’s financial situation was 
damaged by unemployment in March 2007, and insufficient income to address his 
delinquent debts. I give Applicant substantial credit for admitting responsibility for seven 
of eight SOR debts in his SOR response and to the remaining SOR debt in his OPM 
PSI. He has been honest about his failure to address his financial plight. These factors 
show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
 The whole-person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Applicant’s SOR lists eight delinquent debts, totaling 
$54,210. He said he has been making some efforts to resolve his delinquent debts, 
such as attempting to utilize a short sale to resolve his delinquent mortgage debt on his 
condominium, and attempting to establish payment plans with his other SOR creditors. 
Applicant’s employment has been stable since early 2008; however, on October 26, 
2009, he mentioned in his response to DOHA interrogatories, “Due to the reduction of 
working hours, I cannot make payments on [his SOR debts] at this time. My income is 
not sufficient to cover the bills.” He did not provide any proof that underemployment 
caused him to be unable to pay his SOR debts. He did not provide his pay statements 
or his income tax returns. He did not provide enough information to assess his ability to 
address his delinquent debts. He did not provide any documentation showing attempts 
to establish payment plans. He did not pay the two smallest SOR debts in SOR ¶1.d for 
$49 and in SOR ¶1.f for $254. There is no evidence that the eight SOR creditors have 
received any payments since early 2008, when Applicant began working for his current 
employer. Applicant has failed to make sufficient progress resolving his delinquent SOR 
debts to establish his financial responsibility.     
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
