KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Legal judgements provided substantial evidence of Guideline F security concerns. 
Evidence that Applicant committed an act of fraud provided substantial evidence of Guideline E
security concern.  Applicant failed to mitigate these concerns.  Judge’s comments that suggested
he found security concerns in Applicant’s choice of forum were harmless error.  Adverse
decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 09-05963.a1
DATE: 01/13/2011
DATE: January 13, 2011
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-05963
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Richard L. Moorhouse, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On January 25, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On September 30, 2010, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
1As stated above, these representations concerned the legality of the tax shelter in question.  Government Exhibit
(GE) 3 contains the complaint filed by plaintiffs in the state court.  The complaint alleges that Applicant and co-
defendants represented to the plaintiffs that the tax shelter “was a legal and legitimate tax strategy that was fully
supported by . . . an opinion of some prominent national law firm and . . . that there was no possibility of incurring IRS
penalties . . .”  
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his application
of the pertinent mitigating conditions and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis was erroneous.
Consistent with the following discussion, we affirm the decision of the Judge.
Facts
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a 55-year-old
managing director of a defense contractor.  He holds a bachelor’s degree, as well as a master’s
degree in taxation from a nationally recognized business school.  
The SOR alleges four debts.  One arose from a lawsuit filed against Applicant and others for
fraud, breach of fiduciary duty, and violations of general business law.  Applicant had developed,
promoted, sold, and implemented a tax shelter strategy, representing to the plaintiffs that it was a
legitimate tax-saving tool.  The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) disallowed the plaintiffs’ deductions
and imposed penalties on them.  Applicant’s agreement with the plaintiffs had included an
arbitration clause.  Accordingly, the dispute was referred to an arbitration panel.  The panel
concluded that representations made by the defendants in the case were false,1 that the defendants
knew that they were false, and that the plaintiffs relied on these representations to their detriment.
The arbitration panel awarded the plaintiffs some $5,000,000 including costs and expenses.
Applicant negotiated a settlement of this debt, the plaintiffs agreeing to accept $4,000,000.
Applicant is paying off this debt in quarterly increments.  As of the close of the record he was
continuing to make payments.
Two of the debts alleged in the SOR were based on loans Applicant had received from two
organizations falling within an umbrella corporation of which Applicant is managing director.
These loans resulted in adverse judgments against him, in the amounts of approximately $665,000
and $885,000 respectively.  In taking these loans he had signed confessions of judgment, upon the
recommendation of his tax advisor.  The debts were satisfied by the close of the record.
 The final debt alleged in the SOR arose from a contract for a band to perform at an occasion
for Applicant’s son.  The contract provided that Applicant would be responsible for the entire
contract amount in the event he did not use the band.  Applicant’s son decided that he did not want
the band after all.  Applicant offered to settle with the band for its lost profits.  However, the band
insisted on payment of the full amount of liquidated damages, as set forth in the contract.  Applicant
took the case to court and lost, the band being granted a judgement of $25,000.  This debt was paid
before the close of the record.
Discussion
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(b): “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control . . . and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances[.]”  
Applicant contends that the Judge’s decision contains language favorable to Applicant, for
example that Applicant lives within his means and meets his financial obligations.  Decision at 8.
Applicant also contends that the Judge erred in his treatment of the legal disputes in this case.  For
example, he states that the Judge erred in finding “worrisome” Applicant’s having litigated the band
contract rather than pay it and his having submitted the fraud case to arbitration rather than fight the
fraud allegations in court.  The Judge stated that Applicant’s “legal approach to these cases . . . does
little to spotlight those qualities the Government seeks in bestowing access to sensitive material.”
Decision at 9.  Applicant argues that the Judge’s findings and the record evidence support a
conclusion that he has mitigated any security concerns arising from his debts.
We do not consider individual sentences in a decision in isolation.  Rather, we look at each
aspect of a decision in light of the whole and interpret individual portions in their proper context.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06591 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2009).  To the extent that the Judge
appeared to hold it against Applicant that he decided to litigate a contract or that he submitted the
fraud to arbitration rather than litigate it in court, the Judge erred.  Mere recourse to the courts or to
alternative dispute resolution (ADR), considered per se, may be of limited security significance.
However, in this case, the extent to which Applicant’s initial refusal to perform his duties under the
band contract impugns his judgement and reliability is a proper matter for a Judge to consider under
Guidelines F and E.  We also note evidence that, even after the court held in favor of the band, the
debt was not paid until Applicant’s bank account had been the subject of a judicial attachment.  Tr.
at 87.  Under the facts of this case, we conclude that the Judge did not err in his treatment of the
band contract.
Concerning the fraud charge, the Judge appears to have examined Applicant’s use of ADR
in the context of evaluating Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FCMC) 20(b).2  That
is, the Judge appears to have concluded that Applicant’s decision not to avail himself of the more
stringent protections of a trial resulted in a finding of fraud by the arbitration panel, which was
affirmed by the state court.  The resulting judgement against him, therefore, was a consequence of
his own decision rather than a circumstance outside of his control.  While we conclude that the
Judge’s comments regarding Applicant’s litigation tactics were error, we note record evidence
concerning the circumstances that gave rise to the fraud lawsuit.  Specifically, GE 3 includes the
decision by the state court affirming the arbitration panel’s decision.  It reads in pertinent part: “The
Panel found that Plaintiff’s had ‘proven by clear and convincing evidence that the claimed
representations were made, that they were false, that [Applicant and his co-defendants] knew they
were false, and that [Plaintiffs] reasonably relied on them . . .’”  This evidence is consistent with the
Judge’s findings summarized above.  Accordingly, the record evidence, viewed as a whole, supports
the Judge’s treatment of FCMC 20(b), in that the circumstances underlying the fraud charge were
not outside Applicant’s control.  Thus, any error in the Judge’s analysis of the decision to utilize
ADR is harmless.
Applicant contends that the Judge ignored or mis-weighed evidence favorable to him, for
example that the fraud case was not criminal in nature but civil, that a plaintiff in the fraud case had
himself been arrested on fraud charges in another matter, and that Applicant had paid off three of
the four debts alleged in the SOR.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the
record. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-01735 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 31, 2010).  Applicant’s brief is not
sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered the entire record.  With the exception
of the harmless error discussed above, neither is the brief sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge
weighed the evidence in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made,’” both as to the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors  Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The
Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
