 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 09-05005 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On March 23, 2009, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions 
(SF 86). On May 7, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 25, 2010 and requested that the case be 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 30, 2010, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing nine Items and mailed 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant a complete copy on October 1, 2010. Applicant received the FORM on 
October 8, 2010, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. She timely submitted additional documentation to which the 
Department had no objection. I marked those documents as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through K, and admitted them into evidence. On November 15, 2010, DOHA assigned 
the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 
1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.l, 1.m, 1.q, 1.r, and 1.u. Those delinquent debts total $23,073. She 
denied that she owed the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, 
1.s, 1.t, 1.v, 1.w, and 1.x, because she was not aware of those debts. Those debts total 
$5,047. Her admissions are incorporated as factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old and divorced since 2002. She was married for 20 years. 
She has two adult children. In April 2008, she began a position as security guard for a 
defense contractor. Prior to this job, she worked as a waitress or hostess since 2001, 
with short periods of unemployment. She was unemployed from April 2004 to August 
2005, while recovering from an automobile accident. (Item 5.)  
 
 On April 15, 2009, Applicant met a government investigator to discuss past due 
financial accounts. During that interview, she attributed her financial problems to the 16-
month-period of unemployment, a lack of steady gainful employment, and her previous 
boyfriend who incurred the $6,691 and $1,820 debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.u after 
using her credit cards. (Item 6 at 13.) She told the investigator that she had no plans to 
contact the creditors unless she was legally confronted by them because she did not 
have sufficient money to make the minimum payments they demanded. However, she 
did not intend to incur future financial delinquencies. (Id.) She earns $19,000 annually in 
her position. (AE A.) In September 2009, she submitted a budget. Her monthly net 
income is $1,161 and expenses are $1,027, leaving about $100 at the end of each 
month for other items or small payments on the debts. (Item 7 at 5.)  
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated April 2009 and March 2010, the 
SOR alleged 24 delinquent debts totaling $28,120 and involving unpaid medical bills, 
credit cards, and consumer purchase accounts. The delinquent debts accrued between 
2003 and March 2009. In September 2009, she settled the $1,820 debt listed in SOR ¶ 
1.u. (AE I, J.) In July 2010, she paid the $356 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.r. (AE D.) In 
September and October 2010, she made monthly payments of $40 on the $524 debt 
listed in SOR ¶ 1.q. (AE H, G.) Those three debts total $2,700. The remaining 21 debts 
totaling $25,420 remain unresolved because she does not earn enough money to pay 
or resolve all of them at one time. (AE A.) She has not obtained financial counseling or 
formally disputed any of the 14 debts that she denied owing. 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor submitted a letter of recommendation on Applicant’s 
behalf. He considers her to be a “dependable, reliable and honest employee. She is 
 
3 
 
 
considered a valuable asset to our company.” (AE C.) He is aware of her financial 
problems and has confidence that she will continue resolving them in a timely manner. 
(Id.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Based on two CBRs and her statements, Applicant has a history of being unable 
to satisfy delinquent debts that accrued between 2003 and 2009. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20 set forth conditions that could mitigate financial security 
concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Applicant’s delinquencies arose between 2003 and 2009, most of which remain 
unresolved. Because the problems are ongoing and not isolated, there is insufficient 
evidence to support a finding that the indebtedness is unlikely to recur or continue. 
Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  She presented evidence that the accumulation of 
debt resulted after she was injured in a car wreck and subsequently was unemployed 
for about 16 months, and her previous boyfriend misused her credit card. Those were 
conditions beyond her control. Because she did not submit any evidence of steps that 
she took to responsibly manage those debts while they were accruing, AG ¶ 20(b) has 
limited application.  
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that she established a long-term plan to 
resolve her debts or that she sought credit counseling to assist in their resolution. 
According to her budget, she has little money at the end of the month to make 
significant payments on the unpaid debts. At this time, her financial problems are not 
under control. Hence, AG & 20(c) cannot apply.  
 
Applicant provided evidence that she made a good-faith effort to address three of 
the SOR debts. She submitted proof that she paid two debts and is making monthly 
payments on another debt. She paid one of the debts before the SOR issued. AG & 
20(d) had some application. 
 
Although Applicant consistently denied owing 14 debts, she did not provide 
documentation verifying that she formally disputed the debts through the credit reporting 
agencies, which is necessary to trigger the application of AG & 20(e). There is no 
evidence to support the application of AG & 20(f). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
6 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
has worked for a defense contractor since April 2008. Her e-QIP does not list any 
reportable incidents involving illegal drugs, alcohol, the police, or courts. Her financial 
problems are attributable to low paying jobs, a long period of unemployment, and a 
previous boyfriend who abused her credit cards. In April 2009, she learned of the 
Government’s security concerns relating to her numerous delinquent debts. At that time, 
she denied many of the debts and stated that she did not have any intention to resolve 
them, unless legally required to do so. In her May 2010 response to the SOR, she 
continued to deny 14 of the 24 debts because she remained unaware of them, despite 
having knowledge of them since April 2009 and an opportunity to investigate or dispute 
them. However, from September 2009 to the present, she managed to resolve $2,700 
of the delinquent debt, which is noteworthy given her limited income. She provided 
some evidence concerning the quality of her job performance and trustworthiness. 
However, I was unable to evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in person 
since she elected to have her case decided without a hearing. If she continues to make 
some progress in resolving the delinquent debts, she may be a good candidate for 
eligibility of a security clearance in the future.  
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.p:             Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.q and 1.r:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.s and 1.t:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.u:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.v through 1.x:   Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
