1 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.
2 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 09-05796
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s request for
eligibility for a security clearance is granted.
On March 18, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required in connection
with his work for a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued to Applicant interrogatories1 to clarify or augment information in the
background investigation. After reviewing the results of the background investigation
and Applicant’s responses to the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were unable to
make a preliminary affirmative finding2 that it is clearly consistent with the national
3 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included seven documents (Items 1 - 7) proffered
in support of the Government’s case. Item 7, a copy of the Directive, was provided for informational purposes
only.
2
interest to allow Applicant access to classified information. On August 12, 2010, DOHA
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which, if established,
raise security concerns addressed in the adjudicative guidelines3 (AG) under Guideline
C (foreign preference).
On September 14, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR through a notarized
statement and requested a decision without a hearing. On October 26, 2010,
Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)4 in support of the
Government’s preliminary decision. Applicant received the FORM on November 9,
2010, and was given 30 days to file a response to the FORM. On November 15, 2010,
Applicant responded by submitting a cover letter (1 page), a copy of his job description
(2 pages), and letter from his Facility Security Officer (FSO) (1 page). His submission
was included in the record without objection. The case was assigned to me on
December 23, 2010.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline C, the Government alleged that Applicant holds a valid
Canadian passport that will expire in December 2011 (SOR 1.a); that as of November
19, 2009, he was not willing to destroy, surrender, or invalidate his Canadian passport
(SOR 1.b); that he traveled on his Canadian passport (SOR 1.c); and that he has
$1,200 in a Canadian bank account (SOR 1.d). Applicant denied SOR 1.b and 1.d, but
admitted SOR 1.a and 1.c. In addition to the facts established through his  admissions, I
have made the following findings of relevant fact.
Applicant works for a defense contractor as a resource efficiency manager, a
position he has held since March 2009. Between June 2007 and March 2009, he was a
graduate student seeking his master’s degree in engineering at a U.S. university.
Between September 2003 until June 2007, he was employed as a senior field engineer
in work unrelated to the Defense Department. (FORM, Item 4)
Applicant was born in the United States in 1980. His mother is a native-born U.S.
citizen, but his father is a Canadian citizen. In 1984, Applicant’s father moved the family
to Canada. Applicant was raised and educated in Canada until May 2003, when he
graduated from a Canadian university with an engineering degree and moved to the
United States to work and attend graduate school. After the family moved to Canada,
Applicant’s father registered Applicant as a Canadian citizen to qualify for national
health and education benefits. Applicant has always had ties to the U.S. through his
mother and her extended family. (FORM, Items 4 and 6)
5 Directive. 6.3.
3
Applicant holds passports from both the United States and Canada. The record
does not reflect when he first obtained either passport. His current Canadian passport
was issued in December 2006 and is valid through December 2011. He has used his
Canadian passport for travel to Canada, because it is convenient to do so. (Id.) When
Applicant was interviewed by a Government investigator in April 2009, he stated he did
not want to relinquish his Canadian passport out of respect for his father. Also, this is
Applicant’s first request for a security clearance or other position of trust. Until he was
hired for his current job in March 2009, he had no reason to consider relinquishing his
passport. (FORM, Item 6) However, in response to DOHA interrogatories, he stated that
he is willing to surrender his Canadian passport and that he no longer needs it. (FORM,
Item 5) In response to the FORM in November 2010, Applicant provided a letter from
his FSO stating that Applicant had relinquished his Canadian passport to the FSO until
he no longer requires a security clearance.
When Applicant submitted his e-QIP, he answered “yes” to Question 1 of Section
20A (Foreign Financial Interests), which asks, “Do you have or have you EVER (caps in
original) had any foreign financial businesses, foreign bank accounts, or other foreign
financial interests of which you have direct control or direct ownership?” He then listed a
Canadian bank account with a balance of about $1,200 (USD). However, when he was
interviewed by a Government investigator in April 2009, Applicant stated that he opened
the Canadian bank account when he was in high school, but closed it when he moved
to the United States in 2003. (FORM, Item 6) All of Applicant’s assets are now in the
United States. In response to DOHA interrogatories, he estimated his net worth to be
about $225,000 (USD) (FORM, Item 5).
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).
4
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 9, Guideline C (Foreign Preference).
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no
one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of
persuasion.7 
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information
in favor of the Government.8
Analysis
Foreign Preference
Applicant admitted the allegations at SOR 1.a and 1.c. Those allegations are also
supported by information presented in the Government’s FORM. Applicant was issued a
Canadian passport in December 2006 that is valid until December 2011. He has used
that passport for travel to Canada. This information is sufficient to raise security
concerns about whether Applicant may place the interests of another country ahead of
those of the United States. Specifically, the security concern is stated in AG ¶ 9
(Guideline C: Foreign Preference) as follows: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶ 10(a) (exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign
9 See Directive, E3.1.14.
5
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign
passport...), and AG ¶ 10(b) (action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign
citizenship by an American citizen). As to AG ¶ 10(b), by using his Canadian passport,
Applicant seeks to obtain recognition of his status as a Canadian citizen for the ease of
travel to Canada. 
Applicant denied the allegations in SOR 1.b and 1.d. Accordingly, the
Government was required to prove those allegations as controverted facts.9 As to SOR
1.b, the Government’s own information (FORM, Item 5) showed that, in November
2009, when the Applicant responded to DOHA’s interrogatories, he stated that he was
willing to relinquish his passport and that he no longer needs it. This is in contrast to
Applicant’s stated reluctance to relinquish his foreign passport when he was interviewed
by a Government investigator in April 2009. (FORM, Item 6) Applicant was concerned
that doing so would be disrespectful to his Canadian father. But he also stated that,
before beginning this application for a security clearance in March 2009, he never had
reason to consider relinquishing his Canadian passport.
As to SOR 1.d, there is no information that shows Applicant currently still has, as
alleged, a bank account or any other financial interests in Canada. When Applicant’s
answer to e-QIP Section 20A is viewed together with his April 2009 statement to a
Government investigator, it is clear that he was disclosing that he had a Canadian bank
account at one time. The Government’s information (FORM, Item 5) further reflects that
all of Applicant’s financial assets are in the United States and that his current net worth
is about $225,000. By comparison, a bank account with $1,200 has little or no security
significance. 
Based on the foregoing, SOR 1.b and 1.d are resolved for the Applicant. The
only remaining issue regarding Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance centers on
his possession and use of a foreign passport. Applicant has relinquished the passport to
his FSO and has no ongoing need for it. The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(e) (the
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or
otherwise invalidated) applies. On balance, Applicant has mitigated the security
concerns raised by the Government’s information.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline C. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 30 years old and
presumed to be a mature, responsible adult. He is a well-educated product of the
Canadian education system, but received a post-graduate degree from a U.S.
university. At age 4, he moved with his parents to Canada. But Applicant has always
had ties to the U.S. through his U.S.-citizen mother and her extended family. All of his
assets and professional interests are in the U.S. His earlier reluctance to relinquish his
Canadian passport was likely due to inexperience with the security significance of his
10 See footnote 5, supra.
6
circumstances. He since has surrendered his Canadian passport. A fair and
commonsense assessment10 of all available information shows Applicant has mitigated
the security concerns raised by the Government’s information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
