1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-01521
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Gary L. Rigney, Esq.    
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows Applicant is a
former federal employee who has a 30-year history of drug abuse (marijuana), much of
it taking place while he held a security clearance. He made deliberately false statements
in 2004, when he denied using illegal drugs in response to questions on a security
clearance application. His drug abuse came to light in 2006, when he tested positive for
marijuana during a routine drug test as an employee of the Defense Department. As a
result, he resigned in lieu of termination. Since then, he obtained treatment and has not
used marijuana since April 2006. He has not used alcohol, which he also abused, since
August 2007, except for a one-time slip in 2010. He regularly attends group meetings of
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), volunteers in his community, and has a good employment
record. Even though he presented substantial evidence of reform and rehabilitation, it is
outweighed by his long-term history of drug abuse and making false statements during
the security-clearance process. Taken together, these matters continue to undermine
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.17; Tr. 10–14. 2
2
his trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. Accordingly, as explained below, this
case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on March 26,1
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it sets forth the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline E for personal conduct. The SOR also recommended that the case
be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether to deny or revoke Applicant’s
security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. In his Answer, Applicant
admitted all allegations and provided a brief explanation in mitigation. His admissions
are incorporated into the findings of fact below. The case was assigned to a judge July
2, 2010. The case was reassigned to me September 7, 2010. The hearing took place
September 16, 2010. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received September 27, 2010.
Procedural Matters 
At the hearing, the SOR was amended on my own motion to add a second
paragraph citing Guideline H for drug involvement and subparagraph 2.a as follows:
Those matters as set forth in subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h.  I took this2
action because those matters are explicitly covered under the drug involvement
guideline. There were no objections or requests for additional time by the parties. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 53-year-old former federal employee who is seeking a security
clearance for a consulting job with a federal contractor. His educational background
includes a bachelor’s degree in business administration. He was married for more than
20 years until a recent divorce. He has two adult children, a son and a daughter, from
the marriage. 
 
 Exhibits B–K; Tr. 90–102 (witness testimony). 3
 Tr. 80–89 (testimony of minister). 4
 Tr. 68–80. 5
 Exhibit 2. 6
 Exhibit 6 at 3. 7
 Tr. 66–67. 8
3
Applicant’s employment history includes a 25-year period working for the federal
government that ended in 2006, when he resigned in lieu of termination. He worked
primarily in the field of accounting, rising over the years from his initial position as a
clerk typist (pay grade GS-3) to senior-level accountant position for the Defense
Department (pay grade GS-15). He was a stellar employee with a record of outstanding
duty performance.  Since resigning in 2006, his employment history includes a brief3
period of unemployment, a job as an administrative assistant at a church,  and working4
as a laborer for two different firms. He is currently employed as a customer-service
associate for a large grocery store. His duties grant him access to large amounts of
cash and other financial matters. He has a good employment record at the store as
verified by the store manager.  Applicant has had no absenteeism or indications of5
substance abuse while employed there, and the store manager considers him a
trustworthy employee.   
Applicant has a 30-year history of drug abuse (marijuana), much of it taking place
while he held a security clearance as a federal employee. He used marijuana in social
situations, with coworkers after work hours, and with his wife who was a regular user of
marijuana. As such, he made deliberately false statements in 2004, when he denied
using illegal drugs in response to questions on a  security clearance application.  His6
drug abuse came to light in April 2006, when he tested positive for marijuana during a
routine drug test as an employee of the Defense Department. As a result, he resigned in
lieu of termination. 
Applicant then obtained treatment and he received a diagnosis of alcohol
dependence and marijuana dependence in early remission.  He has not used marijuana7
since April 2006. He has not used alcohol, which he also abused, since August 2007,
except for a one-time slip in 2010.  He regularly attends group meetings of Alcoholics8
Anonymous (AA) and  volunteers in his community. He also has the support of family
members who live in the local community. He has periodic contact and communications
with his ex-wife, but he does not know if she continues to use marijuana. He no longer
associates with anyone who uses marijuana.     
 Exhibit 1. 9
 Exhibit 1 at 47 of 52. 10
 Exhibit 3.11
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to12
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
4
Applicant truthfully disclosed his marijuana use in March 2008, when completing
a security clearance application for the consulting job.  He made the following9
comments to explain his marijuana use:
I have experienced a long term addiction to alcohol and marijuana which
resulted in several negative consequences including: loss of security
clearance in April 2006; filing of bankruptcy in July 2006; contributed to the
legal separation [now divorce] of myself and my wife in July 2006 and
negative health issues. I also have experienced depression/anxiety and
have seen a psychiatrist and counselors to treat these illnesses. I have
taken SSRI’s (antidepressants) to treat these illnesses. I currently have a
strong 12 step program in Alcoholics Anonymous (AA); see my
psychiatrist and counselor regularly and all my illnesses are currently in
remission. I have sustained my recovery and understand that I will
continue in AA on a weekly basis to prevent relapse. I am stable and
present no security risk.    10
Applicant also provided extensive and detailed information about his marijuana
use, the circumstances surrounding his resignation from federal employment, and other
matters in September 2008, when he was interviewed during the background
investigation.  At the hearing, Applicant continued to acknowledge and admit his long-11
term history of marijuana use and he did not attempt to minimize it. I found his testimony
to be credible and worthy of belief. 
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As12
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
 484 U.S. at 531.13
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 14
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 15
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.17
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.18
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.19
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 20
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).21
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.22
5
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt13
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An14
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  15
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting16
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An17
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate18
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme19
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.20
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.21
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it22
 AG ¶ 15. 23
 AG ¶ 24. 24
6
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
The personal conduct and drug involvement matters are discussed together
because the SOR allegations are factually interrelated or connected. Under Guideline E
for personal conduct, the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into doubt
due to false statements and credible adverse information that may not be enough to
support action under any other guideline. The overall concern under Guideline E is:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  23
And under Guideline H for drug involvement, the overall concern is: 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises concerns about a person’s ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.24
Under both guidelines, I have considered the following disqualifying conditions:
¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
¶ 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the
person's personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in
another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or
that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve
as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or
intelligence service or other group;
7
¶ 25(a) any drug abuse;
¶ 25(b) testing positive for illegal drug use;
¶ 25(c) illegal drug possession, . . . ; 
¶ 25(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; or
¶ 25(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical
social worker who is a staff member or a recognized drug treatment
program; and 
¶ 25(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
Likewise, under both guidelines, I have considered the following mitigating
conditions:
¶ 17(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such
behavior is unlikely to recur;
¶ 17(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;
¶ 26(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such
as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were
used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation; and 
¶ 26(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program,
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional.
 Applicant has a 30-year history of drug abuse, much of it taking place while he
held a security clearance as a federal employee. He made deliberately false statements
in 2004, when he denied using illegal drugs in response to questions on a security
 Exhibit 2. 25
 In 1986, President Ronald Reagan issued Executive Order 12564, which established a drug-free workplace26
for the federal government. It provided, among other things, that (1) federal employees are required to refrain
from the use of illegal drugs; (2) the use of illegal drugs by federal employees, whether on or off duty, is
contrary to the efficiency of the service, and (3) persons who use illegal drugs are not suitable for federal
employment.
 AG ¶ 2(e)(1). 27
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).28
8
clearance application.  He has had negative consequences due to his drug abuse25
(marital problems, financial problems, and job loss). Since resigning from federal
employment in 2006, he has done a remarkably good job at addressing his substance
abuse and otherwise stabilizing his life, to include active participation in AA and steady
employment in which he excels and enjoys. He appears to be well on his way to a life of
abstinence from both marijuana and alcohol. For those efforts, he deserves substantial
credit in mitigation.   
Nevertheless, Applicant brought these problems on himself by engaging in illegal
behavior (possession and use of marijuana) he knew or should have known was
prohibited and at odds with federal employment and holding a security clearance.  His26
drug abuse was reckless and a major breach of trust. He also engaged in deceit by
making false statements on his 2004 security clearance application. And he did not
voluntarily report his drug abuse before his 2006 positive drug test.   27
Misconduct has consequences, and sometimes those consequences last a long
time. That is the situation here. Even though Applicant presented substantial evidence
of reform and rehabilitation, it is outweighed by his long-term history of drug abuse and
making false statements during the security-clearance process. Taken together, these
matters continue to undermine his trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in a
security-clearance context.      
To conclude, the evidence as a whole justifies current doubts about his
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-consistent
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this
conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s28
favorable evidence. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a
favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against Applicant. 
9
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.h: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.          
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
