 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05110 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 3, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 2, 2010. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on July 27, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
August 19, 2010. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A through C at the 
hearing. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. 
Applicant submitted AE D through H, which were admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s post-hearing memorandum was marked HE II. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 26, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer on a part-time basis since 2000. He performs security duties. He is 
a high school graduate. He is single, but twice divorced. He has children from both 
previous marriages, three from his first marriage (all adults) and two from his second 
marriage for whom he is currently paying child support. He holds a secret security 
clearance.1  
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts. The debts were listed on credit reports 
obtained on March 14, 2009, July 13, 2009, November 3, 2009, June 29, 2010, and 
August 13, 2010. In his answer, Applicant denied owing the debts alleged in SOR.2  
 
 Several events contributed to Applicant’s financial problems. In 2004, his divorce 
affected his ability to pay his debts. In 2005, he had an accident that left him with 
sciatica nerve damage. In 2008, he was laid off from his computer position that paid him 
$85,000 per year. He was left with his part-time security position that paid him about 
$35,000 per year. He hired a bankruptcy attorney to seek Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
protection. The attorney will not file the petition until Applicant pays the full retainer 
amount. As of the date of the hearing, Applicant was still paying monthly installments on 
the attorney’s fee.3  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is for 2008 state income tax in the amount of 
$2,743. Applicant pays on this debt through a payroll deduction from his wages. He also 
admitted that he has not paid his 2009 state income taxes and he is seeking an 
extension to file and pay his 2008 and 2009 federal taxes. These latter issues 
(nonpayment of 2009 state income tax and 2008-2009 federal income taxes), are not 
alleged in the SOR and therefore will only be considered as part of the whole-person 
analysis.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a rental car collection account in the amount of $1,136. 
Applicant damaged a rental car that his insurance was supposed to cover but did not. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 7-8, 29-3, 48-49. 
 
2 GE 3-7. 
 
3 Tr. at 25, 39, 62-63, AE A, F. 
 
4 Tr. at 36, 54-57;GE 7; AE E. 
 
 
3 
 
He could not pay the amount on his own. He has included this amount in his bankruptcy 
petition.5   
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d are collections on consumer debts for 
$25 and $1,213, respectively. Applicant admitted these debts and included both debts in 
his bankruptcy petition.6 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is a medical collection debt for $1,001. Applicant 
was not aware of what this debt was for, but included it in his bankruptcy petition.7 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g are credit card debts for $8,763 and 
$4,296, respectively. Applicant admitted these debts and included both in his 
bankruptcy petition.8 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is a child support account debt for $14,310. This 
child support obligation was for the three children from Applicant’s first marriage. He 
presented documentation showing that child support obligation was satisfied.9  
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j are collections resulting from vehicle 
repossessions for $6,869 and $9,156, respectively. Applicant admitted these debts and 
included both in his bankruptcy petition.10 
 
 Applicant presented several character letters from friends and coworkers. They 
attest to his work with his church and his integrity, good judgment, leadership, 
dedication, and dependability. Applicant also has a stellar reputation in the community 
for all his positive contributions.11   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 37-38; GE 7; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. at 40-42; GE 7; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 42; GE 4; AE A. 
 
8 Tr. at 43; GE 7; AE A. 
 
9 Tr. at 48-50; GE 7; AE D. 
 
10 Tr. at 44-47; GE 3; AE A. 
 
11 AE B, G-H. 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to satisfy his obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s recent debts are recent, numerous, and there is no indication that 
they will not recur. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant experienced some personal set backs such as a divorce, medical 
problems, and loss of a job. As a result, he was unable to meet his financial obligations. 
These qualify as conditions that were outside his control. However, the second prong of 
this mitigating condition requires that Applicant acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant failed to act responsibly. The only action Applicant pursued to 
resolve his debts was seeking bankruptcy relief. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 The only evidence of financial counseling is Applicant’s seeking bankruptcy relief. 
Even this action is incomplete because Applicant has not finished paying the necessary 
 
6 
 
attorney fees to start the bankruptcy filing. Additionally, seeking Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
relief is not a good-faith effort to repay his debts.12 Applicant showed proof of payments 
on the debts listed on SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.h. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are applicable to 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.h.  
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
                                                          
12 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
Applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the Applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an Applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
I considered Applicant’s years of service to his employer. I also considered the 
character letters of support for him, including his contributions to the community. I also 
found Applicant to be honest and candid about his finances. I believe he is sincere 
about getting his finances in order. Although he satisfied his child support obligation to 
his first set of children and his state income tax debt is coming out of his monthly 
paycheck, he has done very little to resolve the remaining debts. He is seeking a 
bankruptcy action to extricate himself from his debt situation. He also has unresolved 
tax issues. His past financial track record reflects a troublesome financial history that 
causes me to question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.g:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.h:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
