                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05331 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations, and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
On May 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
B, E, and F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 28, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 6, 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
2010. At his request, and to accommodate Applicant’s schedule, the hearing was 
scheduled for December 6, 2010. Applicant requested the hearing date be changed to 
accommodate his schedule, and it was postponed until December 23, 2010. The 
original Notice of Hearing was issued on October 19, 2010. An amended Notice of 
Hearing was issued on November 16, 2010. I convened the hearing as rescheduled on 
December 23, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. Applicant did 
not object and they were admitted. The Government requested administrative notice be 
taken of certain facts relating to Iran as contained in Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II. I 
took administrative notice of the documents. Applicant and two witnesses testified. 
Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through J, which were admitted without objections. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 4, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶ 3.a, which he 
denied. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 57 years old. He came to the United States as a student in 1979 
from Iran. He attended college in the United States and received a bachelor’s degree in 
1986. In 2001, he earned a master’s degree. He became a naturalized United States 
citizen in 1989. He married in 1980, and has two children from the marriage who were 
born in the United States. They are 23 and 27 years old, and live in the United States. 
He divorced in 1989 and remarried in 2001. His wife was born in Kazakhstan and 
became a naturalized United States citizen in 2008. He has a son from the marriage 
who is six years old.1 
 
From 1979 through 1989, Applicant returned to Iran once in 1988. He was not yet 
a United States citizen and used his Iranian passport to travel. After becoming a United 
States citizen he traveled to Iran in 1999, 2004, and in 2007, when his mother passed 
away. He explained that as the eldest son he was obligated to return. He obtained an 
Iranian passport through the Pakistani embassy because the United States does not 
have diplomatic relations with Iran. He could not obtain entry to Iran on a United States 
passport because he was born in Iran. Applicant’s Iranian passport was issued in July 
1997 and expired in 2003. He requested the passport be extended and an extension 
was granted from October 12, 2003 through June 7, 2008. He stated he requested the 
extension so he could visit his sick mother. Applicant used his United States passport 
for all other foreign travel. He advised the appropriate personnel at his place of 
employment when he traveled to Iran.2  
 
Applicant has three sisters, one brother, three brothers-in-law, and a sister-in-law 
who are citizens and residents of Iran. He maintains contact with his siblings in Iran. 
Since his mother passed away, he talks with his older sister by telephone on average 
1 Tr. 125-134; GE 1; AE H. 
 
2 Tr. 35-37, 134-145; GE 7; AE F. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
about once every three weeks. Before that they spoke about once every week to two 
weeks. He talks to his other siblings by telephone about every four to six weeks. He 
usually contacts them. He has not seen his siblings since his mother’s funeral in 2007, 
when he returned to Iran. He stated he has no plans to return to Iran to visit them, but 
they all may make arrangements to visit each other in another country. He has a second 
brother who lives in Ecuador and they may meet in another country if his Iranian siblings 
can obtain visas.3  
 
Applicant stated that his older sister left Iran after the revolution in 1979 and 
moved to Spain. She was married and had three children. She returned to Iran about a 
year later because she had difficulty finding work and adapting to the Spanish culture. 
She had worked as an engineer prior to leaving Iran. When she returned, the new 
Iranian government wanted her to work for them. Applicant explained that his sister 
used the excuse that she was the mother of three children and wanted to stay home, 
but she actually told Applicant that the reason was that she did not want to work for the 
new Government. His sister’s husband was an accountant for a private company for a 
period of time and is now a financial consultant. He does not have any government ties. 
Their children are grown and do not have government ties.4  
 
Applicant’s younger sister is a homemaker and her husband works for a factory 
and is the manager of operations. They have two grown children who work. They do not 
have ties to the Government.5  
 
Applicant’s other younger sister is married and has one grown child. She is a 
homemaker and her husband works in private industry. None of them have ties to the 
Government.6  
 
Applicant has two brothers, one who lives in Ecuador and would like to move to 
the United States, but has not been able to obtain a visa. He has no contact with the 
Government of Iran. He is married and has two children. Applicant’s other brother lives 
in Iran. He used to work for a factory, but now works in the clothing business. He is 
married and has two children. He does not have ties with the Iranian Government.7  
 
Applicant noted that he had an uncle who was a general in the Iranian Army prior 
to the 1979 revolution. He stated his uncle was apprehended after the revolution, jailed, 
and later executed by the Iranian government. He had a second uncle who was also a 
3 Tr. 120-126. 
 
4 Tr. 120-125, 151-157; GE 6. 
 
5 Tr. 152, 157-165. 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Tr. 166-168. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
general in the Army who was also jailed. He was detained for about 20 years and 
eventually released. He later died of natural causes.8 
 
Applicant does not own any property in Iran. He estimated he had about $4,000 
to $5,000 in his savings account in the United States. He has no other assets in the 
United States. He owns a home, but it has very little equity in it because he refinanced it 
and took money out of it. He used the money to pay back taxes he owed to the federal 
government and state government. He also used his savings to pay these debts.9  
 
Applicant completed his security clearance application (SCA) on July 9, 2008. He 
was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management in July 
and August 2008. In October 2009, he certified his responses and summary were 
accurate.10 Question 17 of the SCA asked if in the last seven years Applicant had an 
active passport that was issued by a foreign government. He responded “no” and failed 
to disclose he had an active passport issued by the Iranian Government in July 1998 
that was renewed and expired in July 2008. Applicant denied he intentionally failed to 
disclose this information. His explanation was that he did not complete the SCA and that 
it was a mistake by the person who did it for him. He said they worked together 
completing the SCA and it was faster for her to do it. He admitted that he certified the 
information was accurate and took responsibility for the mistake, but stated he did not 
intend to mislead. He stated he did not attempt to conceal his Iranian heritage and 
disclosed the required information to his government employer when he traveled to Iran. 
In addition, he stated that his security manager had a copy of his Iranian passport when 
he completed the SCA.11  
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to business problems. He started a 
business in the 1990s that grew fast. He had difficulty collecting payments from his 
customers and had problems with labor relations and unions. A general contractor who 
owed him money would not pay. He was unable to pay taxes owed to the federal 
government. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) advised a general contractor who 
owed Applicant money to forward the payment to them directly rather than Applicant. He 
resolved the debt to the IRS.12  
 
Applicant was the sole owner of the business. He was the personal guarantor on 
many of the business debts. The business filed Chapter 11 bankruptcy. When the 
business was protected under the bankruptcy, the creditors sought payment from 
Applicant in his personal capacity. He filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 1997 and his 
debts were discharged in September 1997. He estimated the amount discharged in his 
8 Tr. 170-171. 
 
9 Tr. 85-90, 168. 
 
10 GE 1, 6, 7. 
 
11 Tr. 35-37, 49-52, 134-150. 
 
12 Tr. 35-39, 109-119. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
personal capacity as the guarantor on his business expenses was around $200,000. He 
admitted that a portion of the amount discharged also included personal debts, 
exclusive from his business. He did not recall how much of the debts were personal.13  
 
Applicant started another business and was doing well. In 2007, he was able to 
pay his creditors. He obtained a line of credit to purchase a building for his company. He 
and his wife are the sole owners of the property, and he is the president of his company. 
His company has one employee and himself. In 2009, due to the economic downturn, 
he could not obtain enough contracts for work, which affected his ability to pay his 
debts. He also attributed some of his financial problems to a dispute he had with a 
contractor and delays in the government funding certain contracts. He believes the 
contractor violated the contract thereby affecting his ability to receive work.14  
 
Applicant began using credit cards to pay for the company’s expenses. He 
attempted to negotiate with his creditors to accept a settlement, but was unsuccessful. 
In January 2009, Applicant sent letters to his creditors requesting they reduce the 
interest and the balance he owed. He stated he contacted a consultant in August 2010, 
to help him settle his debts. He believes the consultant will be able to settle the debts 
and their compensation is a 10% commission on the amount of the reduction of the 
debt. He provided a copy of the agreement, and acknowledged that neither party has 
signed it. He believes the consultant will be negotiating settlements for his debts in the 
near future. He estimated his debts became delinquent in late 2008 and 2009. He has 
not made payments on any of the delinquent debts. However, he stated that he has 
customer accounts that owe him money, he anticipated his cash flow will be increasing, 
and he will be able to pay the settlement amounts. He is confident that he will be able to 
settle and pay the debts. He has attempted to reduce his expenses by renting spaces in 
the office building he owns. In addition, in September 2009, his wife began working for 
the federal government, which has helped ease their financial problems.15 
 
The creditor in SOR ¶ 1.h ($6,286) agreed to settle the debt. Applicant made one 
payment, but could not afford to fulfill the terms of the settlement and requested the 
creditor reduce the amount of the payments. The creditor would not renegotiate the 
settlement, so Applicant ceased making further payments.16  
 
Applicant owes approximately $50,891 in delinquent debts. He attributed about 
70% of it to business debt and the rest as personal debt. The debts remain unpaid and 
unresolved.17 
13 Tr. 38-39, 109-119. 
 
14 Tr. 40-45, 58-71, 76-84, 103-108; AE J. 
 
15 Tr. 41-49, 58-73, 76-84, 93-103; AE D, I. 
 
16 Tr. 91-93; AE D. 
 
17 Tr. 90. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s employee testified on his behalf. She is the project coordinator for his 
business and confirmed that the company has received favorable appraisals for their 
work. She also confirmed that there is a dispute with a government contractor regarding 
the work they are to receive. Because of the dispute they have not received the amount 
of work they anticipated and feel justified in receiving in accordance with their contract. 
Instead of subcontracting the work to Applicant, the company is doing the work in-
house. Applicant’s company is aggressively pursuing work and has reduced their 
expenses. She believes the company’s financial problems are the result of a declining 
economy. She is responsible for the bookkeeping of the business and stated that 
Applicant rarely withdraws a salary. He pays his employee first and then the mortgage 
on the building. He primarily survives financially with his wife’s income. She believes 
Applicant is an honest and trustworthy person.18 
 
 Applicant’s office manager from his first business testified on his behalf. She has 
known Applicant since 1991. She recalled that the difficulty with his past business was 
due to clients’ failure to pay their bills and union issues. She believes Applicant is 
honest and trustworthy.19 
 
 I have considered all of the documents provided by Applicant. I have considered 
the character letters he provided. He is described as professional, friendly, helpful, 
stable, balanced, honest, and trustworthy.20 I have considered Applicant’s awards, 
letters of appreciation, and training certificates.21 
 
IRAN22 
 
 Iran is an Islamic Republic where the ultimate political authority is vested in a 
religious authority. The United States has not had diplomatic ties or consular relations 
with Iran since their revolution in 1979. In 2009, President Obama continued the 1979 
declaration of a National Emergency with respect to Iran due to the extraordinary threat 
to national security, foreign policy, and the United States economy.  
 
 The United States objects to Iran’s sponsorship of terrorism, its nuclear 
ambitions, and its violations of human rights. Iran has been designated a State Sponsor 
of Terrorism since 1984. It is noted that Iran has been involved in planning and 
providing financial support for terrorism activity throughout the Middle East, Europe, and 
Central Asia. Iran has provided aid in the form of weapons, training, and funding of 
internationally known terrorist organizations to include HAMAS and other Palestinian 
terrorist groups, Lebanese Hezbollah, Iraq-based militants, and Taliban fighters in 
18 Tr. 175-187. 
 
19 Tr. 189-195. 
 
20 AE G. 
 
21 Tr. 52-62; AE H, I. 
 
22 HE II  
 
7 
 
 
Afghanistan. Iran also trains, equips, and funds Iraqi Shi’a militant groups and refused 
to bring to justice senior al Qaida members it has detained. 
 
 Iran flouts the United Nations Security Council restrictions on its nuclear 
program. Iran has repeatedly been in non-compliance with the International Atomic 
Energy Agency program’s international obligations. Iran continues to enrich uranium. It 
has been constructing in secret until September 2009, a second uranium enrichment 
plant. The United States Director or National Intelligence testified that Iran is technically 
capable of producing enough highly enriched uranium for a weapon in the next few 
years and would likely choose a missile as its preferred delivery of a nuclear weapon. 
Iran has the largest inventory of ballistic missiles in the Middle East.  
 
 Iran has sought to illegally obtain U.S. military equipment and other sensitive 
technology. It is also enhancing its focus on U.S. intelligence activities and relies on 
foreign intelligence partnerships to extend its capabilities.  
 
 The Iranian Government has a poor human rights record, which has denigrated 
through the past year, after the disputed June 2010 elections. Security forces were 
implicated in custodial deaths and killings of election protesters. Human rights abuses 
are extensive, including: politically motivated violence, such as torture, beatings, and 
rape; severe officially sanctioned punishments, including death by stoning, amputation, 
and flogging; arbitrary arrest and detentions; and lack of judicial independence and of a 
fair trial.  
 
 The Iranian Government does not recognize dual nationality and will treat U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals solely as Iranian citizens. The United States cannot provide 
protection or routine consular relations to American citizens in Iran. Iranian authorities 
have prevented a number of American citizens, who have traveled to Iran for personal 
reasons, from leaving, and in some cases have detained, interrogated, and imprisoned 
them.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
8 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
9 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has seven delinquent debts totaling approximately $50,891 that are 
unpaid. Applicant had approximately $200,000 in business and personal debt 
discharged in bankruptcy in 1997. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise these 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has seven delinquent debts that are unpaid and unresolved at this 
time. Although he has contacted a consultant to assist him in the future, there has been 
no progress at this point. I find that AG ¶ 20(a) is not established because Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are numerous and ongoing. Based on Applicant’s past history, I am 
not confident that the problem is unlikely to recur.  
 
 
10 
 
 
 Applicant had his business and personal debts discharged in bankruptcy in 1997. 
He attributes his current financial problems to customers who are unwilling to pay, 
contractual issues, and the downturn of the economy. To some extent these problems 
were beyond his control. For AG ¶ 20(b) to be fully applicable, Applicant must have 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Delays in government funding are not 
unusual. Applicant obtained a line of credit to purchase a building, the economy slowed 
down, and he had difficulty collecting from some clients. These are not necessarily 
unusual or unanticipated issues when running a business. Applicant chose to use credit 
cards to stay solvent, but was unable to maintain the payments and they are delinquent. 
Based on his past history, I find his actions were not responsible.  
 
 Applicant stated he has contacted a consultant to assist him in resolving his debt. 
However, he does not have a signed contract and has not instituted a repayment plan. 
There is no evidence he has received financial counseling. He negotiated a payment 
plan with one creditor, made one payment, and was unable to complete the payments. 
He has not made payments to any of his other delinquent creditors. He is hopeful that 
his business will resume and they will begin to receive payments from clients. At this 
point, I cannot conclude that he has made good-faith efforts to repay his creditors or 
that there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control. 
Therefore, I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant has not disputed the 
delinquent debts, so I find AG ¶ 21 (e) does not apply.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and especially considered the following:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 
11 
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s three sisters, brother, and their spouses are all citizens and residents 
of Iran. Applicant maintains regular contact with all of them. He last visited them when 
he returned to Iran in 2007 for his mother’s funeral. They hope to arrange a reunion in 
another country, if possible.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, even if only one relative 
lives in a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor 
alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result 
in the compromise of classified information.  
 
Most nations with substantial military establishments seek classified and sensitive 
information from the United States because it has the largest military industrial complex 
and most advanced military establishment in the world. Iranian officials could potentially 
seek or accept classified information from U.S. citizens with access to this material.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious 
problem in the country with crime or terrorism. Iran and the United States do not have 
diplomatic ties. Iran sponsors terrorism. Its human rights record is dismal. It operates in 
defiance of the United Nations. It unlawfully detains U.S. citizens and treats dual 
nationals as Iranian citizens. The hostile relationship between Iran and the United 
States creates a heavy burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his 
relationship with his siblings does not pose a security risk and he is not in a position to 
be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and his siblings and their 
spouses. With Iran’s dismal human rights record, its state-sponsored terrorism, its illegal 
detention of American citizens, its enhanced focus on obtaining military equipment and 
intelligence, it is conceivable they would target their own citizens or former citizens living 
in the United States in an attempt to gather valuable information from the United States. 
Applicant’s contact and relationship with his siblings and their spouses create a conflict 
of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a possible security 
concern about his desire to help his relatives in Iran, potentially by providing classified 
information. The Government produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts 
with his relatives in Iran to raise the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) applies.  
 
 
12 
 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s family in Iran does not work for the Iranian Government or military, 
and there is no evidence that they have been approached or threatened by the 
Government. There is no evidence that they are currently engaged in activities which 
would bring attention to them or that they or other Iranian elements are aware that 
Applicant might have access to classified information. However, Applicant has an 
emotional bond with his siblings in Iran. He maintains regular and frequent contact with 
them. Although Applicant’s close relationships with his siblings in Iran is an important 
positive reflection on his character, the same close relationships raise security concerns 
for possible foreign influence. Applicant’s contact with his relatives makes them 
vulnerable to coercion and non-coercive measures by Iran because they live there. The 
Iranian Government could exert pressure on them. Because the Iranian Government 
has a history of human rights violations, they are more likely to use improper and/or 
illegal means to obtain classified information through Applicant’s siblings and their 
spouses. Under the circumstances, I find AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) do not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
13 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
Applicant denied he intentionally failed to disclose he possessed an Iranian 
passport in the past seven years. It is somewhat troubling that Applicant admitted that it 
was the person who was assisting him that mistakenly did not disclose he had an 
Iranian passport. Nevertheless, Applicant admitted he was responsible for ensuring the 
information was correct and he signed the application affirming its accuracy. I note that 
Applicant disclosed his trip to Iran in his SCA and to appropriate officials. I find there is 
insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant deliberately failed to disclose accurate 
information on his SCA and conclude the above disqualifying condition does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 1989. His children were all born in 
the United States and live here. Applicant’s siblings and their spouses are citizens and 
residents of Iran. He has one brother who resides in Ecuador. He maintains close family 
contacts with his siblings in Iran. Due to the nature of the relationship between the 
 
14 
 
 
United States and Iran, I cannot conclude that it is unlikely Applicant or his family 
members would be placed in a position to have to choose between their family and the 
interests of the United States. Applicant has a heavy burden of persuasion under 
Guideline B and has failed to meet it. Applicant had his business and personal debts 
discharged in bankruptcy in 1997. He has delinquent debts that he attributed to his 
latest business problems. His delinquent debts remain unpaid and unresolved. Although 
he is hopeful that he will be able to repay his creditors in the near future, that has not 
yet transpired, and it is too soon to conclude his finances are no longer a security 
concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Personal Conduct, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under the guidelines for 
Financial Considerations and Foreign Influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:   Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
