                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-02423 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns under Guideline J (criminal conduct). 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 20, 2008, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 18, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 7, 2010, and DOHA received his answer on 
May 12, 2010. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 31, 2010. The 
case was assigned to me on September 1, 2010. On September 20, 2010, DOHA 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
issued a notice of hearing scheduling the case for October 12, 2010. On September 24, 
2010, DOHA issued an amended notice of hearing rescheduling the case for October 
13, 2010. The hearing was convened as rescheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through W, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. Applicant also 
called one witness, his wife, to testify on his behalf. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on October 21, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted and denied in part the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.a., and admitted 
the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c. His admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old security systems engineer, who has worked for a 
defense contractor since October 2008. (GE 1, Tr. 25, 34.) He seeks a security 
clearance, which is a condition of his continued employment. (AE T, Tr. 32-33, 35.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1982. He attended college from 
September 1984 to May 1987. He resumed his studies at a different college from 
September 1994 to May 1997 and was awarded a Bachelor of Science Degree in 
Business Information Systems. (GE 1, GE 4, AE N, Tr. 34.) Applicant was previously 
married from March 1986 to May 1991. That marriage ended by divorce. He remarried 
in February 1996. Applicant has two children from his previous marriage, a 23-year-old 
son and a 20-year-old daughter. He has a 7-year-old son from his current marriage. (GE 
1, Tr. 15-16, 25.) Applicant’s wife works in “sales” and earns $146,000 per year. 
Applicant earns $130,000 per year. Their combined total annual income is $276,000. 
(Tr. 15-16.) 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Security concerns were identified based on Applicant’s two alcohol-related 
driving convictions in 2005 and 2008, and a 2009 driving infraction.  
 
In 2005, Applicant was convicted of driving with a blood alcohol level of .08 or 
more. He was sentenced to pay a $1,500 fine, to complete six days of community 
service, and to three years probation. Applicant was at a company party and had too 
much to drink. (SOR Response, GE 2, GE 5, Tr. 38-44.) 
 
In 2008, Applicant was convicted of driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol 
and refusal to submit to a breathalyzer. He was sentenced to pay a $1,600 fine and to 
complete ten days of community service. Recognizing that he had too much to drink 
after being out with a friend at a local sports bar, Applicant called his spouse to pick him 
up, but was unable to reach her. His back-up plan was to call a cab if he did not hear 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
back from his wife. Applicant then fell asleep in his car. He was awoken by a police 
officer, who ordered him to perform a field sobriety test, which he failed. Applicant never 
drove his car, but was arrested for DUI because his “key was in the ignition.” (SOR 
Response, GE 2, GE 4, GE 5, Tr. 27-30.) 
 
In 2009, Applicant was convicted of a driving infraction for driving without a 
license. He was sentenced to pay a $250 fine. Applicant testified that he was unaware 
that his license was suspended because of conflicting information he received from his 
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). (SOR Response, GE 6, Tr. 49-56.) 
 
Applicant’s long-time family physician stated by letter dated October 4, 2010 that 
he “does not suffer from alcohol abuse or dependence.” (AE J, AE W, Tr. 30.) Since his 
latest DUI arrest, Applicant has made significant lifestyle changes. Although not 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent, he has chosen to live a life of sobriety. He explained 
that he does not want alcohol to affect his life or reputation adversely again. He attends 
Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) Meetings on a regular basis, has changed his acquaintances 
to those who are “family-focused,” and has become more involved with his church. His 
church involvement includes a greater spiritual involvement as well as a personal 
involvement with church-related activities. (GE 4, Tr. 30-32, 44-46.) 
 
Although not required, Applicant took the additional step to demonstrate his 
commitment to a life of sobriety by executing a statement of intent to never use alcohol 
again with the understanding that failure to abide by his commitment would result in the 
automatic revocation of his security clearance. (AE O, Tr. 33.) Applicant also attended 
an alcohol education program consisting of 12 hours of education classes, 54 hours of 
process groups, 26 15-minute interviews, and 3 transition or re-entry self-help groups. 
He completed that program on December 7, 2010. (AE I, Tr. 18-19, 30.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s wife confirmed that he no longer drinks. After Applicant’s second DUI 
arrest, she informed him that if he did not quit drinking, she would leave him. She stated 
that she is “very proud of him” because he no longer drinks. She confirmed Applicant’s 
involvement in their church and the fact that he has consulted their family doctor about 
his drinking. Applicant’s wife testified convincingly that his life changes are permanent. 
(Tr. 14-25.) 
 
Applicant submitted ten reference letters from a cross-section of individuals to 
include long-time family friends, family members, past and present co-workers, and 
associates from church. The collective sense of these letters supports the notion that 
Applicant is an individual who is trustworthy, hard-working, a dedicated family man, and 
a productive member of society. (AE A – H, P - Q.) Applicant’s 2009 work performance 
evaluation reflects a record of solid performance. (AE R.) Applicant is also a member of 
his employer-sponsored Leadership Development Organization, a member of the 
American Society for Quality, and was awarded the Certified Information Systems 
Security Professional credential in May 2005. (AE K – N.) 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each Guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These Guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 list two potentially disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
  The Government established through Applicant’s admissions and evidence 
presented that AGs ¶¶ 31(a) and 30(c) apply. “Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant 
or maintenance of a security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 07-00852 at 3 (App. Bd. May 
27, 2008) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990)). Because the 
Government has met its initial burden concerning criminal conduct security concerns, 
the burden now shifts to Applicant to establish any appropriate mitigating conditions. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 
32(d) apply. Applicant’s most recent alcohol-related arrest was two years ago. 
Noteworthy is the fact that his most recent DUI arrest in September 2008 indicates that 
he did not drive while intoxicated. Recognizing he was intoxicated, Applicant made the 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
decision not to drive, but had the misfortune of being in his vehicle asleep with his keys 
in the ignition while intoxicated when discovered by a police officer. His first 
documented DUI occurred over five years ago in 2005. 
Applicant presented credible evidence of actions taken to overcome his problem, 
and established he abstains from alcohol and submitted evidence he is not alcohol 
dependent. He is remorseful for his behavior and has initiated lifestyle changes. His 
performance appraisals, certificates of achievement, awards, and the statements from 
company representatives show Applicant’s work behavior has not been indicative of his 
having an alcohol problem. He is viewed as a valuable employee, who is reliable, 
dependable, and professional. His sobriety is supported by company officials, by his 
friends and family, who know him personally and professionally, and by his own credible 
testimony.  
 
The passage of time also plays a role in this analysis. Applicant has not been 
involved in any subsequent alcohol-related incident since his 2008 DUI. At his hearing, 
Applicant acknowledged the problems misuse of alcohol has caused him, demonstrated 
remorse, and a steadfast commitment to continue lifestyle changes. His 2009 driving 
infraction does not rise to the level of a misdemeanor. Applicant had a reasonable basis 
to believe that his license was not suspended because of the conflicting information 
provided by his DMV. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances established by the record evidence. The 
administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case.  
 
Applicant has been willing to do whatever is necessary to maintain his sobriety, 
including regularly attending AA meetings even though he was not diagnosed as alcohol 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
dependent or as an alcohol abuser. He has family support, stable employment, and a 
strong work ethic. His participation in an alcohol education program and support 
mechanisms in place consisting of his family, friends, church, and work should ensure 
his continued success. Applicant demonstrated the correct attitude and commitment to 
being sober. Considering his demeanor and testimony, I believe Applicant has learned 
from his mistakes, and his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. In sum, I find 
Applicant has presented sufficient evidence of rehabilitation.  
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set forth 
in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole person factors”1 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified 
information.  
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
   
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.c.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
1See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
