                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 09-04353 
 SSN: ---------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 20, 2008, Applicant submitted her electronic Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86)(e-QIP). On May 19, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 21, 2010. She answered the 
SOR in writing on May 28, 2010, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. DOHA received the request on June 1, 2010. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on June 29, 2010, and I received the case assignment on June 30, 2010. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 16, 2010, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on August 24, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 6, which 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits 
A through J into evidence without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on September 3, 2010. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until 
September 24, 2010, to submit additional matters.  No additional documents were 
submitted. The record closed on September 24, 2010. Based upon a review of the case 
file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
At the hearing, Applicant indicated she received verbal notice of the hearing date 
from Department Counsel at least 15 days before the hearing date. I advised Applicant 
of her right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days written notice before the hearing. 
Applicant affirmatively waived her right to 15 days written notice. (Tr. 13)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.j, and 1.g of the SOR, with explanations. She denied the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.d, 1.h, and 1.i of the SOR. Her admissions are accepted as factual 
findings. She also provided additional information to support her request for eligibility for 
a security clearance.   
 
Applicant is 25 years old and married. She works in the office of a transport 
company. She has not had a security clearance previously. Her income is about 
$26,000 annually. Her net income monthly is $1,620. From that money she pays 
expenses of $1,120. She pays an additional $500 monthly to her father on her 
repayment plan for loans from him with which she repaid her car loan and two loans 
listed in the SOR (subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i). (Tr. 17-25, 31, 36, 39, 48-50, 56, 80; 
Exhibits 1-6, B, C, H, I) 
 
 Applicant has nine delinquent loans or debts listed in the SOR totaling $36,516. 
She claims she now owes only $28,627 plus her five student loans, which are not 
included in the SOR and are not delinquent. Her parents took out her student loans for 
her college education. She completed three years of that education. Applicant decided 
to repay the three largest debts first and then pay the smaller ones. She has four 
delinquent debts over $4,500 each. Applicant repaid three of the nine SOR-listed loans 
for a total of $12,714 based on the amounts listed in the SOR. Two of the three debts 
paid were large amount debts. She repaid the $90 owed to a medical provider 
(subparagraph 1.a). It was for an annual medical checkup. This debt was paid in cash in 
2010. Applicant also paid the $4,968 debt owed on a credit card (subparagraph 1.h) by 
borrowing the money from her father and now repays it to him at the $500 monthly rate. 
She also paid the $7,666 debt to the same bank credit card (subparagraph 1.i) in the 
 
3 
 
 
same manner. Deducting $12,714 from the $36,516 results in a balance owed of 
$23,802. (Tr. 48-60, 80, 87; Exhibits 2-6, H, I) 
 
 Applicant owes the remaining six delinquent debts listed in the SOR 
(subparagraphs 1.b to 1.g). The debts in order are $295 (subparagraph 1.b) owed to a 
medical provider for an annual wellness checkup. Next, the $9,619 (subparagraph 1.c) 
owed to a medical provider for treatment she obtained when her lungs were burnt when 
she inhaled hot oil and spent four days in the hospital. She did not have health 
insurance. The next debt is $429 (subparagraph 1.d) owed to a bank. Applicant thought 
this debt was part of a former auto loan she repaid but it is a separate debt. She paid 
the debt down to $429 from about $2,000. The next debt listed in the SOR is $1,887 
owed to a cell telephone company (subparagraph 1.e). Applicant incurred this debt 
when she was on disability from November 2008 to March 2009 for a broken back. Her 
income dropped substantially and she was not able to repay this debt. She attempted to 
make installment payments but the telephone company wants a lump sum payment of 
the total debt. Applicant owes a lender $10,864 (subparagraph 1.f) on a car loan she 
incurred when she purchased a car for a friend. He did not make the payments and she 
returned the car to the lender. The car was sold but the lender wants her to pay the 
balance on the loan. The final delinquent debt is $698 owed to a television service 
provider (subparagraph 1.g). Applicant purchased equipment from a store so she would 
have television service in her truck cab as she and her husband drove the tractor trailer 
trucks for her employer. The television service took the position she did not purchase 
the equipment but only rented it. The debt is for the rental payments. None of these 
debts are resolved at the present time. (Tr. 40-60, 80; Exhibits 2-6, D-I) 
 
 Applicant drove a truck for a while until she went on disability in 2008. Now she 
works as a dispatcher for her employer. In her profit and loss statements for 2008 and 
2009 she showed losses for both years. Her income taxes are paid for all years. (Tr. 27-
37, 50; Exhibits 2-6, D-I)  
 
 Applicant incurred her delinquent debts between 2003 and 2007. She has not 
incurred any delinquent debt later than 2007. Applicant had a difficult time in college 
and was taken advantage of financially by several people she thought were her friends. 
They used her credit and money for themselves, leaving her with the debts. Applicant 
testified credibly about her maturing process and her past problems. Applicant recently 
got her job that has a specified income. She made herself a “fixed spending” plan and 
changed her life to make it more stable. (Tr. 26, 34, 86; Exhibits 2-6) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated $36,516 in nine delinquent debts from 2003 to 2007. Six 
debts remain unpaid due to her lack of income. These debts are listed in the SOR.   
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Two conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant was on disability for five months in 2008 and 2009. Her income was 
reduced. She has had some problems in life with her financial management and former 
friends who refused to repay her for monies they borrowed. The car purchase in 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
subparagraph 1.f is an example of that conduct, along with some of the credit card 
debts. Her lack of health insurance and medical problems caused two large debts to 
occur. Applicant has not incurred additional long-term debt since 2007. She lives on 
$1,620 monthly and testified credibly about her budget and repayment procedures to 
her father for loans. She has acted responsibly in view of her limited income and 
employment opportunities. AG ¶ 20 (b) has some application.  
 
Applicant paid three debts of the nine listed in the SOR. She paid two of the three 
debts with money borrowed from her father. She is repaying that loan at the rate of 
$500 monthly. The debts repaid total about $12,600. At her rate of repayment Applicant 
should discharge her obligation to her father on those debts in two years. That rate of 
repayment is reasonable. She stated an intention of repaying her six remaining debts 
from her income or by borrowing from her father after she completes payment on the 
first three debts she paid. AG ¶ 20 (d) has partial application because she made a 
good-faith effort to repay two large debts using a practical lending source and 
procedure.  
 
 As the Appeal Board has ruled concerning the successful mitigation of security 
concerns arising from financial considerations, A[a]n applicant is not required to show 
that [she] has completely paid off [her] indebtedness, only that [she] has established a 
reasonable plan to resolve [her] debts and has >taken significant actions to implement 
that plan.=@1 
 
 Two recent Appeal Board decisions illustrate the analysis for applying AG ¶¶ 
20(a) and 20(b). In ISCR Case No. 09-08533, the Applicant had $41,000 in delinquent 
credit card debt and defaulted on a home loan generating a $162,000 delinquent debt. 
Id. at 2. She filed for bankruptcy the same month the Administrative Judge issued her 
decision. Id. at 1-2. The Applicant in ISCR Case No. 09-08533 was recently divorced, 
had been unemployed for 10 months, and had childcare responsibilities. Her former 
husband was inconsistent in his payment of child support. The Appeal Board 
determined that AG ¶ 20(a) was “clearly applicable (debt occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and [the debt] does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)” even though that 
Applicant’s debts were unresolved at the time the Administrative Judge’s decision was 
issued. The Appeal Board also decided that the record evidence raised the applicability 
of AG ¶ 20(b) because of the absence of evidence2 of irresponsible behavior, poor 
judgment, unreliability, or lack of trustworthiness. Id. at 4.   
  
 Similarly, in ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) the Appeal 
Board addressed a situation where an Applicant who had been sporadically 
 1ISCR Case No. 06-12930 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2008) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006)).  
2 Applicant has the burden of proving the applicability of any mitigating conditions, and the burden 
to disprove a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.  
 
 
7 
 
 
unemployed lacked the ability to pay his creditors noting that “it will be a long time at 
best before he has paid” all of his creditors. The Applicant was living on unemployment 
compensation at the time of his hearing. The Appeal Board explained that such a 
circumstance was not necessarily a bar to having access to classified information 
stating: 
 
 However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not 
required to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts 
immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which 
evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009).  The Applicant in ISCR 
Case No. 08-06567 used his limited resources to (1) resolve some of his debts; (2) had 
a repayment plan for the remaining debts; and (3) took “reasonable actions to effectuate 
that plan.” Id. The Appeal Board remanded the Administrative Judge’s decision because 
it did not “articulate a satisfactory explanation for his conclusions,” emphasizing the 
Administrative Judge did “not explain what he believes that Applicant could or should 
have done under the circumstances that he has not already done to rectify his poor 
financial condition, or why the approach taken by Applicant was not “responsible” in light 
of his limited circumstances.” Id.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young adult, who has 
had financial problems in college and subsequently in obtaining gainful employment. 
She permitted her former friends to borrow money from her without repaying it. She did 
not have health insurance when she suffered injury. Her truck driving job did not earn 
her enough money to resolve her delinquent debts. Her profit and loss statements 
showed for two recent years she incurred losses. Since 2009 Applicant has changed 
her behavior and now acts responsibly regarding her income and debts. These are 
permanent behavior changes as she matures and becomes more experienced in 
financial matters. She now has an office position as a dispatcher that pays more money 
on a regular pay schedule and allows her to resolve her debts, albeit slowly. There is no 
likelihood her former conduct will recur based on the experiences she has had in the 
past five years. There is no potential for coercion, duress, pressure, or exploitation on 
her debts because she can borrow money from her father with which to resolve the 
debts. There is no other derogatory information in the record that raised a security 
concern.   
 
I give Applicant substantial credit for admitting responsibility for six of nine SOR 
debts, only denying the debts she paid.  Applicant did not accrue more delinquent 
debts. Instead she made adjustments in her lifestyle, reduced her expenses, and paid 
down some of her delinquent debts with her father’s assistance.  
 
I am confident she will keep her promise to continue resolving the SOR debts 
and avoid future delinquent debt. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the 
whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted 
that the concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes 
evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an 
applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid 
off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his 
financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (”Available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
 
9 
 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations 
omitted).  
 
Applicant is an intelligent person, and she understands how to budget and what 
she needs to do to establish and maintain her financial responsibility. She is using a 
plan based on paying her larger debts first before paying the smaller debts later to 
resolve her debts and establish her financial responsibility. There is simply no reason 
not to trust her. Moreover, she has established a “meaningful track record” of debt re-
payment. She is an asset to her employer or she would not have retained her 
employment during the process of deciding whether her security clearance should be 
granted.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a to 1.i:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
