 
 
 
 
1
                                                              
                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case: 09-02662 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Brian Bannon, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record as a whole, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On March 27, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 17, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2
 After having been granted an extension, Applicant answered the SOR in writing 
on March 30, 2010, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On May 
13, 2010, he filed a Supplemental Answer to the SOR. On August 17, 2010, DOHA 
assigned the case to me and issued a Notice of Hearing on August 23, 2010, setting the 
hearing for October 6, 2010. On that date, Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 13 were 
admitted into evidence by a stipulation by the parties. At the hearing, Applicant filed a 
Second Supplemental Answer to the SOR. He testified and called four witnesses. 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through H were admitted into evidence by a stipulation of the 
parties. AE I through T were admitted for purposes of administrative notice without 
objection. AE U was marked for identification purposes only. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 19, 2010.1  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to India. The request and the attached documents pertinent to 
India are included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE 1) along with 15 attachments. 
The documents were admitted over Applicant’s objections. (Tr. 6.) The facts 
administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and pertinent to 
India, and not subject to reasonable dispute. The facts administratively noticed are set 
out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his initial Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.g of the SOR and provided explanations. Those answers are incorporated 
into these findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He was born in India. After completing high school, he 
graduated from an Indian university with a bachelor’s degree in engineering in 1976. He 
worked in a family owned business for a year and then immigrated to the United States 
in 1978, at the age of 29. He then started a full-time position with a U.S. company while 
pursuing a master’s degree in business administration. In 1981, he completed that 
degree. In December 1984, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. He relinquished his 
Indian passport after he became a U.S. citizen because he was “no longer a citizen of 
India.” (Tr. 92-93.) In 1985, he completed a second bachelor’s degree in computer 
science. He subsequently worked for two more U.S. companies before forming a 
company in March 1995 that provides services to companies and the federal 
government. (Tr. 47-52.) He has held a secret security clearance since approximately 
1984.  
 
                                            
1ISCR Case: 09-03068 references the Decision pertinent to Applicant’s spouse’s security 
clearance application.  
 
 
 
 
3
 In June 1982, Applicant married his wife in India. She was born there and 
immigrated to the United States in 1983. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in June 
2006. (Answer.) She owns her own consulting company. Applicant and his wife have 
three children, all of whom were born in the United States. Two have graduated from 
college and one lives at home. (Answer.) 
 
 Both of Applicant’s parents were born and raised in India. They are deceased. 
His mother died in 1997 and his father died in 2009. His father lived in the United States 
from 1975 to 1982 and taught business courses at a U.S. college. He subsequently 
returned to India and became an elected member of the national Indian parliament from 
1992 to 1998. In 2008, he returned to the United States to reside with Applicant until the 
early summer of 2009 when he returned to India before his death. His father had U.S. 
permanent resident alien status in 2008 when he was in the United States.  (Tr. 66; GE 
11.)  
 
 Applicant is one of five children, all born in India. Applicant’s brother is deceased. 
(Tr. 115.) His eldest sister and her husband are citizens and residents of India. They 
have U.S. permanent resident alien status and intend to move here in another year to 
be with their children. Both are retired and spend time in the United States. They were 
in the United States at the time of this hearing. (Tr. 72, 87.) His sister was a teacher and 
his brother-in-law was employed with the Indian Government in the field of agriculture. 
He visits or calls this sister and brother-in-law sporadically. (Tr. 70-72.) One of 
Applicant’s sisters is a naturalized U.K. citizen and resides in Scotland. (GE 11.) 
Another sister is a naturalized U.S. citizen, residing in the United States with her 
husband and family. He is estranged from this sister. (Tr. 115.) His sister-in-law, who 
was married to his brother, is a citizen and resident of India. She is a homemaker. He 
has little communication with her. He has seen her six or seven times over the past 30 
years. (Tr. 69; Answer.) 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law were born in India. His mother-in-law 
died in the summer of 2010. (Tr. 103.)  His father-in-law is an elected member of an 
Indian state assembly. He has visited his father-in-law about 15 times since leaving 
India in 1977. Applicant sometimes makes a courtesy telephone call to him, if he travels 
to another part of the country. (Tr. 59-60.) Applicant does not discuss business or 
politics with his father-in-law. (Answer.) His father-in-law “loves America.” (Tr. 63.)  
 
 Applicant has traveled to India approximately three times each year between 
2002 and 2006. He traveled there four times in 2007 and twice in 2008. (Answer.) Some 
of the trips have been for the purpose of seeing his father and family, some have been 
for business purposes, and others have been for a combination of personal and 
business purposes. (Tr. 78-79.) Applicant notifies his facility security officer of his travel 
plans to India. (Tr. 123; GE 11.)  While in India, no one has ever questioned him about 
his work as a federal contractor. (Tr. 86) He would notify his facility security officer if he 
encountered an inappropriate inquiry. (Tr. 97.) He also returned for his father’s funeral 
in the summer of 2009 and his mother-in-law’s funeral in the summer of 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
4
 Applicant’s estimated net worth in the United States is approximately $4 million. 
(Tr. 76.) Applicant and his wife have approximately $2,000 deposited in an Indian bank 
account that was opened in 1982 when they were married. They have used the account 
while traveling in the India. (GE 11.) He intends to close it. (Tr. 77.) There is no 
information that he has a police record or derogatory financial records. He has never 
been fired from a job. He has never been arrested. He has never used illegal drugs or 
been involved in an alcohol-related incident. (GE 1.) There is no evidence in the record 
that Applicant breached any security policies or procedures while holding a security 
clearance for more than 20 years. 
 
 Applicant is active in community activities and a volunteer for several local 
charities. His company has donated equipment to the city’s high school. He has 
encouraged handicapped individuals to join his company and provided special training 
for them. (Tr. 89.) He participates in professional organizations pertinent to his training 
and background. (Tr. 89.)  
 
 Three witnesses testified on behalf of Applicant. All have security clearances. A 
former director for a federal agency testified. He retired from the U.S. Navy after 27 
years. He has known Applicant for 20 years and worked with him over that period of 
time. He has no reason to believe that Applicant would be disloyal to the United States 
or that he prefers India to the United States. (Tr. 23-28.) The second witness was a 
senior executive with a federal agency for many years. He was an active duty officer 
with the U.S. Army from 1975 to 1984.  He has known Applicant since 1989. He initially 
met him in a supervisory role, and subsequently became a personal friend. He has 
never had a reason to question Applicant’s trustworthiness. (Tr. 29-32.) He stated that 
Applicant is “overjoyed . . .  at being a U.S. citizen.” (Tr. 33.)  The third witness is a 
retired Senior Chief Storekeeper in the Navy. He has known Applicant as an employee 
since 1998. He has no reason to question Applicant’s loyalty to the United States. (Tr. 
33-38.) 
 
 In addition to the three witnesses, Applicant submitted character letters from six 
other people, most of whom hold security clearances. All of them have worked with 
Applicant in some capacity. The letters strongly support Applicant’s efforts to secure a 
security clearance and assert his integrity and trustworthiness. (AE A, C, D, F, H, and I.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant credibly and sincerely expressed pride in his U.S. 
citizenship. He has no intention to return to India to live. He has decided that “America 
is our home . . . and this is the country we belong to. This is the country we live in. I 
have full loyalty to the United States of America.” (Tr. 97.) 
 
India 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts: According to its constitution, 
India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic. It is a multiparty, federal, 
parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament and a population of approximately 
1.1 billion.  
 
 
 
 
5
 
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but numerous 
serious problems remain. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial 
killings of persons in custody, disappearances, torture, and rape. The lack of 
accountability permeated the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere 
in which human rights violations went unpunished. A number of violent attacks were 
committed in recent years by separatist and terrorist groups. In November 2008, the 
terrorists coordinated an attack at a hotel in Mumbai frequented by westerners.    
 
The United States recognizes India as key to its strategic interests and has 
sought to strengthen its relationship with it. The two countries are the world’s largest 
democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by representative 
government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, in fighting 
terrorism, and in creating a strategically stable Asia. However, differences over India’s 
nuclear weapons program and pace of economic reform exist. There are also concerns 
about India’s relations with Iran, including their increasing cooperation with the Iranian 
military. 
 
There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of 
U.S. restricted, dual–use technology to India, including technology and equipment which 
were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Foreign 
government and private entities, including intelligence organizations and security 
services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology. In March 
2008, an American businessman pleaded guilty to conspiring to illegally export 
technology to entities in India.  
 
The United States views India as a growing world power with which it shares 
common strategic interests. There is a strong partnership between the two countries 
and they are expected to continue addressing differences and shaping a dynamic and 
collaborative future. The U.S. and India seek to elevate the strategic partnership further 
to include cooperation in counter-terrorism, defense, education, and joint democracy 
promotion. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶¶ 
 
 
 
 
6
2(b) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG & 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
 
 
 
 
7
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern, which may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;2  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, and father-in-law are 
citizens and residents of India. India is the world’s largest democracy, works 
closely with the United States on many matters, shares common strategic 
interests, and generally respects the rights of its citizens. But it also continues to 
have some human rights issues, has been victimized by terrorist attacks, and 
restricted, dual use technology has been illegally exported to India. This creates 
a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) have 
been raised by the evidence. 
 
 Applicant has $2,000 deposited into an account in an Indian bank. That amount 
represents an insignificant percentage of his net worth and is insufficient to raise a 
security concern under AG ¶ 7(e).  
 
  After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation. Three 
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
conditions raised in this case: 
                                            
2 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
8
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon that government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious 
problem in the country with crime or terrorism. India’s close, friendly relationship to the 
United States, its adherences to human rights standards and rule of law, its leading role 
in the suppression of terrorists, and the lack of evidence that India uses coercive tactics 
in its espionage targeting of the United States, all tend to negate a concern that 
Appellant’s relationships with his sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, and father-in-law 
who is a state representative rather than a national figure, pose a security risk.  Hence, 
AG ¶ 8(a) has some application.   
 
Applicant produced significant evidence establishing AG ¶ 8(b).  He has lived in 
the United States since 1977. His wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen and his children were 
born in this country. He attended graduate school at two U.S. colleges. He participates 
in various community and professional organizations. He has strong financial ties to the 
United States through his business and investments, which total $4 million. Other than a 
small bank account, he does not own any property in India. He has held a security 
clearance for more than 20 years without question or incident. His colleagues, who work 
in close contact with him, consider him to be trustworthy and loyal to the United States.  
He considers himself to be a citizen of the United States and no longer a citizen of India. 
Based on those deep and longstanding connections and loyalties to the United States, 
he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not have application to the security concerns raised as a result of 
his Applicant’s contacts with his four family members residing in India because they are 
 
 
 
 
9
sufficiently frequent and cannot be considered casual. He has visited all of them over 
the years and maintained some, albeit limited, communication with them.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The Appeal Board 
requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal 
loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his 
[or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; and many others 
raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 
2007).   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Although this case pertains to Guideline 
B, the security concerns do not arise from any questionable conduct by Applicant, but 
rather from circumstances that warrant further analysis. Applicant is a 55-year old man, 
who was born in India, but has lived in the United States for 33 years and has been a 
naturalized U.S. citizen since 1984. His spouse has been living in the United States 
since 1983 and is a naturalized U.S. citizen. His three children were born in the United 
States. He has a successful business in the United States and assets worth $4 million. 
His ties to the United States are much stronger than his ties to family members living in 
India. There is no evidence that he has ever taken any action that could cause potential 
harm to the United States. He takes his loyalty to the United States seriously, and 
relinquished his Indian passport after he became a U.S. citizen. Since approximately 
1984, he has held a security clearance without incident. He notifies his security officer 
when he travels to India. His coworkers and employees assess him as ethical and 
responsible, praising his loyalty to the United States. He expressed a deep allegiance to 
the United States and gave credible testimony in response to the security concerns 
alleged in this case.  
 
 
 
 
 
10
I weighed the totality of Applicant’s family ties to India, a strong U.S. ally, against 
his ties to the United States. Since 2002, he has traveled to India with some frequency, 
but not always for the purpose of visiting his family. Both parents are now deceased. 
Applicant has limited interactions with his father-in-law, who is a state politician and 
loves the United States. His sister and brother-in-law in-laws spend time in the United 
States with their children and intend to move here within a year. He has limited contact 
with his sister-in-law. Applicant’s position, assets, and established connections in the 
United States make economic coercion through any of the four relatives living in India, 
extremely unlikely. In the event such a conflict arose, I am persuaded that Applicant 
would resolve the conflict of interest in favor of the United States. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:            For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                             
         
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
