 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04023 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco J. Mendez, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jon L. Roberts, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
The evidence fails to establish some disqualifying conduct and Applicant 
mitigated the remaining security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 16, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 13, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 7, 2010. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on September 10, 2010, with a hearing date of September 
15, 2010. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 12, which were admitted. Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, presented three witnesses, and offered 
exhibits (AE) A-K that were admitted without any objections. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 21, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted ¶¶ 1.a,1.b, and 1.c (partially). 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. He is married and has no children. He has worked for 
his current employer, a defense contractor, since February 2009. Prior to his current 
employment, he worked for defense contractor since 2007. He holds a Master of Arts 
degree and has received advanced language training. He served in the Navy from 1997 
to 2001 and held a top secret security clearance. He received an honorable discharge.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) traveling to Cuba in 2001 
without the proper authorization from the United States government (SOR ¶ 1.a); (2) 
traveling to western China (Tibet) in 2002 without obtaining a permit (SOR ¶ 1.b); and, 
(3) involvement in an altercation while traveling in Egypt in 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.c). 
  
 Applicant admits to traveling to Cuba without proper authorization. In 2001, he 
had just separated from the Navy and traveled to South America. While he was in 
Honduras he decided to go to Cuba. He stayed in Cuba approximately two weeks. 
While he was there he did tourist activities. He did not make any Cuban contacts and he 
does not have any financial dealings with Cuba. He knows that current United States 
policy requires permission to enter Cuba and he agrees with that policy. He does not 
plan on going back to Cuba. He has always reported his travels to Cuba on all security 
clearance paperwork. He understands that he was wrong by not first obtaining official 
United States government approval before entering Cuba.2  
 
 In May 2002, Applicant visited China on vacation. He also went to western China, 
otherwise known as Tibet. Although he did not have a permit when he entered Tibet, he 
followed the advice of a widely known tour book called, Lonely Planet: Tibet. Pursuant 
to that advice, he entered Tibet, and voluntarily appeared at a police station where he 
advised the police of his presence. He then obtained a permit to enter Tibet after paying 
a $40 “fine”. He was not arrested or otherwise detained by Chinese officials during his 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 93-99; GE 1; AE G. 
 
2 Tr. at 100-104; GE 2, 5, 10, 12. 
 
 
3 
 
 
stay in Tibet. He has never concealed his trip to Tibet and always listed it on his security 
clearance questionnaire forms.3 
 
 From June 2003 to June 2004, Applicant was studying abroad in Egypt. While 
there, he was at a bar and asked a girl to dance with him. She refused and walked 
away. At that time, someone approached the Applicant from behind and hit him. The bar 
was on a rooftop and Applicant almost fell off. Applicant was beaten by his attacker. 
During this altercation, the attacker’s cell phone fell out of his pocket. Applicant picked it 
up. Later, after the parties were separated, Applicant left the bar and was out by the 
ocean when he remembered the cell phone. He took it out of his pocket and threw it in 
the ocean. The next day, Applicant was contacted by the local police who asked him to 
pay for a new cell phone for the attacker. Applicant did so. He was not arrested. He 
threw the cell phone away because he was angry for being hit without provocation. He 
has never concealed this information on any security clearance related form.4  
 
 Several coworkers/supervisors submitted character letters for the Applicant. 
Additionally, three witnesses testified to Applicant’s good character. Applicant is held in 
high regard for his professional work and his reputation for honesty, trustworthiness, 
and dependability.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 106-112; Answer to SOR, exhibit 15, p. 12; AE H. 
 
4 Tr. at 114-117; Answer to SOR, exhibit 15, p. 11. 
 
5 Tr. at 43-87; Answer to SOR. 
 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
 
5 
 
 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information; and  
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
Applicant’s admitted unauthorized trip to Cuba calls into question his judgment 
and created a vulnerability to exploitation. AG ¶ 16(d) and (e) apply to SOR ¶ 1a. 
I found Applicant’s explanation concerning his entry into Tibet credible. He 
entered the area based upon the advice of a travel book. The Chinese officials treated 
his entry as a routine administrative matter with no other ramifications. Therefore, the 
evidence does not support any personal conduct disqualifying conditions for SOR ¶ 1.b 
and AG ¶¶ 16(d) and (e) do not apply. 
I also found Applicant’s testimony credible concerning the events surrounding the 
bar fight allegation stated in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant was an innocent bystander when he 
was attacked by someone in the bar. Certainly, he should have used better judgment 
when he threw the attacker’s cell phone in the ocean, but his reaction was 
understandable under the circumstances. AG ¶¶ 16(d) and (e) do not apply to SOR ¶ 
1.c. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 Applicant’s trip to Cuba was nine years ago. He made no Cuban contacts and he 
understands the United States policy towards Cuba. He does not plan on returning to 
Cuba. I find that sufficient time has passed to mitigate his actions. Additionally, because 
Applicant was forthright about his travels, his reliability, trustworthiness and good 
judgment are not in question. AG ¶ 17(c) applies.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 No disqualifying conditions were established by the government concerning SOR 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, nonetheless, I also find, that had a disqualifying condition been 
established for those allegations, sufficient time has passed to mitigate the conduct 
alleged. Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment are not in question.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s age when 
he engaged in the conduct, and the passage of time since the acts. Additionally, I 
considered his military service, his current work environment and the strong 
recommendation he received from coworkers regarding Applicant’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. Applicant met his burden and provided sufficient evidence to mitigate 
the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    For APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
