                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02780 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On September 13, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 9, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 8, 2010. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on November 16, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on December 8, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified on his own behalf 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
and offered Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 14, 2010.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 At the conclusion of the hearing, Department Counsel amended the SOR and 
added allegation ¶ 1.k. It is marked as HE I. Applicant admitted the allegation and 
exercised his right to continue the hearing. The hearing was postponed until January 5, 
2011. At the second hearing, Applicant explained that he did not have the documents 
he intended to offer because he had difficulty printing them due to a computer glitch. He 
requested to submit the documents after the hearing. I granted his request. Upon 
receipt, I marked the documents as AE B. They are copies of federal income tax return 
forms for tax years 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, and 2004. Also included was a mail receipt 
to show the tax return was mailed on January 6, 2011. Department Counsel provided a 
written response that was marked as HE II. She did not object to AE B, and the 
documents were admitted. DOHA received the supplemental transcript (Tr. II) on 
January 11, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR and amended SOR. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He graduated from college in 1982 and earned a 
bachelor’s degree. He has pursued other studies, but did not earn a degree. He married 
in 2003, and divorced in 2005. He has no children. He worked for a federal agency for 
15 years before his employment was terminated. He was told he could resign or be 
terminated. He chose to resign. He explained he was never given a written document 
with an explanation for why he was terminated. He stated he received a performance 
appraisal that he refused to sign. He concluded this action was a mistake. He stated he 
left the agency because he had a personality conflict with his supervisor and chose to 
resign before he was dismissed. He explained he always wanted to be in the private 
sector working in international commerce and trade and decided it was a good time to 
explore this new line of work.1  
 
 Applicant left federal employment in July 2002. From July 2002 to February 
2005, he was intentionally unemployed with no source of income. He spent the time 
studying for licensing examinations in the insurance field. His wife worked part-time. He 
did not seek other employment. In 2003, he withdrew all of his savings from his Thrift 
Savings Plan (TSP) account. The amount was $169,335. He used the TSP money, 
other savings, and money from a home equity loan he acquired when he refinanced his 
home to live on. He estimated he had about $200,000 in liquid assets at that time. 
When he withdrew the money from his TSP, it created a tax consequence. The IRS 
1 Tr. 22-37. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
withheld $33,000 for partial payment of the taxes. Applicant still owed approximately 
$16,000 in additional taxes and withdrawal penalties. He failed to file his 2002 and 2003 
federal income tax returns and has not made any payments toward this debt since its 
withdrawal eight years ago. Applicant also failed to file his state income tax returns for 
tax years 2002 and 2003. He did not file his 2003 income tax returns because he was 
unsure of how much money he would need in the future. He was aware he still owed for 
the TSP withdrawal. He has not prepared the state tax returns for these years. The 
federal tax debt has increased to $45,434, due to interest and penalties, and remains 
unpaid. Applicant hired a tax service firm in 2005, and contacted them again about a 
week before his hearing. He has not taken action on resolving his tax debt because he 
does not have the money.2  
 
 At the second hearing, Applicant provided copies of his 2000 to 2004 tax returns 
that he prepared after his initial hearing. He admitted he owes money to the IRS, but 
has not paid it. He admitted that he knew he had income in 2002 and 2003, and was 
required to file returns and pay his taxes, but he did not. Although some of the taxes he 
owed for withdrawing his TSP savings were withheld by the IRS, Applicant knew he 
owed additional tax, but did not pay it. He estimated that he spent around $50,000 to 
renovate his home during this time period. He admitted it was poor judgment the way he 
handled his finances during this period. He also used the TSP money and savings for 
living expenses. He explained he did not file returns and pay his taxes because he 
believed that his business would become successful and then it would be easier to pay 
the debts.3  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to a failed personal business. 
Applicant began working in the private sector insurance industry in 2005. He received 
commission-based compensation and failed to meet the threshold requirement for the 
business. He worked for four different companies during this period, but could not meet 
their minimum requirement for sales. He stated that from 2004 to 2009 his earnings 
were below the poverty line. He estimated he earned about $9,000 to $10,000 
annually.4  
 
While he was married, his wife was working as a part-time nanny. Beginning in 
2002, Applicant lived off the money he withdrew from his TSP, savings, and the home 
equity loan. It is now depleted. He estimated he presently has about $200-$300 in cash. 
He now works for a federal contractor on a part-time basis, which is somewhat sporadic. 
He has not been offered a full-time job. He attempts to work odd jobs to supplement his 
income. He does not have sufficient income to pay his delinquent debts.5 
 
2 Tr. 17, 37-56. 
 
3 Id. 
 
4 Tr. 17, 21, 68-73. 
 
5 Tr. 18, 27-29, 56. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c are judgments. He admitted the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.c and provided documented proof that it was satisfied.6 The judgments in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a (debt to homeowners association for $537) and 1.b (credit card debt for $2,646) 
are not paid.7  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e (electric company for $569), 1.f (medical for $88), 1.g 
(credit card for $1,451), 1.h (telephone services for $158), 1.i (credit card for $3,382), 
and 1.j (cable services for $235) are unpaid. Applicant stated that some of the debts 
were for services at his house before it was foreclosed. The others are for credit cards 
he used to pay for necessities.8  
 
 Applicant believes he has a solid financial record of paying his bills prior to 
leaving employment with the federal government. It has only been since he left federal 
employment in 2002 that he began experiencing financial problems. He stated he 
attempted to pay all of his monthly bills on time and live frugally. He admitted he is not 
presently in a position to pay his outstanding debts. Applicant included, as part of the 
supplemental information and documents, copies of federal income tax return forms for 
2000 and 2001. Applicant was working for a federal agency during these years. He did 
not file or pay his taxes for these years. His failure to file his 2000 and 2001 federal 
income tax returns when he was working full-time for a federal agency contradicts his 
testimony that he did not file due to his issues with his business. He has not had any 
financial counseling.9 
 
Applicant provided information that, in 1996, he was part of a group that received 
a meritorious unit citation from the government agency where he worked. Applicant 
noted that he maintains confidentiality agreements with his prior employer and he has 
never violated them.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
6 AE B. 
 
7 Tr. 59-60. 
 
8 Tr. 61-66. 
 
9 Tr. II; 4-17, 67. I have not considered Applicant’s failure to file returns and pay his 2000 and 2001 
federal income taxes and his failure to file returns and pay his 2000 to 2004 state income taxes,  for 
disqualifying purposes. I have considered these matters when analyzing Applicant’s credibility, overall 
financial history, mitigation, and in my “whole-person” analysis.  
 
10 Tr. 21-22. 
 
5 
 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
6 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant has at least $54,500 in delinquent debts that are unpaid or unresolved. 
He admitted he failed to file his federal and state income tax returns for 2002 and 2003. 
I find there is sufficient evidence to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant provided documentation to show he paid the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.c. I 
find AG ¶ 20(e) applies to this debt. Applicant has other delinquent judgments, debts, 
and a large tax lien that he has not paid or resolved. Applicant failed to file his federal 
income tax returns for 2002 and 2003, until January 6, 2011, after his hearing. He has 
not filed his state income tax returns for 2002 and 2003. Applicant repeatedly used poor 
judgment in managing his finances. He was aware that he was required to file his 
income tax returns, but did not address them until after his hearing. The taxes remain 
unpaid, as are his other delinquent debts. I find that AG ¶ 20(a) is not established 
because Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, ongoing, and not the result of 
circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
 Applicant chose to withdraw all of his TSP money; he chose to obtain a home 
equity loan and renovate his house while he was not earning an income; he chose not 
to work during a more than two-year period. He made poor financial decisions. He 
incurred a significant tax debt when he withdrew all of his TSP savings. All of these 
circumstances were within his control. Applicant had difficulty working in a business 
where earnings were based on commissions. Despite his repeated inability to earn an 
income to meet his expenses, he failed to take responsible action. His testimony was 
not credible or believable regarding his financial mishaps and tax problems. Applicant 
failed to file his federal and state income tax returns during years he was fully employed 
by a federal agency. He continued this pattern for years and it was not until after his 
security clearance hearing that he actually submitted the required income tax forms for 
his federal income taxes. He has not done so for his state income tax returns. He has 
not paid any of his other delinquent judgments or debts. Applicant’s financial problems 
were caused by his actions and he did not act responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling, that the problem is 
being resolved, or that Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant 
worked for a federal agency for 15 years. He decided to use all of his financial 
resources to live on while he studied for more than two years to obtain licenses. He 
claimed he paid all of his bills while he was employed by the federal agency. That is not 
accurate because he failed to file returns or pay his federal and state income taxes 
when he was working. Applicant failed to address the tax consequences of withdrawing 
money from his TSP. He chose not to work during this time period. He used a home 
equity loan to renovate his house. Applicant’s testimony was not credible. Applicant 
repeatedly made poor decisions which raises serious questions about his judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
