                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00374 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
D, Sexual Behavior, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On August 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline D, 
Sexual Behavior, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 20, 2010, and provided a second 
statement on September 15, 2010. He elected to have his case decided on the written 
record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
(FORM) on November 4, 2010. He received the FORM on November 15, 2010. 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the FORM and submitted an 
additional statement. Department Counsel did not object, and I have considered the 
additional statement. The case was assigned to me on December 10, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, but denied he deliberately falsified 
his security clearance application (SCA). After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and statements submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. He has worked for a federal contractor since June 
2008. He served in the Navy from August 1999 until his Honorable Discharge in June 
2008. He has held a Secret security clearance since 1999. He married in 2001.  
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2001 and charged with soliciting a prostitute. He pled 
guilty to a lesser charge of indecent exposure and was placed on unsupervised 
probation for three years. In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied his intention 
was to solicit a prostitute. He stated that he is a religious man who was attempting to 
“witness” to the prostitute and show her the error of her ways. The person he solicited 
was an undercover police officer.  
 
 Applicant provided a supplemental statement regarding his 2001 conviction. He 
stated:  
 
 After proven that I was part of a[n] Outreach Ministry known as [Ministry] 
sponsored by [International Ministry], that I was supporting this ministry in 
trying to reach lost souls, the Judge decided to reduce the charge from 
Soliciting an Undercover Police Officer to a lesser charge of Indecent 
Exposure. This was my first ever offense.1  
 
 I find Applicant’s statement of explanation is not credible. No corroborating 
evidence was provided to support Applicant’s assertions as to why the Judge reduced 
the charge. The question remains if Applicant was truly involved in ministry, why the 
Judge did not dismiss the charge and why he pled guilty to it. 
 
 In May 2008, Applicant noticed a female walking on the sidewalk. He stopped his 
vehicle and asked her to get into his vehicle, which she did. He offered her a ride to 
where she was going. She asked him if he was “looking for a good time.” He told her 
“yes.” He agreed to pay her $30 to perform oral sex on him. He went to an automatic 
teller machine to retrieve the money and then drove to a store’s rear parking lot. Shortly 
after he parked the vehicle the police arrived and arrested Applicant and the woman. He 
was charged with soliciting a prostitute. In June 2008, he appeared in District Court and 
1 Response to FORM dated December 1, 2010.  
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
entered a plea of Nolle Prosequi. In August 2008, he served seven days in detention 
and the charge was dismissed.  
 
 Applicant completed his SCA on December 11, 2008. In response to question 
23f, which asked if Applicant had been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any 
offense(s) in the past seven years that were not previously listed, he answered “no.” 
During his interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator he 
stated he was advised by his attorney that his records regarding his arrest and 
conviction would be expunged.  
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR he stated: 
 
 My reason for omitting these two inquiries was my lack of intelligence of 
reporting expungments given to me from legal counsel after I was 
released from containment (sic) in August of 2008. It was unclear to me at 
the moment that if you have been arrested or convicted of a criminal 
offense where the crime was reduced to a lower sentence and/or 
dismissed, that you could undergo a (sic) the process of expungment and 
your record will be cleared which I thought meant that I did not have to 
report it since the record was destroyed. It was told to me that any police 
record I had would be destroyed. The previous statement was why I 
agreed to be detained for one (1) week because the record would be 
destroyed both physically and from all databases. I asked that specific 
question and I was assured by the attorney that the record would be 
destroyed.2  
 
* * * 
 
[I]t is NOT [my] intention to hide information about my personality, 
character, or integrity. I made a possibly devastating mistake because I 
was unlearned of the expunging process. Furthermore, I understand that 
terms Sealing or Expunge are used interchangeable and that the only 
exception to none (sic) reporting is covered under the Federal Controlled 
Substance Act ordered by the court.3  
 
 Applicant explained in his answer that he was advised by his legal counsel that 
after he served his seven days of jail there would be no record of the offense. He stated: 
“I was under the impression from legal counsel at the time of filling out the SF 86 form 
that I did not have to report anything because my record was expunged.”4 Applicant 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Id. 
 
4 Item 4. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
denied intentionally falsifying his SCA. He stated that he was “misinformed in how to 
submit information on the SF 86 Form.”5  
 
 Applicant claims he did not deliberately fail to disclose his prior arrest on his 
SCA. I find there is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant deliberately falsified his 
SCA.  
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM he stated that his wife is aware of “all of his 
transgressions.” His said his neighbor witnessed his last arrest. He told a friend about 
his arrest and “everything that happened with both arrest[s].” He indicated his entire 
Navy chain of command was aware of his arrests. He stated he confessed his actions to 
the entire church where he attended and where he is currently the pastor. He did not 
provide specific information as to what details he disclosed to his family and friends. I 
did not have an opportunity to question him about these matters. 
 
 Applicant further stated in his response to the FORM that he is an upright citizen 
in his community. He helps teenagers make the right decisions. He uses his arrest as a 
teaching tool. He conducts Bible studies and holds Sunday worship services.  
 
 Applicant stated he voluntarily arranged “addictive sexual behavior” counseling 
with a “Psychiatric Counsel.” He stated that the doctor decided that there are “no 
concerns of any addictive behavior or continued advances in [Applicant’s] behavior.” 
There is no corroborating evidence to support these assertions. I did not have the 
opportunity to question Applicant about his counseling. I did not have an opportunity to 
determine a time-frame of when and how long Applicant may have attended counseling 
and if there was a diagnosis. I did not receive any mental health reports, medical 
reports, or counseling reports regarding Applicant’s counseling. I do not have any 
information that details the credentials of his counselor, and the reason for and type of 
treatment Applicant may have received. 
 
 Applicant stated the following: “Remorse is definitely in play because I admitted 
the arrest and the reason for the arrest publically and will openly talk about the arrest 
upon request.”6 I have not had an opportunity to question Applicant about what specific 
actions he is remorseful for and I have not questioned him about his repeated criminal 
sexual behavior. Despite his 2001 plea and conviction, he continues to deny his 
involvement in the offense.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
5 Id. 
 
6 Response to FORM. 
 
5 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern pertaining to sexual behavior. 
 
6 
 
 
Sexual Behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment, or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered the following as potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted;  
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2001 for soliciting a prostitute. The charge was 
reduced to indecent exposure and he pled guilty. He received three years of 
unsupervised probation. In 2008, he solicited a prostitute for oral sex. He entered a plea 
of Nolle Prosequi to the offense, received seven days detention, and the charge was 
dismissed. Both offenses occurred in public areas. I find the above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising under the sexual behavior guideline. The following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶17 are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet.  
 
  Applicant was charged on two occasions with soliciting a prostitute. The first time 
was in 2001, and the charge was reduced to indecent exposure. The second time was 
in 2008, and he served seven days detention. Because his conduct was repetitive and 
recent, I cannot find that it is unlikely to recur. Applicant was on notice after his first 
offense as to the serious nature of his actions. He again engaged in risky criminal 
 
7 
 
 
behavior in 2008. His conduct was in a public place. His statements regarding his first 
arrest are not credible. His actions cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to convince me that 
his behavior is no longer a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress. Applicant 
continues to deny his involvement in the first offense. He has not provided sufficient 
evidence to corroborate the statements he made that all of his friends and family are 
aware of his conduct. I do not know if his employer and coworkers are aware of his 
sexual behavior and criminal offenses. I find none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 31 and especially considered: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant was convicted in 2001 of indecent exposure and received three years 
unsupervised probation. In 2008, he pled Nolle Prosequi to the charge soliciting a 
prostitute and served seven days in detention. I find both of the above disqualifying 
conditions apply to these offenses. Applicant denied he deliberately falsified his SCA. I 
find there is insufficient evidence to conclude he intentionally and deliberately failed to 
disclose information on his SCA. Therefore, I find no disqualifying conditions apply to 
SOR ¶ 3.b and it will not be discussed further. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and the following potentially apply: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
 
8 
 
 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant was arrested on two occasions for sexual offenses, the first in 2001 
and the latest in 2008. He pled guilty to indecent exposure and pled Nolle Prosequi to 
soliciting a prostitute. Not enough time has elapsed since his last incident to convince 
me the conduct will not recur. His conduct casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. I find AG ¶¶ 32(a) and (c) do not apply. Applicant offered his own 
statements that he is rehabilitated and is remorseful for his conduct. However, he 
continues to dispute that he did anything wrong with regard to his 2001 conviction, for 
which he pled guilty. I do not know why he would agree to plead to a lesser charge of 
indecent exposure if he did not commit some offense, especially considering the impact 
this charge would have on his credibility in the Christian community. I do not know why 
if he was “witnessing” to the woman regarding the error of her ways, and she was a 
police officer and he was not soliciting her for other purposes, the police and 
prosecution did not dismiss the case outright. I do not know why he received three 
years of probation if he was merely trying to convince the woman that her ways were 
wrong.  
 
 Applicant did not provide any independent evidence that he attended counseling. 
He did not provide evidence as to what he admitted to his counselor and if his counselor 
made a diagnosis. He did not indicate how long he attended counseling. I did not have 
the opportunity to make a credibility determination. I was not provided any independent 
evidence other than Applicant’s statements, which were not subject to cross-
examination. Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion. I find AG ¶ 32(d) does not 
apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct.  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
9 
 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant denied he deliberately failed to disclose facts on his SCA. He stated he 
was advised by his attorney that his record was expunged and he did not have to 
disclose the information. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant 
deliberately falsified his SCA. Therefore, no disqualifying conditions apply to this 
allegation. 
 
 On two occasions, years apart, Applicant was involved with prostitutes. He pled 
guilty to a lesser offense of indecent exposure and entered a plea of Nolle Prosequi 
regarding the 2008 soliciting a prostitute charge. I find disqualifying condition AG ¶ 
16(e) applies.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for personal conduct under 
AG ¶ 17 and the following potentially apply: 
 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
 (g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with the 
rules and regulations.  
 
 The same analysis provided under the Guidelines for Sexual Behavior and 
Criminal Conduct applies under the Personal Conduct Guideline as it pertains to the 
repetitive nature of his conduct and its recency. I find AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
Applicant continues to deny his criminal behavior that occurred in 2001. He did not 
provide sufficient evidence for me to conclude he has acknowledged his behavior and 
has taken positive steps to change it. I am not convinced the conduct will not recur. He 
has not provided sufficient evidence for me to conclude he has reduced or eliminated 
his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. He has not provided sufficient 
evidence for me to conclude that he no longer is involved in criminal activity. Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
did not provide any mitigating information regarding the circumstances surrounding his 
actions of soliciting a prostitute in 2008. His repeated conduct casts doubt upon his 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and willingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. I find none of the remaining mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 33 years old, served in 
the Navy, and received an Honorable Discharge. He was convicted of two sexual 
offenses, the latest in 2008. He denies criminal involvement in the first offense, despite 
his plea of guilty. He did not provide any explanation regarding his 2008 conviction for 
soliciting a prostitute. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion and 
mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for Sexual Behavior, 
Personal Conduct, and Criminal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
11 
 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:    For Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
