 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02476 
                                                            )                                                                       
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the 
personal conduct adjudicative guideline. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on August 31, 2009. On June 25, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 26, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested that his 
case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. On October 17, 2010, the 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 7.1 By letter dated October 18, 2010, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the FORM on 
November 2, 2010. His response was due on December 2, 2010. Applicant did not file 
any additional information within the required time period. On December 23, 2010, 
DOHA assigned the case to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains one allegation of disqualifying conduct under AG E, Personal 
Conduct (SOR ¶ 1.a.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation. I 
admit Applicant’s admission as a finding of fact. (Item 1; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant is 25 years old, never married, and employed by a government 
contractor as a software engineer. He completed four years of college study and was 
awarded a bachelor’s degree in 2008. He has worked for his present employer since 
June 2008. (Item 4.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that in August 2009, Applicant was denied program access 
eligibility by another government agency because he had provided inaccurate and 
untruthful information about his past drug use and, in a polygraph examination, 
attempted to conceal drug use and other information by intentionally using breathing 
countermeasures. In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation. In 
response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided a letter, dated August 31, 2009, 
from the other government agency in which it denied him access eligibility for the 
conduct specified in SOR allegation 1.a. The letter corroborated the Government’s 
allegation. Applicant provided no evidence to rebut or mitigate the allegation. (Item 1; 
Item 5 at 4-6.) 
  
           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
1As Item 7, the Government offered for administrative notice copies of the Directive and the adjudicative 
guidelines. 
 
 
3 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
  
Analysis 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant’s personal conduct raises security concerns under AG ¶ 16(b) and AG 
¶ 16(e). AG ¶ 16(b) reads: “deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.” AG ¶ 16(e) reads, in 
pertinent part: “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging 
in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional or 
community standing . . .  .” 
 
 AG ¶¶ 17(b) and 17(e) provide conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
in this case. AG ¶ 17(b) reads: “the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or 
concealment was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual cooperated fully and 
truthfully.” AG ¶ 17(e) reads: “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”  
 
Applicant failed to provide information to establish that either AG ¶ 17(b) or AG ¶ 
17(e) is applicable to the facts in his case.   
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
5 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
Applicant requested a decision on the written record. He did not file a response 
to the FORM. The written record in this case is sparse. Moreover, without an 
opportunity to assess Applicant’s credibility at a hearing, I am unable to conclude that 
he met his burden of persuasion in mitigating the Government’s allegation under the 
Personal Conduct adjudicative guideline.         
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising from his personal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:                      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information.  Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
