                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01365 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s marijuana use from August 29, 2009 to December 4, 2009, in two 
foreign countries, while holding a security clearance, showed exceptionally poor 
judgment. Drug involvement concerns are mitigated; however, personal conduct 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF-86). 
(GE 1) On October 20, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005. 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and 
E (personal conduct). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be continued or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On November 8, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On December 1, 
2010, Department Counsel indicated he was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On 
December 6, 2010, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On December 7, 2010, 
DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for December 22, 2010. (HE 1) On 
December 22, 2010, Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.1 At the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered two exhibits (GE 1-2) (Tr. 17), and Applicant offered three 
exhibits. (Tr. 18-19; AE A-C) There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-2 and AE 
A-C. (Tr. 17-20) Additionally, I admitted the hearing notice, SOR, and Applicant’s 
response to the SOR. (HE 1-3) On December 23, 2010, I received Applicant’s 
performance evaluations for 2005 to 2009. (AE D) On January 3, 2011, I received the 
transcript.  The record closed on January 3, 2011. (Tr. 20-21)  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted all of the SOR allegations: (1) he used 
marijuana on several occasions from February 2007 to December 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.a); 
and (2) he used marijuana after being granted an interim Top Secret security clearance 
on August 24, 2009 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b; 2.a). (HE 3) His admissions are accepted as factual 
findings.   
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (Tr. 6) The same 
engineering firm has employed him in the area of materials for satellites for about 66 
months. (Tr. 23, 25-26) In 2001, he graduated from high school. (Tr. 6) He was awarded 
a bachelor’s degree in 2005 and a master’s degree in applied mechanics for aerospace 
and mechanical engineering in 2008. (Tr. 7) He was employed in engineering either at 
the university he attended or at a private corporation from 2003 to 2005. (Tr. 24)    
 
Applicant has never married, and he does not have any children. (Tr. 23) He has 
never served in the military. (Tr. 23)  
 
Drug involvement 
 
On August 20, 2009, Applicant signed his SF 86. (GE 1) On this SF 86, he 
responded, “Yes” to Section 23a, which asks about illegal drug use in the last seven 
years. (GE 1) He explained that he used marijuana “8 or 9 times over a two year 
 
1 Applicant waived his right to 15-days notice of the date of his hearing. (Tr. 15-16) 
  
2Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
period,” and disclosed the time period as “02/2007 (Estimated)” to “06/2009 (Estimated.” 
(GE 1) 
 
 In 2006, Applicant received a Secret clearance. (Tr. 28) In August 2009, he 
received an interim Top Secret clearance. (Tr. 28) His clearances were subsequently 
suspended because of his marijuana use. (Tr. 28) 
 
 In February 2007, Applicant used marijuana at a party. (Tr. 30) At that time, 
Applicant was 24 or 25 years old and in a master’s degree program at a university. (Tr. 
30) From February 2007 to December 2009, he used marijuana by smoking it a total of 
about nine times. (Tr. 30-31; GE 1) From August 29, 2009 to December 4, 2009, he 
used marijuana five or six times, while he was in two foreign countries. (Tr. 36-37; GE 2 
at 15) He did not purchase the marijuana he used. (Tr. 31, 47) He has never purchased 
drug paraphernalia. (Tr. 47) He has never been tested using urinalysis for illegal drug 
use at his employment. (Tr. 38) The only illegal drug he used was marijuana. (Tr. 49-50)  
 
Applicant was on a leave of absence from his employment when he used 
marijuana while outside the United States. (Tr. 39) He used marijuana overseas during 
the period from August 29, 2009 to December 4, 2009. (GE 2 at 15) The use of 
marijuana in country N was not illegal; however, marijuana use in country T was illegal. 
When he used marijuana, he understood that marijuana use could result in revocation 
of his security clearance. (Tr. 40) He acknowledged that his marijuana use while holding 
a security clearance showed poor judgment. (Tr. 41) On December 4, 2009, an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) investigator interviewed Applicant at an overseas 
location. (GE 2 at 13-17) The OPM investigator asked Applicant about his plans 
concerning future marijuana use and he stated, “[He] intends to stop using marijuana if 
he gets his Top Secret security clearance. Once [he] has access to classified 
information, he will definitely stop all marijuana use.” (Tr. 42, 52; GE 2 at 14) At his 
hearing, he explained that approval of a Top Secret clearance would be an additional 
reason, but not his exclusive motivation not to use marijuana in the future. (Tr. 53-54) 
He meant that even without the issue of his clearance, he would have stopped using 
marijuana. (Tr. 53-56)   
 
From August 2009 to January 2010, Applicant traveled overseas. (Tr. 32) After 
January 2010, he lived in a different location in the United States than previously. (Tr. 
32) He has changed his lifestyle, and no longer associates with marijuana users. (Tr. 
22, 48) He gets lots of physical exercise. (Tr. 48) He is focused on his career, and 
recognizes that marijuana use is contrary to his career goals. (Tr. 62) He promised not 
to use marijuana in the future. (Tr. 47, 54-55; AE C) He has not received drug 
counseling or therapy. (Tr. 47-48) He was promoted at work to project manager. (Tr. 22) 
He signed a statement indicating that future illegal drug use “will result in revocation of 
any clearance currently held.” (AE C)    
 
Character evidence 
 
 One character witness described Applicant as intelligent, compassionate, 
diligent, and very successful in academic and professional endeavors. (AE A) Another 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
described him as trustworthy, responsible, prudent, hardworking, and conscientious. 
Both recommended that Applicant’s security clearance be approved; however, neither 
recommendation indicated an awareness of Applicant’s marijuana use in a foreign 
country while holding a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant’s performance evaluations from 2005 to 2009 describe his excellent 
growth, initiative, diligence, intelligence, talent, and professionalism. (AE D) His 
evaluations’ descriptions of his performance tend to support approval of his access to 
classified information. (AE D) 
      
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and E (personal conduct) with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Three drug involvement disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g) 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “any drug abuse,”3 
“illegal drug possession or sale or distribution,” and “any illegal drug use after being 
granted a security clearance.” These three disqualifying conditions apply because 
Applicant used and possessed marijuana.4 He admitted his marijuana use on his SF 86, 
 
3AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
4AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
to an OPM investigator, and at his hearing. He possessed marijuana before he used it. 
Applicant’s Secret security clearance was approved in 2006, and his interim Top Secret 
clearance was approved in August 2009. He used marijuana on five or six times from 
August 29, 2009 to December 4, 2009.  
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant’s last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 
months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge 
 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substance. See Sch. I (c)(9). See also Gonzales v. 
Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”5 
 
Applicant’s marijuana use lasted from February 2007 to December 4, 2009. 
When he completed his SF 86 on August 24, 2009, he said he used marijuana eight or 
nine times. At his hearing, he stated he used marijuana five or six times in 2009 while in 
two foreign countries after completing his SF 86. He stopped using marijuana about 14 
months ago. He recognizes the adverse impact on his life of drug abuse. He no longer 
associates with known drug users. He believes his life circumstances and career goals 
have changed sufficiently to create some certitude that he will continue to abstain from 
drug use. AG ¶ 26(a) partially applies to his marijuana-related offenses.6    
 
Applicant demonstrated his intent not to abuse illegal drugs in the future. He has 
disassociated from his drug-using associates and contacts. He has broken his patterns 
of drug abuse, and he has changed his life with respect to illegal drug use. He has 
abstained from drug abuse for fourteen months. He provided “a signed statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b) applies.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse 
prescription drugs. Marijuana was never prescribed for him. He did not receive a 
prognosis of low probability of recurrence of drug abuse.   
 
5 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
6In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
 In conclusion, Applicant ended his drug abuse in December 2009, about fourteen 
months ago. The motivations to stop using illegal drugs are evident. He understands the 
adverse results from marijuana use.7 He has shown or demonstrated a sufficient track 
record of no drug abuse to eliminate drug involvement as a bar to his access to 
classified information.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
Applicant used marijuana five or six times while holding an interim Top Secret 
clearance and while in two foreign countries. In one of the foreign countries, his 
marijuana use was illegal. His marijuana use under such circumstances shows 
questionable judgment and adversely affects his professional standing. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 
16(e) apply. 
 
7Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
Applicant deserves substantial credit in the whole-person analysis for candidly 
admitting his marijuana use. Applicant’s disclosure of his marijuana use is an important 
positive step “to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress.”  AG ¶ 17(e) mitigates security concerns raised under AG ¶ 16(e). However, the 
personal conduct concerns pertaining to Applicant’s marijuana use while holding an 
interim Top Secret clearance and while overseas in country T on more than one 
occasion from about August 29, 2009, to December 4, 2009, shows such poor judgment 
that none of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Personal conduct concerns cannot be 
mitigated at this time because they are too serious and too recent.  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
was relatively young and immature when he began using marijuana in 2007. He served 
his country as an employee of a Government contractor. He stopped using marijuana in 
December 2009. I am confident that he has the ability to abstain from marijuana use. In 
his SOR response and at his hearing, he admitted his history of marijuana use. He 
knows the consequences of marijuana use. He provided “a signed statement of intent 
with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” Applicant contributes to his 
company and the Department of Defense. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he 
would intentionally violate national security. His character and good work performance 
show some responsibility, rehabilitation and mitigation. His supervisors evidently 
support him or he would not have been able to retain his employment after his security 
clearance was called into question. His evaluations and character statements laud his 
hard work, trustworthiness, and dedication. I am satisfied that if he continues to abstain 
from marijuana use, and avoids future offenses he will eventually have future potential 
for access to classified information.  
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant is 27 years old, and he was sufficiently mature to be fully 
responsible for his conduct. His marijuana use five or six times between August 29, 
2009, and December 4, 2009, while holding an interim Top Secret clearance and while 
in country T shows an exceptional lack of judgment. He risked his security clearance 
and detention in a foreign country each time he possessed and used marijuana. Such 
judgment lapses “raise questions about [Applicant’s] reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information.” See AG ¶ 15. His marijuana use under such 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
circumstances raises a serious security concern, and a security clearance is not 
warranted at this time.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude drug involvement concerns 
are fully mitigated; however, personal conduct concerns are not mitigated at this time. 
For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not currently eligible for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
