1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 10-04402
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties consisting of five delinquent
accounts for a total of about $14,341. Although the debts are longstanding, and he has
various explanations for them, none of the debts are paid, settled, or otherwise
resolved. Applicant does not have a realistic plan in place to resolve them. Applicant
failed to present sufficient evidence to overcome the security concerns stemming from
his problematic financial history. Accordingly, as discussed below, this case is decided
against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG  were
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace the
guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Exhibit 1. 2
 Exhibits 2–5. 3
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on June 17, 2011,1
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar
to a complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security
guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations. 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned
to me August 24, 2011. The hearing took place October 20, 2011. The transcript (Tr.)
was received October 28, 2011. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleged five delinquent accounts in amounts ranging from $281 to
$5,058 for a total of about $14,341. In Applicant’s reply to the SOR, he denied the debts
with explanations. The following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is married, and
he and his wife have a two-year-old child and a four-year-old stepchild. His employment
history includes honorable military service in the U.S. Navy during 1994–1999. He has
been continuously employed as an aircraft mechanic by the same company since April
2007. He earns about $26 per hour, and he estimated his gross wages for 2010 at
about $60,000. He is seeking an industrial security clearance for the first time,
submitting an application in January 2010.  2
As alleged in the SOR, and established by the documentary evidence,  the five3
delinquent debts consist of the following: (1) an $880 collection account; (2) a $3,622
collection account; (3) a $4,500 charged-off account; (4) a $5,058 charged-off account;
and (5) a $281 collection account. He did not present any paperwork (e.g., account
statements, offers of settlement, correspondence, etc.) showing the debts were paid,
settled, or otherwise resolved.   
 Exhibit 2. 4
 Exhibits 4 and 5. 5
 Tr. 78. 6
3
After submitting his security clearance application, Applicant was interviewed in
February 2010 as part of his background investigation.  Each of the five debts was4
discussed during that interview, and Applicant provided an explanation for each debt.
His hearing testimony concerning the debts was largely consistent with his interview.
His explanations for the five delinquent debts are summarized as follows: 
• The $880 collection account stems from an apartment lease and claims for
damages after Applicant vacated the apartment in 2008. He disputes the debt,
claiming the amount is excessive. 
• The $3,622 collection account was incurred several years ago when Applicant
entered into a cell phone contract with a former coworker and roommate. He
claims that he got out of the account after about six months and it was
transferred to the former coworker. 
• The $4,500 charged-off account was incurred several years ago when Applicant
obtained an unsecured personal loan on behalf of the same former coworker.
The understanding was that the coworker would repay Applicant for the loan.
• The $5,058 charged-off account was incurred several years ago when Applicant
cosigned an auto loan for a then girlfriend. The relationship did not endure, and
the vehicle was repossessed when she stopped making payments. Applicant
claims that his girlfriend assumed responsibility for the loan when they separated.
• The $281 collection account was incurred fraudulently by the former coworker. 
The five debts appear in a February 2010 credit report or a June 2011 credit report or
both.  Applicant did not offer any documentary evidence concerning the five debts or in5
support of his various claims and explanations. The five debts remain unresolved. 
Applicant’s plan, at this point, is to retain a credit repair firm to assist him in
resolving the debts. To that end, he contacted such a firm by telephone, but has not yet
retained their services. In addition, he sought assistance from his company’s employee
assistance program (EAP) to help him design an overall financial plan. He has met once
with an EAP counselor, but nothing has been formalized or implemented.
Applicant described his overall financial situation as “pretty bad right now.”  He6
stated that he had about $100 in the bank, although he usually maintains a balance of
about $1,500 to $2,000. He anticipated taking a loan against his 401(k) account (the
 Tr. 79–80. 7
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a8
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 11
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.15
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 16
4
estimated balance is about $30,000) to catch up with his mortgage loan payments and
other accounts in arrears.7
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As8
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt9
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An10
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  11
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting12
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An13
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate14
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme15
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.16
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).17
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.18
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 19
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant20
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  21
5
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.17
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it18
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant19
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline20
F is: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  21
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information within the
defense industry.   
 AG ¶ 19(a).  22
 AG ¶ 19(c). 23
 ISCR Case No. 99-0201 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999) (“[T]he concept of ‘good faith’ requires a showing that a24
person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.
Such standards are consistent with the level of conduct that must be expected of persons granted a security
clearance.”) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No. 02-30304 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (relying on a legally
available option, such as Chapter 7 bankruptcy, is not a good-faith effort) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No.
99-9020 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001) (relying on the running of a statute of limitations to avoid paying a debt is not
a good-faith effort). 
 
6
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. The multiple delinquent debts raise security concerns. Taken
together, these circumstances indicate inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a22
history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The23
facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions, and the facts suggest
financially irresponsibility as well. 
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F. Any of the
following may mitigate security concerns:
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control;
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;24
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
AG ¶ 20(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).25
7
I have considered all the mitigating conditions and none, individually or in combination,
are sufficient to overcome and mitigate the security concerns. 
The evidence of Applicant’s problematic financial history justifies current doubts
about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-
consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In
reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the
favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I gave due
consideration to the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence, to25
include his years of honorable military service. It appears that in the past Applicant was
too trusting or financially naive or both. As a result, he was taken advantage of by a
coworker and a girlfriend. Nevertheless, accepting his undocumented explanations as
true, he is most probably responsible if not liable for the debts except for the smallest
debt of $281 (SOR ¶ 1.e), which was incurred by fraud without his consent or
knowledge. Moreover, he has done little to help himself. This is somewhat difficult to
understand considering the debts are longstanding, and he was put on notice that the
debts were of security concern during his February 2010 interview. Despite the passage
of time since the interview, he has not formalized much less implemented a realistic
plan to address and resolve the four largest debts by payment in full, by settlement, by
disputing their validity, or by some other means.    
Applicant’s problematic financial history is unresolved and it is ongoing. And that
history is inconsistent with the high standards that apply to those who are granted
access to classified information. Based on the evidence before me, it is too soon to tell if
or when Applicant will put his financial house in good order. Applicant did not meet his
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
