 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02534 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 2, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 17, 2010, and elected to have 
her case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on November 2, 2010. The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant, and proof of receipt was received by DOHA on November 15, 2010. 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant provided additional information. On December 10, 
2010, Department Counsel noted no objections to the additional submissions by 
Applicant. The case was assigned to me on December 23, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d, but 
denied 1.e. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, 
I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. She is unmarried and has no children. She currently 
works as a systems analyst for a defense contractor. She has a bachelors degree in 
computer science.1  
 
 The debts listed in the SOR are supported by a credit report dated March 31, 
2010. Her financial difficulties were impacted by several periods of unemployment within 
the past 10 years (June-August 2000, August 2001-June 2002, and September 2007-
August 2008). In 2004, she purchased a home and rental property. The rental property 
produced a positive cash flow for about seven to nine months. After that, the tenants 
stopped paying rent and Applicant was forced to evict them. When she reclaimed the 
property, it was uninhabitable. She was required to invest $4,000 just to make the 
property habitable. Her mortgage payments on the rental property doubled due to 
increased taxes and insurance. In May 2006, she tried to sell this property, but despite 
lowering the price it did not sell. The lender foreclosed on this property resulting in the 
debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.d (mortgage balance listed at $185,000). Applicant made two $50 
payments in June and July 2010 on this debt. No evidence of additional payments was 
presented.2 
 
 Applicant defaulted on her home mortgage due to unemployment in 2007 and 
2008. She sought a loan modification but the paperwork was reportedly not received 
and her home was foreclosed in September 2009. This is the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.b 
(mortgage balance listed at $75,614). Applicant also defaulted on the second mortgage 
on this property (SOR ¶ 1.c; mortgage balance listed at $17,637). Both mortgages were 
serviced by the same lender. In April 2010, the lender notified Applicant she was liable 
on both debts. Applicant presented evidence showing that she made two $50 payments 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 3, 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
in June and July 2010 on the first mortgage deficiency and one $50 payment in July on 
the second mortgage deficiency. No evidence of additional payments was presented.3  
 
 Applicant has not resolved the judgment entered against her for $3,184 (SOR ¶ 
1.a). She did settle the credit card debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.e. She has approximately 
$24,000 worth of student loan debt that is currently deferred.4  
 
 Applicant consulted with a bankruptcy attorney about the possibility of filing for 
bankruptcy protection, but decided against taking that action. Instead, she chose to 
negotiate directly with the creditors. It is unclear from the record what result these 
negotiations have achieved.5  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
                                                          
3 Items 3, 5. 
 
4 Item 3. 
 
5 Item 3. 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant defaulted on three mortgage loans and had a judgment entered against 
her. I find both disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Except for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e, Applicant did not provide evidence that she has 
paid or resolved any of her delinquent debts. Therefore, her behavior is recent and the 
delinquent debts remain a concern. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply 
because Applicant’s debts remain owed and unresolved.  
 
 Applicant provided some information that she experienced periods of 
unemployment and that her tenants abandoned her rental property. These could be 
considered conditions beyond her control. The second requirement for mitigating 
condition AG ¶ 20(b) to apply is whether Applicant acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant failed to meet her burden to show that she took responsible 
actions to deal with her debts while, or after, she was undergoing these hardships. I find 
AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 There is some evidence Applicant sought bankruptcy advice from an attorney, 
but decided to forego seeking formal representation. There is no clear evidence that 
Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or under control. Although she 
documented several $50 payments for two months on the three delinquent mortgage 
debts, these payments are minimal considering the amount of the underlying debt. 
Under these circumstances, I find she has not made a good-faith effort to pay her 
delinquent debts or attempt to resolve them, other than SOR ¶ 1.e. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
and 20(d) apply to SOR debt ¶ 1.e, but not to the remainder of the SOR debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
6 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered that the Applicant 
experienced periods of unemployment and difficulties with a tenant. I have also 
considered her current employment position. Except for the credit card debt and the 
minimal recent mortgage payments, she has done little to resolve her debts. She failed 
to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.d.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e.:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
