 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 (Redacted)          )  ISCR Case No. 10-00553 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her security clearance application (SCA) on July 16, 2009. 
On May 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 25, 2010, but her answer was incomplete. 
She submitted a complete answer on July 1, 2010, and requested a determination on 
 
 2
the record without a hearing. DOHA received her request on July 19, 2010. Department 
Counsel submitted the government’s written case on October 15, 2010. On October 18, 
2010, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, 
who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the government’s evidence. She received the FORM on October 25, 2010, 
and did not respond. The case was assigned to me on December 23, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.e, 
1.h, and 2.a-2.c. Her admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor, working as an 
administrative clerk since July 2009. She is a high school graduate. She has never held 
a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant’s SCA reflects that she was employed as a bartender and food server 
from May 2006 until she submitted her SCA (GX 6 at 16.) However, she told a security 
investigator that she was unemployed from April 2006 to May 2007. She told the 
investigator she did not intend to conceal her unemployment but had difficulty entering 
the data electronically, because the computer program would not allow her to leave any 
gaps in her employment record. (GX 9 at 5.)  
 
 When Applicant submitted her SCA, she answered “Yes” to question 13C, asking 
if in the last seven years she had been fired, quit a job after being told she would be 
fired, left a job by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct, left 
a job by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance, left a job for 
other reasons under unfavorable circumstances, or was laid off from a job. She 
disclosed that she was laid off from a job for being too slow. She did not disclose that 
she left a job in June 2005 under unfavorable conditions and was fired from a job in 
April 2006, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c. She admitted SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c in her 
answer to the SOR and during an interview with a security investigator in October 2009. 
She also admitted to the security investigator that she should have disclosed the two 
unfavorable terminations and had no reason for not doing so. Nevertheless, she 
claimed she was not attempting to conceal the information. Regarding her being fired in 
April 2006, she told the investigator that she did not like the job, found it boring, and her 
dislike for the job showed in her performance. (GX 9 at 6.) 
 
Applicant answered “No” to question 22b on her SCA, asking if in the last seven 
years, she had been arrested. She did not disclose that she was arrested in May 2005 
for being an accessory to a crime. She pleaded guilty to disturbing the peace, and was 
fined and placed on probation for two years. Her arrest was alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a, and 
she admitted it in her answer and during an interview with a security investigator in 
October 2009. She also admitted to the investigator that she should have disclosed her 
arrest on her SCA. She claimed she disclosed it on other paperwork and did not intend 
 
 3
to conceal it, because she knew that police records would be checked as part of her 
background investigation. (GX 8 at 2; GX 9 at 6-7.)  
 
Finally, Applicant answered “No” to question 26 on her SCA, asking if in the last 
seven years she had a judgment entered against her. She did not disclose a judgment 
entered against her in July 2006 and alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. She told a security 
investigator that the debt was for unpaid rent, that the debt had been paid, and that her 
landlady had told her that she had filed a lawsuit for unpaid rent but that it would be 
withdrawn. (GX 9 at 8-9.) Applicant did not submit any documentation showing that the 
rent had been paid or the lawsuit withdrawn. 
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts totaling about $17,000. The table below 
summarizes the evidence concerning these debts. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Answer Status Evidence 
1.a Judgment 
(rent) 
$2,248 Deny Applicant claims it is paid; 
no documentation  
GX 9 at 8-9;
GX 12 
1.b Auto loan $1,535 Admit Applicant claims it was 
stolen; no documentation 
GX 13 at 1 
1.c Auto loan $1,025 Admit Applicant claims it was 
stolen; no documentation 
GX 13 at 1 
1.d Cable service $34 Admit Paid GX 13 at 1 
1.e Credit card $368 Admit Unpaid GX 9 at 9; 
GX 13 at 1 
1.f Auto loan $2,838 Deny Applicant claims debt was 
settled in mediation; no 
documentation 
GX 9 at 9;  
GX 13 at 2 
1.g Collection $2,327 Deny Applicant has no 
information; has not 
disputed debt 
GX 9 at 9; 
GX 13 at 2 
1.h Collection  $237 Admit Applicant claims it is paid; 
no documentation 
GX 9 at 9; 
 
1.i Overpaid 
unemployment 
benefits 
$7,278 Admit Applicant claims she made 
payment; no documentation 
GX 9 at 7-8 
 
 Applicant’s net monthly income is about $1,993, and her living expenses are 
about $1,593, leaving a net remainder of about $400. Her expenses do not include 
payments on any of the delinquent debts listed above. She has no savings. She told a 
security investigator that she has no money left at the end of the month. (GX 9 at 8.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
 
 4
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 5
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Applicant admitted six of the nine delinquent debts alleged, and her admissions 
are corroborated by the Government’s evidence. She denied two debts, claiming they 
were resolved, but she submitted no documentation to support her denial or to refute 
the Government’s evidence. She denied one claim based on lack of information, but she 
has done nothing to investigate or challenge the debt. The evidence establishes two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 Since the Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing, 
numerous, and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s unemployment from 
April 2006 to May 2007 was not a condition beyond her control, because she was fired 
for poor performance. She admitted to a security investigator that she did not like the 
job, found it boring, and her attitude was reflected in her performance. She did not 
present evidence of any other conditions beyond her control. 
 
 
 6
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant presented no evidence that 
she has sought or obtained counseling, and her financial problems are not being 
resolved. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Although Applicant has a net monthly 
remainder of about $400, she does not have a plan to resolve her delinquent debts, and 
she has not presented evidence of any payments, except for the $34 cable bill, which 
she has paid. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the cable bill, but not for the 
remaining delinquent debts. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
claimed that several debts had been resolved, but she produced no evidence to support 
her claims. She claimed to have no information about the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, but 
she has done nothing to investigate, challenge, or dispute the debt. I conclude that AG 
¶ 20(e) is not established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
 Applicant admitted being arrested in May 2005 for being an accessory to a crime 
and pleading guilty to disturbing the peace, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. She admitted 
being terminated from employment under unfavorable conditions in June 2005 and April 
2006, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c. She has denied intentionally falsifying her SCA, 
as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.d-2.f. 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
 
 7
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant admitted to a security investigator that she should have disclosed her 
employment record and her police record, and she presented no reason for not 
disclosing them. She offered a facially plausible explanation for not disclosing the 
judgment for unpaid rent, but she failed to support her explanation with any 
documentation that the debt was paid or the lawsuit dismissed. Her intentional 
omissions from her SCA establish the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire. 
 
 Applicant’s unfavorable employment record and arrest record (which was not 
alleged under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct) establish the following disqualifying 
conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations; and  
 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant 
made no effort to correct the omissions from her SCA until she was confronted with the 
evidence ten months later. 
 
 Security concerns based on personal conduct may be mitigated by showing that 
“the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). 
The circumstances of Applicant’s arrest and her terminations from employment under 
unfavorable conditions are arguably “minor,” and they occurred several years ago. On 
the other hand, her falsifications are recent, serious, and did not occur under unusual 
circumstances. I conclude that AG ¶ 17(c) is established for the arrest and the 
 
 8
employment terminations alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.c, but not for her falsifications alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 2.d-2.f. 
 
 Security concerns based on personal conduct may be mitigated if “the individual 
has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(e). This mitigating condition is established by 
Applicant’s belated full disclosure of her arrest and employment record. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is relatively young and inexperienced. She did not request a hearing, 
limiting my ability to assess her sincerity and credibility. Her admitted lack of candor and 
her inattention to her financial affairs raise doubts about her reliability, trustworthiness 
and good judgment. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
 
 9
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1-a-1-c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.d-2.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
