 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02584 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Barry M. Sax, Esquire 
 
 
January 12, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On July 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant, through his attorney, answered the SOR in writing on July 20, 2010, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on September 22, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on September 30, 2010. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on November 10, 2010. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant did not object and they were admitted. The 
Government requested administrative notice be taken of certain facts relating to Taiwan 
 
2 
 
 
and Philippines as contained in Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II. Applicant had no 
objection and I took administrative notice of the documents. Applicant and one witness 
testified. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through M, which were admitted without 
objections, and a trial brief. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 24, 
2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 DOHA alleged under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, that Applicant’s father and 
mother are dual citizens of the United States and Taiwan, residing in the Philippines 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.); that Applicant’s uncle is a citizen and resident of Taiwan and 
works within the Taiwanese government (SOR ¶ 1.c.); that Applicant’s grandmother is a 
dual citizen of the United States and Taiwan and resides in Taiwan (SOR ¶ 1.d.); that 
Applicant’s father has contact with individuals employed within the Filipino and 
Taiwanese governments (SOR ¶ 1.e.); and that he travels to the Philippines 
approximately once yearly to visit his relatives (SOR ¶ 1.f.). Applicant admitted the 
allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
married for two years to an American citizen. He was born in the United States to 
parents who immigrated to the United States from Taiwan in the late 1970s to further 
their education. Appellant’s parents met at an American university and married in the 
U.S. They were naturalized as U.S. citizens in the 1980s, but retained dual citizenship 
with Taiwan. (GE 1; GE 2; AE L; Tr. 61-65, 115-117, 120-121.) 
 
Applicant was raised in the U.S. and attended public schools. During his 
testimony, he told of his pride in being American. He noted that during middle school, 
the American flag was not being flown every day at his school. He volunteered every 
school day, for two years, to go to school early and hoist the flag. He also stayed after 
school to fold the flag properly. (AE L; Tr. 95-97.) 
 
Applicant grew up very close to his American cousins, aunts, and uncles, who 
lived down the street from him. He would spend whole summers playing with his mostly 
older cousins. He continues to maintain a close relationship with them. Several of his 
extended family members live in the same state of Applicant and he socializes with 
them frequently. Applicant is also close to his sister, who is an American-born citizen 
and is currently attending medical school in the U.S. His wife is a native-born American 
citizen. Applicant is close to his in-laws, who all reside in the U.S. and are U.S. citizens. 
(GE 1; AE A; AE K; Tr. 92-93, 102, 121, 123.) 
 
In the mid-1990s, Applicant’s father’s job threatened to be outsourced. 
Applicant’s father decided to open up a factory in the Philippines to sell back the same 
item he produced in the U.S. to his former employer and other clients, mostly in the U.S. 
market. By 1996, Applicant’s father was living in the Philippines the majority of the time, 
although Applicant, his sister, and Applicant’s mother continued to reside in the United 
 
3 
 
 
States. His mother retired from her job in the U.S. in approximately 2005, when 
Applicant was 23-years old, and joined her husband in the Philippines. The factory is 
located in a suburb of the capital city of Manila. Applicant testified that this region is the 
safest part of the Philippines and that the majority of terrorist acts in the Philippines 
occur over 1,000 miles away. (GE 2; AE L; Tr. 62-67, 85-86, 117, 122.) 
 
As a local businessman, Applicant’s father is sometimes invited to business and 
charity functions where the mayor of his suburb is present. He has attended golf outings 
and other charity functions where local Filipino politicians are present. In February of 
2009, Applicant’s father was invited and took part in a business trip to Taiwan to attend 
an economic forum to promote increased trade between Philippines and Taiwan. This 
was the only such trip Applicant’s father has taken. (GE 1; AE L; Tr. 68-69.) 
 
Applicant traveled to the Philippines to visit his parents in December 2002 
through January 2003, March 2007, March 2008, and March 2009. He has no future 
trips to the Philippines planned. His parents visit him in the U.S. approximately two-to-
three times per year and stay at Applicant’s aunt’s house, when they are in the U.S. 
Applicant mainly communicates with his parents using Skype. They chat on a weekly 
basis. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 85-86, 118, 123.) 
 
Applicant’s father is 60-years old and his mother is 55-years old. They plan to 
return to the U.S. after they retire in the next ten years. They have earned full Social 
Security and Medicare benefits here. Until then, they seek medical treatment in Taiwan, 
as the Taiwanese medical system is considered by Applicant’s parents to be more 
advanced than that in the Philippines. They maintain Taiwanese passports in order to 
receive Taiwanese medical care and to collect a small inheritance in Taiwan. (GE 1; Tr. 
70, 90-91, 111-112.) 
 
Applicant is “explicitly not included in any sort of inheritance” and does not stand 
to inherit anything in the Philippines or Taiwan. He has no financial investments, bank 
accounts, or other interests in Philippines or Taiwan. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 95-97.) 
 
Applicant has a maternal grandmother who resides in Taiwan. Applicant’s 
grandmother is in her 80s. She is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Taiwan. She became a 
U.S. citizen in the 2000s. In 2006, she moved to Taiwan, when Applicant’s mother 
moved to the Philippines, to be geographically closer to Applicant’s mother. She has 
always been a housewife. Applicant’s contacts with his grandmother are limited to 
conversations relating to health due to Applicant’s limited knowledge of the Taiwanese 
dialect of Chinese. He only speaks to his grandmother on an infrequent basis. They only 
communicate when his mom is in Taiwan visiting her. (GE 1; GE 2; AE L; Tr. 73-75, 99, 
118.) 
 
Applicant also has a maternal uncle who is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. 
Applicant was unaware that his mother had a younger brother until 2006. In his youth, 
Applicant’s uncle worked for a civilian or military Taiwanese government agency. In 
1983, Applicant’s uncle had been sent to China on a mission to conduct espionage on 
 
4 
 
 
behalf of the Taiwanese government. He had allegedly been trained by Americans. 
Applicant’s uncle was immediately caught and sentenced to prison in China. The 
Taiwanese government told Applicant’s mother’s family that the uncle was dead. 
Applicant’s mother never told Applicant about this uncle. However, in December 2006, 
the Chinese government released the uncle from prison, after approximately 25 years of 
incarceration. (GE 1; GE 2; AE L; Tr. 70-73.) 
 
Applicant has met his Taiwanese uncle twice. The first meeting occurred when 
Applicant was visiting his parents for a week in the Philippines in March 2007. 
Applicant’s uncle was visiting his parents at the same time as Applicant’s trip. During 
this trip, Applicant was a social guest of the Taiwanese Representative at the  Taipei 
Economic and Cultural Office in the Philippines for a dinner, which the Representative 
hosted in order to meet Applicant’s uncle. The second meeting occurred in March of 
2008, when Applicant was in Taiwan for a day or two. Applicant reports that he cannot 
communicate with his uncle because his uncle speaks only Mandarin Chinese, and 
Applicant knows no Mandarin. Applicant does not communicate with his uncle over the 
phone nor electronically. Applicant has not had any contact with his uncle since March 
2008 and he is “scrupulously avoiding any further contact.” Applicant’s mother only 
contacts his uncle a few times a year and she doesn’t normally see her brother when 
she visits Taiwan. Applicant reports that he has no bonds or affection toward this uncle. 
Since their last contact, Applicant’s uncle has taken a job in the Taiwanese government 
as an aide to a legislator. (GE 1; GE 2; AE L; Tr. 69-73, 88, 122.) 
 
Applicant takes his responsibility to protect classified and proprietary information 
very seriously. He states: 
 
I chose to work in the defense establishment because I honestly believe 
that the United States has underwritten global security and world peace 
for the better part of several decades now. We do so not only because of 
our ideals, but also because of our citizens and the technological need 
that our defense provides. And, so I chose to work at [defense contractor] 
. . . dedicated to improving the national defense through research and 
analysis instead of going to commercial industry because I really do 
believe that I’m part of a larger force of defense establishment, which is 
actually helping the world. To actually betray any of that, would be against 
not only to my [sic] personal interest for my family and financial ties here 
and my honor and integrity, but also my intellectual desire to make the 
world a better place than when I came here. (Tr. 76-78.) 
 
Applicant indicated that he would report any attempts to get him to act improperly 
directly to his Facility Security Officer. He also has spent time reading materials such as 
the Adjudicative Desk Reference, the National Industrial Security Program Operations 
Manual, the local FBI’s counter-intelligence news letters, and the Military Critical 
Technologies List so that he can be aware of the methods that foreign entities use to 
collect information and guard against covert collection attempts. (Tr. 76-78, 103, 106-
108.) 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant is financially invested solely in the U.S. He reports liquid assets of 
approximately $50,000 and retirement savings of $80,000. He has approximately 
$160,000 of equity in his home. His wife is employed by an American based technology 
company and together, they make salaries of over $190,000 per year. They maintain 
good credit. (AE C; AE F; AE G; AE H; AE I; AE J; AE L; Tr. 89-90.) 
 
 Applicant is well respected by his colleagues, program manager, Facility Security 
Officer, and American family members. His program manager calls him “the finest 
young engineer I have ever worked with,” and his Facility Security Office indicated “he 
proves himself to be an excellent steward of all classified material.” His performance 
reviews for 2010 indicate Applicant does outstanding work. Applicant’s professional 
achievements include a 2006 National Defense Science and Engineering Fellowship. 
Applicant is currently earning a master’s degree from a prestigious American university. 
(AE A; AE B; AE D; Tr. 81, 117.) 
 
Taiwan1 
 
 In 1949, Taiwan was populated by approximately two million refugees fleeing a 
civil war in China. That same year, Communists in mainland China established the 
People’s Republic of China (PRC), and a separate, independent government was 
established in Taiwan. The PRC does not recognize Taiwan, and insists there is only 
“one China.” On January 1, 1979, the United States formally recognized the PRC as the 
sole legal government of China.  
 
 Taiwan is a multi-part democracy, which has significant economic ties with the 
PRC, despite not having any official talks with the PRC from 1998 through June 2008. 
Taiwan maintains a military with the primary mission of the defense of Taiwan against 
the PRC, which is seen as the predominant threat to Taiwan. 
 
 Taiwan was identified as an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence in the 
National Counterintelligence Center’s 2000 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign 
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage. Additionally, there have been various 
court cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export of U.S. restricted 
technology to Taiwan, including a criminal conviction of the Principal Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs for illegally removing classified 
materials. 
 
Philippines2 
 
 The Philippines is a representative democracy and ally of the United States. It 
has suffered economically, since World War II, and has been impacted by the recent 
global economic downturn. In addition to the economic challenges facing the 
Philippines, the government faces threats from terrorist groups acting within its 
boarders. The State Department has posted a warning to U.S. citizens traveling to the 
                                                          
1 All of the information about Taiwan is contained in Hearing Exhibit I.   
2 All of the information about the Philippines is contained in Hearing Exhibit II.   
 
6 
 
 
Philippines to be aware of the threats of bombings, assassinations, and kidnappings 
posed by the terrorist groups.  
 
 Human rights issues also present a concern in the Philippines. The State 
Department Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, dated February 2009, 
determined that the arbitrary, unlawful, and extrajudicial political killings of people, 
including journalists, continued to be a problem. Further, arbitrary or warrantless arrests 
and detentions were common.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
7 
 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant admits that he has foreign family members, to include his mother and 
father, who are dual citizens of the U.S. and Taiwan, living in the Philippines; his 
grandmother, who is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Taiwan and resides in Taiwan; and 
his uncle who is a Taiwanese citizen and works as an aide to a Taiwanese legislator. 
However, the mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. Even if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.  
 
Most nations with substantial military establishments seek classified and sensitive 
information from the United States because it has the largest military industrial complex 
 
8 
 
 
and most advanced military establishment in the world. Taiwanese military officials 
could seek or accept classified information from U.S. citizens with access to this 
material. In fact, the administrative notice documents highlight several recent cases 
involving Taiwan’s attempts to collect proprietary information from U.S. sources. In 
addition, the presence of terrorist organizations operating within the Philippines and the 
human rights abuses committed there raises significant risks with respect to family in 
the Philippines. Applicant’s access to classified information and his connection to his 
family in each of these countries could create a potential conflict of interest. I find AG ¶¶ 
7(a) applies.  
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious 
problem in the country with crime or terrorism. Taiwan is known to target U.S. 
intelligence, and terrorist organizations are known to be operating openly in the 
Philippines. Further, the Philippines’s human rights record is poor and there is a risk for 
U.S. citizens traveling there.  
 
Applicant has a close, familial relationship with his dual-Taiwanese-and-U.S. 
citizen parents residing in the Philippines. The same cannot be said of his grandmother 
and uncle. Applicant speaks to his elderly grandmother rarely and has communication 
problems with her when they do talk. Applicant has not had any contact with his uncle 
since 2008 and has intentionally cut off all contact with him. There are no ties of 
affection that bind Applicant and his uncle. Applicant’s foreign ties of affection lie with 
 
9 
 
 
his parents, whom he visits in the Philippines. Although the Philippines is an ally with 
the United States, the fact that terrorist groups operate openly in the Philippines is a 
cause of concern. Similarly, a risk is present because Applicant’s parents possess dual 
citizenship with Taiwan, an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence, and they often 
visit Taiwan for health care services. I find the nature of the relationship that Applicant 
has with his parents is more than casual and infrequent. Therefore, I cannot find that it 
is unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of his parents and the interests of the United States. Therefore, AG ¶¶ 8(a) 
and 8(c) apply with respect to Applicant’s grandmother and uncle, but do not apply with 
respect to Applicant’s parents. 
 
Applicant’s ties to the United States run deep. He was born in the U.S. He 
attended public school and college in the U.S., earning a bachelor’s degree from a 
prestigious American university, and is in the process of earning a master’s degree at 
the same U.S. university. His mother, father, and grandmother are all naturalized 
citizens, despite living abroad. Applicant’s wife is a natural-born U.S. citizen. He is close 
to his U.S. born in-laws and his extended family, consisting of over 20 aunts, uncles, 
and cousins who are all U.S. citizens, residing in the U.S. Applicant’s assets are in the 
United States. He does not stand to inherit anything in a foreign country. Applicant has 
the trust of his Facility Security Officer who opined Applicant was “an excellent steward 
of classified material.” He has earned the accolades of his supervisors. He was also a 
2006 National Defense Science and Engineering Fellow.  
 
Applicant has close and substantial ties to his parents that have dual citizenship 
with the U.S. and Taiwan, and reside in the Philippines. To a lesser extent, he has 
familial ties to his grandmother who is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Taiwan and resides 
in Taiwan, although his contact with her is infrequent and strained due to a language 
barrier, as noted above. He has broken off all ties to his uncle, who is a citizen of 
Taiwan and has a civil servant job as an aide to a legislator in Taiwan.  
 
I have had the opportunity observe Applicant, listen and consider his testimony, 
examine the evidence and resolve any questions. I find that, although Applicant has 
family ties in the Philippines and Taiwan, he has a deep and longstanding relationship 
with the United States. His life and that of his immediate family is entrenched in the 
United States. His patriotism shines through in his tale of raising the flag as a child and 
is highlighted by his commitment to security and his dedication to the principles which 
this country holds dear. There is no evidence that Applicant’s parents living in the 
Philippines are political activists or that they have high profile jobs with that 
Government. While Applicant’s father is a businessman and sometimes interacts with 
politicians such as his local mayor, these instances are rare and pose little risk. The 
one-time trip Applicant’s father took to interest Taiwanese businesses in investing in the 
Philippines was mainly a business trip, not governmental in nature. Further, the dinner 
that Applicant and his father attended at the Taiwanese Representative’s residence in 
the Philippines was to honor Applicant’s uncle. Since Applicant has severed all ties with 
his uncle, there is little indication that such contact would reoccur. There is no evidence 
that Applicant’s parents currently engage in activities that would bring attention to them. 
 
10 
 
 
There is no evidence that terrorists or any anti-U.S. elements are aware that Applicant 
has family living in the Philippines. His parents live outside of the area inhabited by 
terrorists. I find his connections to the United States are stronger than his connection 
the Philippines and Taiwan. His loyalty to the United States is steadfast and undivided 
and he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. I 
find AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant was 
born and has lived all of his life in the U.S. He attended public schools and has worked 
hard to reach where he is today. His dedication to the U.S. and the defense 
establishment led him to choose a career in public service, although he is highly 
accomplished. He is dedicated to improving the national defense and has taken 
necessary steps to educate himself on methods foreign entities use to collect 
information, should he ever be targeted. I have carefully considered all of the evidence 
and I am convinced Applicant’s roots are firmly planted in the United States. I am also 
convinced that should there ever be a conflict of interest, Applicant would clearly resolve 
it in favor of this country due to his steadfast commitment to the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Foreign Influence.  
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
