1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-00463
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On June 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant. The SOR enumerated security concerns
arising under Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
In his August 17, 2010, answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three
allegations raised in the SOR and requested an administrative determination.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated October 14,
2010. Applicant received the FORM on October 21, 2010, but did not submit any
additional information for consideration. The case was assigned to me on December
23, 2010. Based on a review of the materials, security clearance is denied.
 FORM Item 4 (Security Clearance Application, dated Oct. 19, 2009) at 32-33.1
 FORM Item 5 (Interrogatories) at 6.2
 FORM Item 6 (Interrogatories) at 2.3
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year-old technical analyst who has worked for the same
defense contractor since January 2003. He is single and has no children. Born and
raised in Brazil, Applicant fulfilled approximately 11 months of compulsory military
service in the Brazilian military in 1985. He received a bachelor’s degree from a
Brazilian university in 1993. Applicant emigrated to the United States at an
indeterminate time. 
Applicant became a naturalized United States citizen in February 2009. He is
currently a dual-citizen of the United States and Brazil. He has a current U.S. passport.
He also maintains a Brazilian passport, which is set to expire in August 2011. He visits
Brazil frequently. He last visited Brazil in about June 2009.  When traveling to Brazil, he1
presents both his U.S. and Brazilian passports in order to obviate the necessity of first
obtaining a travel visa prior to his trips.  While in the U.S. and when visiting Brazil,2
Applicant maintains frequent contact with his mother and periodic contact with his
sister. Applicant would consider giving up his Brazilian citizenship if necessary, but
wishes to maintain it because of the “possibility of visiting family [in Brazil] on short
notice when necessary.”  3
Applicant chose a decision without a hearing. The FORM consists of Department
Counsel’s memorandum and seven attachments, including Applicant’s Answer to the
SOR, his 2009 security clearance application, and two sets of interrogatories from
2010. He provided no additional information in response to the FORM.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions
and mitigating conditions, which are required in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” All available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).5
 Id.6
 Id.7
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.8
3
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching my
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence submitted.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a4
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  5
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified
information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access6
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a7
determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the8
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance.
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find Guideline C (Foreign
Preference) to be the most pertinent to the case. Conditions pertaining to this
adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as
well as those which would mitigate such concerns, are discussed below.
 AG ¶ 9.9
 AG ¶ 10(a). 10
 Afroyim v. Rusk, 387 U.S. 253 (1967).11
 See AG  ¶ 10(a) and ¶10(a)(2).12
4
Analysis
Guideline C – Foreign Preference
The concern regarding foreign preference is that when an individual acts in such
a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the U.S., then he or she
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests
of the U.S.  Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying9
include exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  10
Applicant admits that he is a dual citizen of the United States and Brazil, a fact
alleged under SOR ¶ 1.a. Dual citizenship is not a bar to a security clearance, nor is it
necessarily incompatible with the standards required for access to classified
information. The United States Supreme Court recognized a right under the United
States Constitution for United States citizens to have dual citizenship with another
country.  Security concerns can arise not by the mere possession of foreign11
citizenship, but by exercise of that citizenship. Eligibility for a security clearance must be
determined by application of the disqualifying conditions for foreign preference under
the factual circumstances.
Applicant completed nearly a year of compulsory military service in Brazil in
1985, as referenced in SOR allegation ¶ 1.c. This service occurred over a decade
before he became a United States citizen. While military service or a willingness to bear
arms for a foreign country may reflect the exercise of an obligation of foreign
citizenship, such service is not disqualifying unless it occurred after an applicant
became a U.S. citizen.12
Of genuine concern in this case, however, is Applicant’s continued maintenance
and use of a foreign passport. Such a situation raises Foreign Preference Disqualifying
Condition AG ¶ 10(a) (exercise of any right or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This
includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport). 
Here, Applicant’s dual citizenship status is based on his birth in Brazil. This fact
could potentially raise Foreign Preference Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 11(a) (dual
5
citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country).
However, Applicant’s sole expression of a potential willingness to relinquish his dual
citizenship is tentative and he continues to maintain a foreign passport. Without more
information or personal testimony, here is insufficient information to raise AG ¶ 11(b)
(the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship). 
Applicant is a 44 year old adult who became a U.S. citizen in 2009. He continues
to use a current Brazilian passport, although he also has a current U.S. passport which
could afford him safe passage in and out of Brazil. Possession of a national passport is
a privilege of a nation’s citizenship. While simultaneous use of both the U.S. and
Brazilian passports may facilitate speedier travel and permit one to travel without a visa,
this situation obviates application of AG ¶ 11(c) (exercise of the rights, privileges, or
obligations of foreign citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or
when the individual was a minor). 
Applicant provided no evidence or information indicating sufficient facts to raise
AG ¶ 11(d) (use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security authority) or
AG ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security
authority, or otherwise invalidated). No other mitigating conditions are applicable.
In continuing to use his valid Brazilian passport, rather than utilize a U.S.
passport for all of his international travel, Applicant continues to enjoy the privileges of
foreign citizenship. The limited record contains scant information that might tend to
mitigate the foreign preference security concerns this use raises. Consequently,
security concerns remain unmitigated.   
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and
the whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. I note that the information submitted by the Applicant is scant. He is a mature
individual who recently became a U.S. citizen. He is a college graduate and gainfully
employed. He maintains his Brazilian passport to use in tandem with his U.S. passport
to facilitate his passage to, through, and from Brazil, where he often visits his family. 
6
The possession and maintenance of a passport is an exercise of citizenship.
Applicant only cited to matters of convenience when explaining why he maintains and
uses his foreign passport. His continued use of his Brazilian passport may heighten his
ease of travel to and from Brazil, but it presents genuine security concerns that the
information of record fails to mitigate. In these cases, the burden is placed squarely on
an applicant to present information and evidence that tends to mitigate, extenuate,
rebut, or explain those admitted allegations forming the basis for expressed security
concerns. The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials. Any reasonable doubt
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive information. As previously noted, such a
conclusion is not a reflection on an applicant’s loyalty to the United States. It is merely a
determination that an applicant failed to carry his burden. In light of the security
concerns remaining unmitigated, clearance is denied.   
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
