  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01571 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O'Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has one charged-off and 13 unpaid accounts placed for collection, 
which total approximately $28,000. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the security 
concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on September 13, 2010, detailing security concerns 
under financial considerations. 
  
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
2 
 
 
 
 On October 4, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated November 17, 2010. The FORM contained 12 
attachments. On December 2, 2010, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with 
notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Responses to the FORM are due 30 days after receipt of the FORM. Applicant’s 
response was due on January 2, 2011. As of January 13, 2011, no response had been 
received. On January 19, 2011, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admits the factual allegations in the SOR. I 
incorporate Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of 
the record, pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old electronic technologist who has worked for a defense 
contractor since March 2006, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. From July 
1996 to November 2003, Applicant served as an enlisted member of the United States 
Marine Corps. He received a disability while serving and receives $240 monthly from 
the Veterans’ Administration for his disability. (Item 6) From October 2005 to October 
2008, he served in the Army National Guard. He enlisted in hopes of becoming a 
helicopter pilot. Four times he prepared paperwork to attend Officer Candidate School 
(OCS), but was never accepted. For the first six months in the National Guard he 
attended drill, but was not paid. (Item 5) He received a general discharge under 
honorable conditions from the Army National Guard for unsatisfactory participation.  
 
In 2001, Applicant was divorced. Applicant’s financial problems began in 2003 
due, in part, to careless spending and failing to keep track of his money. His divorce, 
child support, and his discharge from the military also contributed to his financial 
problems.  
 
In September 2005, a judgment for past-due child support was granted against 
Applicant. Child support payments had been automatically deducted from his check and 
sent to the state Office of Recovery Services (ORS) until November 2003 when he left 
the state. From November 2003 to April 2005, his employer withheld $300 per month 
child support from his salary, but, Applicant asserts, failed to properly send it to the 
ORS. Applicant currently has $300 withheld monthly from his check, and is no longer 
behind on his child support obligation. (Item 6) He provided copies of his pay 
statements showing the monthly deductions.  
 
In June 2009, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 5) Even though he disagreed with some of the 
accounts reported on his credit bureau report (CBR), he listed numerous delinquent 
accounts on his e-QIP. At that time, he said he had recently taken full responsibility for 
 
3 
 
 
 
his debt and was focused on paying off all of his debt. He intended to focus on one debt 
at a time starting with the debt with the smallest balance. (Item 5) His goal was to be 
debt free within two years.  
 
In July 2009, Applicant remarried and his new wife’s daughter has medical 
problems. In September 2009, he paid six creditors $20 each. Applicant did not make 
additional payments to the creditors due to having to pay for the daughter’s medical 
treatment. (Item 6) As of May 2010, the daughter was in a residential program. The 
normal cost of the residential program was $1,500 per month, but the program agreed 
to accept $750 monthly. Applicant was paying the residential program $450, which was 
the amount of child support received for the daughter. (Item 6)  
 
As of July 2009, Applicant’s gross monthly income was $3,300. Child support of 
$300 was withheld from his check. His net monthly remainder was $180. (Item 6) In 
February 2010, his and his wife’s gross income was $2,000 per month and their monthly 
net remainder was $38. (Item 6) In May 2010, their monthly gross income had 
increased to $2,500, but their net income remained at $38. He has not received any 
financial counseling.  
 
In May 2010, Applicant’s summer work schedule was to include at least 32 hours 
of overtime per pay period. (Item 6) In his May 2010 letter, he states he has come to 
understand the importance of credit and the differences between “want” and “need.” 
(Item 6) 
 
 A summary of the judgment, the accounts placed for collection, and their current 
status follows: 
  
 
 
Creditor 
 
Amount 
 
Current Status 
a Collection account placed 
for a federal credit union. 
(Items 7, 8,11, 12) 
$1,931 Unpaid. Applicant contacted the 
creditor, but was unsuccessful in 
negotiating a repayment arrangement.  
b Collection account. (Items 
7, 8) 
$805 
 
Unpaid. 
c Collection account placed 
for telephone service. 
(Items 7, 8) 
$1,120 
 
Unpaid. 
d Collection account placed 
for computer purchase. 
(Items 7,8) 
 
 
$1,941 Unpaid. Between April 2009 and August 
2009, Applicant made three monthly 
payments of $50. (Item 6) In September 
2009, he made a $20 payment. (Item 6) 
He has made no additional payments 
since being informed the account was 
sold to another collection firm. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
e Credit card collection 
account. (Items 7, 8, 11, 
12) 
$5,851 In September 2009, Applicant made a 
$20 payment on this debt. (Item 6) 
f Bank account collection. 
(Items 7, 8,11, 12) 
$3,178 Unpaid. (Item 6) 
g Student loan account 
placed for collection. 
(Items 7, 8, 12) 
$2,690 Unpaid. Applicant has been 
unsuccessful in contacting the creditor. 
(Item 6) 
h Signature loan account 
charged off. (Items 7, 8, 
11, 12) 
$4,357 Account opened in 2000 and become 
delinquent in November 2003, when he 
left the Marine Corps. In September 
2009, Applicant made a $20 payment 
on this debt. (Item 6) 
i Credit card account 
placed for collection by a 
federal credit union. (Item 
11, 12) 
$1,408 Unpaid. (Item 6) 
j Credit card account 
placed for collection by a 
federal credit union. (Item 
11, 12) 
$653 Unpaid. (Item 6) 
k Office of Recovery 
Services for child support 
judgment filed in 2005. 
(Item 12) 
 
$3,340 Applicant is current on his child support 
payments. In April 2003, Applicant 
became past due on his child support 
obligations. In November 2007, the 
matter was resolved. (Item 6)  
l Dentist bill placed for 
collection. (Item 11) 
$2,700 
 
Applicant is disputing this debt because 
the dental treatment he received only 
made matters worse. (Item 6) 
m School account placed for 
collection. (Item 11, 12) 
$975 
 
Unpaid. (Item 6) 
n Gas utility company 
account placed for 
collection. (Item 12) 
$146 Unpaid. (Item 6) 
o Cable account placed for 
collection. (Item 11, 12) 
$106 
 
Unpaid. (Item 6) 
 Total debt listed in SOR $31,201  
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion of obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Behavior in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may 
behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of 
financial problems. Applicant had one unpaid judgment, one charged-off bank loan, and 
13 accounts placed for collection totaling approximately $31,000. Although now current 
on his child support obligations, he is still delinquent on the charged-off signature loan 
and 13 collection accounts totaling approximately $28,000. The evidence supports 
application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
7 
 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; or 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The mitigating factors listed in AG ¶ 20(a) do not apply. The debts are numerous 
and remain unpaid. The debts were not incurred under such circumstances that they 
are unlikely to recur. His financial problems started in 2003, when he left the Marine 
Corps. His continuing financial problems cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
The mitigating conditions listed in AG & 20(b) have only limited application. In 
2001, Applicant divorced and incurred a $300 monthly child support obligation. When he 
remarried in 2007, his wife’s daughter required special attention and is currently in a 
program costing $1,750 per month on which Applicant pays $450 monthly. The divorce 
was largely beyond his control, however that occurred more than nine years ago. The 
daughter’s expense is also an event largely beyond his control, however, he is paying 
the residential program $450 monthly, which is the amount of child support received for 
the daughter. He failed to document any additional expenses for the daughter. AG & 
20(b) has limited applicability.  
 
The mitigating factors listed in AG &20(c) do not apply because there is no 
indication Applicant has received financial counseling nor is there an indication his 
financial problems are under control. As of May 2010, his monthly net income was $38, 
which is insufficient to address his accounts placed for collection. In May 2010, he 
stated his job during the summer would pay him at least 32 hours overtime per pay 
period. He failed to indicate if he received the overtime pay or if he used it to pay his 
collection accounts.  
 
Applicant was behind on his child support obligation which resulted in the 2005 
judgment. His $300 monthly child support has always been deducted from his pay. He 
is current on his child support obligation and has no arrearage. I find for him as to SOR 
¶ 1.k. Since July 2009, when questioned about his financial problems, he has been 
aware of the Government’s concerns. Since that time, he made five payments of $20 
each. This is insufficient to show a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debt. AG &20 (d) does not apply. 
 
8 
 
 
 
Applicant disputes the dentist bill (SOR ¶ 1.l, $2,700) because it did not help his 
problem. For the mitigating conditions listed in AG &20(e) to apply there not only needs 
to be a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt, but there must 
also be documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or evidence the action 
is being resolved. Applicant has not done this. AG & 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial problems 
started when he left the Marine Corps in 2003. He has been employed with his current 
employer since March 2006–more than four years. In June 2009, he stated he intended 
to take full responsibility for his debts and hoped to have them paid within two years. 
Since that time he has made $120 in payments on the accounts placed for collection. 
With his currently monthly remainder of $38, it is unlikely he will be able to make 
payment on the collection accounts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l and 1.o:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
