                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01344 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations, Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On July 19, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F, H, and G. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 13, 2010, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on September 28, 2010. The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
and it was received on November 2, 2010. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
object to the FORM and did not submit additional material. The case was assigned to 
me on December 23, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, except he did not provide any 
answer to ¶ 1.p. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
statements submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He is not married and has no children. He earned a 
college degree in 2003, and has worked for a federal contractor since 2006.  
 
 Applicant admitted he owes the 15 delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.o, totaling approximately $49,889. He accumulated the debts between the 
years 2003 and 2008. He is attempting to develop a budget and live within his means. 
He hopes to pay his delinquent debts by paying the smallest first. He recently moved, 
which impacted his ability to start his payments. He provided an outline of a plan 
indicating when he would start paying each debt and indicated they would all be 
resolved in the next four years. He did not provide documents to support he has begun 
making payments on any of the debts. There is no indication Applicant has received 
financial counseling.  
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquent income tax debt to the failure of his employer, 
in 2005, to withhold taxes from his pay. In his statement to an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator in 2009, he stated that he learned in 2007 that he 
owed money to the IRS and took a loan from his father to repay the debt. In 2008, he 
was contacted by the IRS and advised he owed back taxes for tax years 2005 and 
2007. He stated he paid the debt in full in 2008. In 2009, he was again contacted by the 
IRS because he owed 2008 income taxes. He stated he entered into a payment plan 
with the IRS to pay $220 a month. His first payment was due January 2010, and the 
term of the agreement was for 60 months. Applicant admitted in his OPM interview that 
he was aware when he completed his 2005, 2007, and 2008 federal income tax returns 
that he owed money to the IRS. He did not have the funds to pay them at the time. He 
provided documentation that he made a $220 payment in March 2010 and April 2010. 
No additional documentation was provided.1 
 
 Applicant was suspended in 2007, by his employer, for one week for misusing 
the company’s credit card. Applicant did not provide a response to this allegation in his 
answer. In his OPM statement he admitted to improperly using his employer’s credit 
card, which was a violation of the employer’s policy. The card was to be used only for 
1 Answer to SOR; GE 8 at 122-123. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
business expenses, and he used the credit card for personal purchases. His misuse 
was discovered when he was delinquent in paying the credit card bill.2  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial issues to overspending and then not paying his 
bills timely. He admitted the debts were not beyond his control. He stated he is able to 
pay his monthly expenses.  
 
 Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from about 1997 to September 
2009. He purchased marijuana on various occasions. He sold marijuana on various 
occasions. He used cocaine on approximately two occasions in about 2000 to 2001. He 
used two prescription drugs, Adderall and Ritalin, without a prescription approximately 
weekly between 2000 and 2003. 
 
 Applicant was arrested on about November 30, 2007, and was charged with 
marijuana possession, less than 40 grams, use or deliver drug paraphernalia, and 
driving under the influence (DUI). In accordance with a plea agreement, Applicant was 
found guilty of DUI, and the other charges were dropped. He was sentenced to 365 
days in jail, with 364 days suspended, fined $1,200, placed on probation for five years, 
and ordered to complete an alcohol assessment, and attend a victim’s impact panel. In 
his OPM statement, he indicated that he attended an alcohol and drug assessment, but 
was unable to recall the name or address of it. He stated he was assessed with “no 
problems” related to alcohol or drugs.3  
 
 In his OPM interview of October 29, 2009, Applicant stated he had not consumed 
marijuana since June 2009. However, he planned on continuing casual consumption of 
marijuana in the future. He did not believe his use of illegal drugs contributed to any 
problems. He indicated that he reduced his illegal drug use in the past six years and 
anticipated limiting it in the future. He has never received any treatment for drug-related 
issues. 4 
 
 Applicant stated in his answer that he has not used any illegal drugs or misused 
any prescription drugs since September 2009. His statement is inconsistent with the 
previous statement he made to the OPM investigator. He indicated in his answer that he 
never purchased large quantities of marijuana with the intent to sell for profit. He 
“merely ‘sold’ extremely small quantities to friends at cost.”5 Applicant used marijuana 
while he was on probation. He remains on probation until 2012. His answer to the SOR 
did not address his use of drugs in the future. 
 
2 GE 8 at page 127. 
 
3 GE 8 at 125-127. 
 
4 Id. 
 
5 Answer to SOR. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant was arrested in about August 2001, and charged with operating under 
the influence. The charge was reduced to operating while intoxicated. He was required 
to pay a fine.  
 
 Applicant continues to consume alcohol, at times to excess and to the point of 
intoxication, even though he continues to be on probation for an alcohol-related offense. 
He intends to continue consuming alcohol.  
 
 Applicant admitted his criminal arrests bring into question his judgment. He 
believes they were isolated situations. He does not believe he has an alcohol problem. 
He indicated the last time he drank alcohol and drove was in November 2007, when he 
was arrested. He attended the victim’s impact panel and it had a profound impact on 
him.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant has 15 delinquent debts totaling more than $49,889 that are not paid. 
He began accumulating delinquent debt in 2003. He admitted his delinquent debts were 
due to his overspending and then being unable to make the payments. He admitted he 
misused his employer issued credit card for personal use. I find there is sufficient 
evidence to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant admitted he owes all 15 delinquent debts alleged. He provided a 
proposed plan on what he intends to do, but did not provide documented proof that he 
has started the plan. He did provide proof that he has made two payments toward his 
debt to the IRS. He admitted the debts were not beyond his control. He has made 
limited efforts to pay his delinquent debts. His lack of action to resolve the delinquent 
debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 
20(a) and 20(b) do not apply. Applicant offered no evidence that he received financial 
counseling or that there are clear indications he is acting in a responsible way to resolve 
his debts. He has not made sufficient good-faith payments to his creditors or taken other 
action to resolve his delinquent debts. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
 
7 
 
 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 
and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and  
 
Applicant has used marijuana with varying frequency from about 1997 to at least 
September 2009. He used it while on probation. He purchased marijuana for his 
personal use. He sold small quantities of marijuana to friends and not for profit. I find 
these disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 
26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation;  
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant has been using illegal drugs since 1997. His most recent use of 
marijuana was in September 2009. His behavior is recent. His probation does not seem 
to be a deterrent to him to stop using illegal drugs. I find his behavior is recent and there 
 
8 
 
 
is minimal evidence to support it is unlikely to recur. His drug abuse casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Therefore, AG ¶ 26(a) does not 
apply. Applicant has not demonstrated an intention not to abuse illegal drugs in the 
future. In his 2009 statement to OPM, he indicated he would likely use marijuana in the 
future. In his answer to the SOR, he does not address his future use. There is no 
evidence that Applicant’s abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged 
illness. There is no evidence Applicant satisfactorily completed a prescribed drug 
treatment program. I find none of the remaining mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:  
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 including:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
Applicant had an alcohol-related incident in 2001, and again in 2007, when he 
was convicted of DUI. He remains on probation for the 2007 DUI conviction until 2012. 
The above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and 
especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt o the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
 (b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
 (c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has not  history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
 
9 
 
 
 (d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant has two alcohol-related convictions. His last conviction was in 2007. He 
remains on probation for this conviction until 2012. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
information or evidence regarding his current alcohol consumption pattern or any 
substantiation that he was diagnosed as having “no problem.” Applicant continues to 
consume alcohol, so without additional information, I am unable to determine if he has 
overcome his alcohol-related issues, and established a pattern of responsible use. 
Therefore, I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F, H and G, in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is 29 years old. He has a significant history of illegal drug use. He indicated in 
his statement to OPM that he had reduced his illegal drug use, but he did not provide a 
clear and convincing statement that he intended to stop using illegal drugs in the future. 
Applicant has approximately $49,889 in delinquent debts that remains unpaid. He 
admitted the debts were due to over spending and then not paying his bills. He misused 
 
10 
 
 
his employer’s credit card. He pled guilty to DUI in 2007 and remains on probation until 
2012. Applicant’s use of marijuana after he was placed on probation from his DUI is 
troubling. Applicant continues to consume alcohol after his DUI conviction. He provided 
insufficient information to conclude that he is using alcohol responsibly. I find that SOR 
¶ 2.a includes the conduct under ¶ 2.g, and therefore find for Applicant under SOR ¶ 
2.g. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion and mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guidelines for Financial Considerations, Drug Involvement, 
and Alcohol Consumption.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.p:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.g:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.c.   Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
