                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------                     )  ISCR Case No. 10-01169 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
In 1966, Applicant was born in Pakistan. In 1988, he immigrated to the United 
States. In 1996, he became a U.S. citizen. His spouse and six children were born in the 
United States and are U.S. citizens. Although his parents were scheduled to immigrate 
to the United States from Pakistan in the near future, they continue to be at risk until 
they depart Pakistan. Foreign influence concerns are not mitigated. Access to classified 
information is denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 21, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (hereinafter SF-86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On 
June 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence) (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. The 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for him, and it recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. 
 
On July 9, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On August 23, 2010, 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On August 25, 2010, the case was 
assigned to me. On September 22, 2010, DOHA issued a hearing notice setting the 
hearing for October 18, 2010. (HE 1) The hearing was held on October 18, 2010, as 
scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits (GE 1-2) 
(Transcript (Tr.) 17-18), and Applicant offered 24 exhibits. (Tr. 19-26, 29; AE A-W) I 
admitted GE 1-2 and AE A-W. (Tr. 18, 84-85) Additionally, I admitted the SOR, 
response to the SOR, and the hearing notice. (HE 1-3)  
 
Applicant provided the decisions of Administrative Judge Howe in ISCR Case 02-
32673 (A.J. June 17, 2003) and Administrative Judge Metz in ISCR Case No. 05-14555 
(A.J. Sept. 29, 2006). (Tr. 22-26; AE C-D) These two decisions discuss foreign influence 
relating to relatives of those two Applicants who were living in Pakistan. The two 
decisions conclude security concerns are mitigated. (HE C-D) The decisions by 
administrative judges provide persuasive albeit non-binding authority. On October 27, 
2010, I received the hearing transcript. On November 25, 2010, I received eight 
additional exhibits from Applicant, which were admitted without objection. (AE X-EE) On 
January 5, 2011, and January 19, 2011, I received emails from Applicant which were 
admitted without objection. (AE FF, GG)  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning the 
Pakistan. (Tr. 14; Administrative Notice Request, July 27, 2010) Department Counsel 
provided supporting documents to show verification, detail and context for these facts in 
the Administrative Notice request. Id. Applicant did not object to me taking 
administrative notice of all of the facts in all of the documents. (Tr. 14) See the Pakistan 
section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, for the material facts from 
Department Counsel’s submissions on Pakistan.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the underlying facts alleged in the SOR. (HE 3) After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.   
 
In 1966, Applicant was born in Pakistan. (Tr. 6, GE 1) He immigrated to the 
United States in 1988 when he was 21 years old. (Tr. 18, 39-40; GE 2 at 1) He became 
a U.S. citizen in 1996. (Tr. 39) He is an engineer, who has been employed by a major 
aircraft manufacturing company for the last nine years. (Tr. 39)     
 
Applicant married in 1991 and divorced in 1998. (Tr. 7, 41; GE 2 at 2) He met his 
first wife in the United States, and she is a U.S. citizen. (GE 2 at 1) He has five children 
from his first marriage, who are ages 15, 15, 16, 18, and 20. (Tr. 7, 44-45; GE 2 at 2) 
His first wife’s father was in the U.S. Navy serving in the United Kingdom when she was 
born. (Tr. 60; GE 2) His five children were born in the United States and reside in the 
United States. (Tr. 44) He has never taken his children to Pakistan. (Tr. 45)  
 
Applicant married his current spouse in 2000, and has one four-month-old child 
with his spouse. (Tr. 7, 44) His spouse and child were born in the United States, and 
they live in the United States. (Tr. 44, 60) In 2001, he received a bachelor’s degree in 
aerospace engineering from a U.S. university. (Tr. 8) The only time he took his spouse 
to Pakistan was in 2005. (Tr. 45-46; GE 2 at 8) 
 
Applicant owns a home and a rental property in the United States. (Tr. 41) His 
mortgage on his residence is $198,000, and his equity is about $15,000. (Tr. 41) His 
mortgage on the rental property is $75,000, and his equity is about $15,000. (Tr. 42) He 
has approximately $100,000 in a U.S. 401(k) account, and has approximately $20,000 
in U.S investment, checking, and savings accounts. (Tr. 41-43) He does not have any 
non-United States investments. (Tr. 43)  
  
There is no derogatory information concerning Applicant’s police or financial 
records. He has never been fired from a job. There is no evidence of record showing 
any U.S. arrests, illegal drug possession or use, or alcohol-related incidents.   
 
Applicant’s father, mother, and two sisters are citizens and residents of Pakistan. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b; HE 2) His father, who is a retired airline employee, was born in 
India in 1936. (GE 2 at 7) His mother is not employed outside their home. (Tr. 61) In 
November 2009, Applicant’s parents applied for a visa to enter the United States. (AE 
A, B)  Applicant has sponsored his parents for immigration into the United States. (SOR 
¶ 1.c; Tr. 19; HE 3) On November 1, 2010, Applicant filed documents with the U.S. 
State Department, including $400 for each of his parents, to process their visas. (AE 
 
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or locations 
in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information. 
Unless stated otherwise, the sources for the facts in this section are Applicant’s SF-86 (GE 1) or his 
investigative personal subject interview (PSI). (GE 2) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
AA, BB, CC, DD, EE) He also provided their Immigrant Visa and Alien Registration 
documents. (AE DD, EE) He frequently communicates with his parents as he arranges 
their immigration to the United States. (Tr. 61) At his hearing, Applicant said he 
expected his parents to permanently immigrate to the United States around November 
1, 2010. (Tr. 48-49) On January 5, 2011, Applicant advised that on December 27, 2010, 
he sent photographs of his parents to the Immigration and Naturalization Service, and 
that his parents still needed to complete an interview at the embassy in Pakistan. The 
interview is scheduled for early March 2011. (AE GG) He estimated it will be two or 
three months before they arrive in the United States. (AE FF) 
 
Applicant has two sisters living in Pakistan. (Tr. 20-21) They are both older than 
Applicant. (Tr. 20-21) One sister is an accountant, and the other is a housewife. (Tr. 21) 
One husband works for a car manufacturing company, and the other works in an office. 
(Tr. 21) Applicant has once yearly telephone contact with his sisters, who are citizens 
and residents of Pakistan. (GE 2 at 7) He also visited his sisters when he went to 
Pakistan. (GE 2 at 7) 
 
In 2005, Applicant sponsored the daughter-in-law of a friend into the United 
States. (SOR ¶ 1.d; GE 2 at 8; Tr. 27) He indicated to the U.S. State Department that he 
would financially support her, if necessary, after she arrived in the United States. She 
moved to a state that is more than a 1,000 miles from Applicant’s state. He did not have 
any need to provide support or assistance to her.  
   
Applicant traveled to Pakistan in 1997, 2002, 2005, and 2007. (SOR ¶ 1.e; HE 3; 
Tr. 46) His visits to Pakistan have been to the city of Karachi, and his sisters live in 
Karachi. (Tr. 35-38) Karachi is located in the most southern section of Pakistan, and the 
primary area of terrorism is in northern Pakistan on the Afghanistan border. (Tr. 36)    
 
 Applicant has two uncles, and several cousins who live in the United States. (Tr. 
46) Applicant is a member of his company’s flying club. (Tr. 47) He is also involved with 
several U.S. charitable associations. (AE G) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s technical leader at his employment for the last six years, two co-
workers at his current employment, a friend, and a previous employer describe 
Applicant as friendly, loyal, ethical, organized, professional, faithful, responsible, 
trustworthy, and diligent. (AE H, I, J, L, M) He is a valuable asset and is highly 
recommended for continued employment with his employer. (AE J, L)  
 
 Applicant’s performance evaluations document his hard work and contributions to 
his employer. (AE N) These evaluations describe his increasing professionalism, 
expertise, and leadership. (AE N) His employer has promoted him two levels over the 
past nine years. (AE N) 
   
A Chief U.S. Magistrate Judge has known Applicant for ten years, and is his 
friend. (AE K) She lauds Applicant’s integrity, high standards, and trustworthiness. (AE 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
K) She emphasized that he is professional, responsible, and has never engaged in 
illegal behavior. (AE K)   
 
Pakistan 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic with a population of more than 167 
million people. After September 11, 2001, Pakistan supported the United States and an 
international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom to remove the Taliban from 
power. Despite this support, members of the Taliban are known to be in the Federally 
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan and in the Balochistan Province, which 
borders Iran and Afghanistan. The leader of the Taliban operates openly in Pakistan, as 
are extremists from the Pakistani Taliban and Al Qaida. Taliban financing has been 
traced from Pakistan to Afghanistan, allowing the insurgency in Afghanistan to 
strengthen its military and technical capabilities. Pakistan has intensified its 
counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for dealing with militants has been mixed. 
 
The U.S. Department of State has defined several areas of Pakistan to be 
terrorist safe havens. The security situation in Afghanistan worsened in 2008, driven in 
part by insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous 
Afghan-Pakistan border. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide vital 
sanctuary to Al Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist groups. 
Al-Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the Afghan 
insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and Western interests 
in Pakistan and worldwide. Together with the Afghan Taliban and other extremists 
groups, Al Qaida uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare 
regional and transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and 
supplies. Al Qaida and its extremists have waged a campaign of destabilizing suicide 
attacks throughout Pakistan. The attacks targeted high profile government, military, and 
western-related sites. Nearly 1,000 individuals were killed in 2008 due to such attacks. 
In the last three months of 2009, terrorists based in Pakistan conducted at least 40 
suicide terrorist attacks in major cities of Pakistan and killed about 600 Pakistani 
civilians and security force personnel.   
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to 
Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Since 2007, several American citizens present in 
Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other personal reasons. The human rights 
situation in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial killings, torture, and disappearances 
occur. Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police corruption is widespread, and the 
Pakistani government maintains several domestic intelligence agencies to monitor 
politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign 
intelligence agents. Credible reports indicate that authorities use wiretaps and monitor 
mail without the requisite court approval, and also monitor phones and electronic 
messages. In addition, Pakistan continues to develop its own nuclear infrastructure, 
expand nuclear weapon stockpiles, and seek more advanced warhead and delivery 
systems. In the aftermath of Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, the United 
States cut-off military aid to Pakistan for several years.  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
In 2005, Karachi had a population of more than 11.5 million people. It is 
hundreds of miles from the safe havens and contested areas on the border with 
Afghanistan. In the period of 1997 to 2007, there were several bombings and other 
terrorist incidents in Karachi.2   
  
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its alliance with the United States in 
counterterrorism methods. Pakistan committed to elimination of terrorist camps on the 
Pakistan-Afghanistan border and subsequently sent thousands of troops and sustained 
hundreds of casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency 
efforts, and demonstrated determination and persistence in combating militants. The 
United States is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster Pakistan’s military forces and 
security. In 2003, President Bush announced that the United States would provide 
Pakistan with $3 billion in economic and military aid over the next five years beginning 
in 2005.    
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
 
2See U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Pakistan, July 21, 2010, at 12 (Attachment I to 
Department Counsel’s Administrative Notice Request). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guideline B (foreign influence) with respect to the allegations set forth 
in the SOR. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) do apply because of Applicant’s relationships with his 
parents, who are living in Pakistan. Applicant was born in Pakistan. At the time of his 
hearing, his parents were living in Pakistan, and they are expected to remain there for 
several additional months.      
 
Applicant’s communications with his parents are frequent. There is a rebuttable 
presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, their immediate 
family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 
(App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has not attempted to rebut this presumption. 
Applicant’s relationships with his parents living in Pakistan are sufficient to create “a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.” His relationships with residents of Pakistan create a concern about 
Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and his desire to 
help his parents who are in Pakistan. For example, if the Pakistan Government or 
terrorists in Pakistan wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, it could exert pressure on 
his parents. Applicant would then be subject to indirect coercion through his relationship 
with his parents and classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Pakistan 
is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has 
a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
States. The relationship of Pakistan with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his parents living in Pakistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist his parents living in Pakistan who might be coerced by 
terrorists or other Governmental entities in Pakistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Pakistan 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or his 
parents living in Pakistan, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
Applicant’s communications with his parents living in Pakistan are frequent, and he 
continues to feel an obligation to them and affection for them. Applicant’s concern for 
his parents is a positive character trait that increases his trustworthiness; however, it 
also increases the concern about potential foreign influence. Department Counsel 
produced substantial evidence to raise the issue of potential foreign pressure or 
attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is necessary 
about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), 8(c), and 8(f) have limited applicability. Applicant traveled to 
Pakistan in 1997, 2002, 2005, and 2007. Applicant has frequent contact with his 
parents, who live in Pakistan. Applicant has quite limited contacts with his siblings living 
in Pakistan, and security concerns relating to his siblings are fully mitigated. The 
amount of contacts between an Applicant and relatives living in a foreign country are not 
the only test for determining whether someone could be coerced through their relatives. 
Because of his connections to his parents, Applicant is not able to fully meet his burden 
of showing there is “little likelihood that [he and his spouse’s relationships with relatives 
who are residents of Pakistan] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” It 
is evident that he feels an obligation to his parent’s welfare.    
 
Applicant has “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He 
has strong family connections to the United States. His spouse, six children, and 
several other relatives are U.S. citizens and live in the United States. Applicant owns a 
house in the United States and has substantial investments in the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his parents who live in 
Pakistan. There is no evidence that terrorists, criminals, the Pakistan Government, or 
those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his parents in 
Pakistan to coerce Applicant or his parents for classified or sensitive information. 
Applicant has not yet received access to classified information and as such, there is a 
reduced possibility that Applicant or Applicant’s family would be specifically selected as 
targets for improper coercion or exploitation. While the Government does not have any 
burden to prove the presence of such evidence, if such record evidence was present, 
Applicant would have a heavy evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate foreign 
influence security concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ recent 
relationship with Pakistan, and especially Pakistan’s systematic human rights violations 
and most of the ever present danger from terrorists and those who seek to damage U.S 
interests. The conduct of terrorists in Pakistan makes it more likely that terrorists would 
attempt to coerce Applicant through his parents living in Pakistan, if the terrorists 
determined it was advantageous to do so.     
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with his parents living in Pakistan. Applicant is not required to 
report his contacts with his parents living in Pakistan. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has some applicability. Applicant has substantial property interests in 
the United States, which include his employment in the United States, and the value of 
his home and investments in the United States. However, this mitigating condition can 
only fully mitigate security concerns raised under AG ¶ 7(e), and AG ¶ 7(e) is not raised 
in this case. Applicant does not own any property or have any investments in Pakistan 
or elsewhere outside the United States.   
 
In sum, the primary security concern is Applicant’s close relationships with his 
parents, who live in Pakistan. His parents, who live in Pakistan, are readily available for 
coercion. Although the Pakistan Government’s failure to follow the rule of law further 
increases the risk of coercion, the major cause of concern is the prevalence of terrorists 
in Pakistan. The concern about his visits to Pakistan in 1997, 2002, 2005, and 2007 are 
mitigated because they are not recent. But for his parents living in Pakistan, all foreign 
influence security concerns would be mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns. Appellant has 
strong connections to the United States. In 1988, he immigrated to the United States. In 
1996, he became a U.S. citizen. He is an engineer and has been employed by the same 
firm for the last nine years. His spouse and six children are U.S. citizens and live in the 
United States. 
  
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
There is no derogatory information concerning Applicant’s police or financial 
records. There is no evidence of record showing any U.S. arrests, illegal drug 
possession or use, or alcohol-related incidents. The Chief U.S. Magistrate Judge and 
several colleagues and supervisors at work lauded Applicant’s dedication, diligence, 
and responsibility. He is loyal to the United States and he considers the United States to 
be his home. Applicant’s demeanor, sincerity, and honesty at his hearing are important 
factors militating towards approval of his access to classified information. 
 
The circumstances tending to support denial of Applicant’s clearance are more 
significant than the factors weighing towards approval of his clearance at this time. 
Applicant’s parents live in Pakistan. Terrorists have killed hundreds of Pakistani citizens 
in the last two years, and would not hesitate to coerce Applicant through his parents to 
obtain classified information. Applicant had frequent contact with his parents and is 
committed to their welfare. Appellant’s parents have made important steps towards 
moving from Pakistan to the United States, and once they have left Pakistan security 
concerns will be substantially alleviated.     
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Pakistan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in Pakistan, as well as the dangers existing in Pakistan.3 Although 
there is less danger of terrorist attack in Karachi than in northern Pakistan, terrorists are 
able to strike anywhere in Pakistan, including Karachi. The danger of coercion from 
terrorists in Pakistan government is more likely than in many other countries. Although 
Pakistan and the United States are allied militarily, diplomatically, and through trade, the 
Pakistan Government has had significant difficulty maintaining order within its borders 
and in the suppression of terrorists. I have continuing doubts that Applicant’s parents 
living in Pakistan will remain safe from terrorist coercion should Applicant receive 
access to classified information.        
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has not fully 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns arising from his parents continued 
residence in Pakistan.  
 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion). 
  
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    Against APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b to 1.e: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
