 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-14135 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline K 
(handling protected information) and Guideline E (personal conduct). Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 13, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines K and E. This action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. In an undated document, Applicant answered the SOR. The case was 
 
2 
 
 
assigned to me on January 8, 2016. DOHA issued the Notice of Hearing on January 29, 
2016. The hearing was held as scheduled on February 22, 2016.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
7, while Applicant testified and offered no exhibits. After the hearing, he submitted 
documents that were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F. All exhibits were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was 
received on March 1, 2016. 
 
Procedural Matter 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.c by changing the listed month 
from May to April. Applicant had no objection to the amendment. The motion was 
granted.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old security guard who is being sponsored for a security 
clearance by a federal contractor. He first began working for that contractor in about 
February 2010, but subsequently has been employed by other companies. He 
graduated from high school in 2002, attended college without earning a degree, and 
qualified as an emergency medical technician (EMT). From 2002 to 2008, he served in 
the Army National Guard, achieved the grade of specialist (E-4), and received an 
honorable discharge. He deployed to Iraq from January 2007 to February 2008. He is 
divorced and has a child who is nine years old. He was first granted a security 
clearance in 2004.2 
 
The SOR alleged under Guideline K that Applicant committed three security 
violations in 2010 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c). Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged the he was 
charged with assault on a family member in 2009 (SOR ¶ 2.a); that he was terminated 
from a job during a probationary period in 2009 (SOR ¶ 2.b); that he was counseled for 
neglect of duty and falsification in 2009 (SOR ¶ 2.c); that he illegally gained access to a 
hotel in 2009 (SOR ¶ 2.d); that he was returned early from an overseas assignment and 
placed on probation in 2010 (SOR 2.e); and that he falsified his responses to two 
questions in an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SOR ¶¶ 
2.f and 2.g). The allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c were also cross-alleged under Guideline 
E in a single allegation (SOR ¶ 2.h). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 2.a-2.e, did not respond to the allegation in SOR ¶ 
2.h, and denied the remaining allegations.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 10-11, 42. 
2 Tr. 5-6, 62, 65, 92-93, 102-104; GE 1, 2. 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 2.e, and 2.h – three security violations in a two-month 
period, being returned from an overseas assignment without completing a 
contract, and being placed on probation in 2010. From March to April 2010, 
Applicant worked as a security guard for a company [hereafter referred to as “Company 
A”] at an overseas location. In that job, his duties included verifying the eligibility of 
those seeking access to controlled spaces and classified information. 
 
On March 1, 2010, a team leader at Company A issued a memorandum for the 
record (MFR) that reflected Applicant closed, but did not lock, a safe in a secured space 
and failed to record properly the opening and closing of the safe and the logging in and 
out of classified documents. (Allegation in SOR 1.a). Applicant was counseled to ensure 
that all procedures were followed, especially those concerning the safeguarding of 
classified information, and admonished that further instances of unsatisfactory 
performance would result in more severe corrective action. The MFR reflected it was 
placed in “personnel file,” but it does not contain Applicant’s signature or any indication 
that he was shown it or informed about it.4 
 
Applicant testified that he never willfully violated any security protocol that was 
properly explained to him. This incident occurred soon after he began working for 
Company A. He arrived at the overseas location less than 48 hours before the incident. 
It happened his first day on the job. He claimed that he was not given proper guidance 
on the opening and closing of the safe. The safe was not secure because he failed to 
spin the lock dial. The safe was located in a secure room and the classified information 
was not subject to compromise. Additionally, a person cleared for classified information 
signed out a document, but Applicant did not know there was a part of the document 
that he was required to fill out. He acknowledged that he made mistakes because he did 
not ask enough questions and stated he did not thereafter make those same mistakes 
again.5 
 
On March 10, 2010, a team leader at Company A issued a MFR that reflected 
Applicant failed to follow orders by permitting a non-cleared worker to have access to 
the controlled access area (CAA) without verifying the worker was on the CAA access 
roster. (Allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant was questioned about this security violation 
and stated that he recognized the worker. The MFR noted that the worker had just 
returned from a leave of absence and had not yet been placed back on the CAA access 
roster. The MFR also indicated that it would serve as a written reprimand of 
unsatisfactory performance. The MFR reflected it was placed in “personnel file,” but it 
does not contain Applicant’s signature or any indication that he was shown it or 
informed about it.6 
                                                          
4 GE 2, 3. 
5 Tr. 13, 21-34, 41; GE 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
6 GE 2, 4. Interestingly, the text of the MFR issued on April 19, 2010, referred to an incident that 
occurred on May 17-18, 2010. An email attached to the MFR corrected those dates to April 17-18, 2010. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant testified that this was his second day working at a particular post. He 
stated that he read the wrong weekly CAA access roster at the post and the non-
cleared worker was listed on that roster. This was an outdated access roster. Applicant 
claimed that, due to a clerical error, the individual was not added to the most recent 
access roster. He claimed he recognized the individual as being a person on the access 
roster from the previous day, but that was the wrong access roster. When the error was 
discovered, the old roster was taken away and a new roster was issued with the 
individual in question added to it. Applicant stated his team leader was upset that he 
had not checked the latest access roster. He was counseled for this incident, but did not 
remember receiving a written warning at that time.7 
 
On April 19, 2010, a team leader at Company A issued a MFR that reflected 
Applicant failed to conduct properly a page inventory of classified documents on April 
17, 2010. (Allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c). The MFR noted that two of the documents had 
been previously combined and another had 48 pages removed for destruction. 
Applicant’s inventory failed to account for the missing pages. He was asked how he 
conducted the inventory and responded by saying he conducted a page-by-page count. 
When asked to explain the discrepancy involving the missing pages, he acknowledged 
his mistake. The MFR reflected it was placed in “personnel file,” but it does not contain 
Applicant’s signature or any indication that he was shown it or informed about it.8 
 
 In his background interview, Applicant stated that he counted the pages. At the 
hearing, he testified that every week a document inventory was conducted and every 
month a more extensive page-by-page document inventory was conducted. He stated 
that he made the mistake of believing this inventory was the weekly document inventory 
instead of the monthly page-by-page inventory. He claimed the team leader had 
improperly taken the missing pages and stored them in his room without logging them 
out. He believed the team leader was setting a trap for the guard conducting the 
inventory. This incident resulted in a conflict between him and the team leader. He 
contacted the program manager and reported that the team leader improperly handled 
documents. He also indicated that he wrote a detailed rebuttal to the counseling.9 
 
 Shortly after the incident on April 17, 2010, Applicant was sent home before the 
completion of his contract. A payroll document reflected “[h]e is on probation. Please 
hold pay.” (Allegation in SOR ¶ 2.e). He stated that he received all of the written 
warnings/reprimands when he was leaving this overseas location. He further stated that 
he was so upset about being sent home that he did not read the documents that were 
given to him. He did not consider his return to the United States as a termination. His 
program manager led him believe that he was sent back because of the personality 
                                                          
7 Tr. 34-42; GE 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
8 GE 2, 5. Interestingly, the text of the MFR issued on April 19, 2010, referred to an incident that 
occurred on May 17-18, 2010. An email attached to the MFR corrected those dates to April 17-18, 2010. 
9 Tr. 39-40, 42-48; GE 2 at 9-11; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
5 
 
 
conflict with the team leader and told him that he would get another assignment. He 
resumed working for Company A at another overseas location in October 2010. This is 
also the company that is currently sponsoring Applicant for a security clearance.10 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.a – charged with assault on family member in 2009. On January 9, 
2009, Applicant was issued a summons to appear in court for the charge of assault on a 
family member, a Class 1 misdemeanor. On April 28, 2009, Applicant pleaded not guilty 
to the charge. The court found there were sufficient facts to establish guilt but deferred 
adjudication for one year. He was required to attend anger-management classes and 
avoid committing any offenses. In April 2011, the charge was dismissed.11 
 
 In his e-QIP, Applicant disclosed this charge. He testified that his ex-wife was 
striking him during an argument. He tried to block her hands but accidently hit her on 
the side of the head with an open hand. He testified that he never hit his ex-wife before 
or after that incident.12 
 
SOR ¶ 2.b – termination from a job during a probationary period in March 
2009. In his e-QIP, Applicant disclosed that he was terminated from a security guard 
position with Company B near the end of a six-month probationary period. Company B 
was not required to provide an explanation for the termination during that period. He 
noted that he was accused of wearing an earbud linked to an unauthorized MP3 player 
while at work. He stated the earbud was for a cell phone that was permitted. He also 
indicated that this incident happened about a month before his probationary period 
ended, and he was never written up for this incident.13  
 
Applicant testified that he believed that he was terminated from the probationary 
position because of the pending domestic-violence charge. If he was convicted of the 
charge, he would have been prohibited from carrying a firearm at work. If he continued 
to work for Company B beyond the probationary period, he would have become a 
member of the employee’s union and the company would have had to hire an attorney 
to remove him from the job if he could no longer carry a firearm.  He indicated the 
employer was willing to rehire him after the domestic-violence charge was dismissed.14  
 
SOR ¶ 2.c – counseled for neglect of duty and falsification in September 
2009. Applicant’s background interview reflected that, while employed with Company C 
overseas, he was counseled for neglect of duty and falsification of log book. During the 
                                                          
10 Tr. 42-51, 93-97; GE 7; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
11 GE 2 at 20-21, 6.  
12 Tr. 59-65, 71; GE 1, 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
13 GE 1, 2 at 15-16.  
14 Tr. 66-72; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
6 
 
 
interview, he voluntarily provided a copy of the official counseling he received on 
September 7, 2009, for this incident.15 
 
Applicant testified that the night shift consisted of two guards who manned two 
posts. Usually the guards would rotate between the posts each night. On the night in 
question, however, the schedule did not rotate the guards between the posts. Applicant 
and the other guard assumed their assignments were rotated and stood them in that 
manner. In doing so, they signed the logs for the wrong posts. He claimed no dereliction 
of duty occurred because both posts were properly manned. The other guard also was 
written up for this discrepancy.16 
 
SOR ¶ 2.d – illegally gained access to hotel by opening a sliding door in 
2009. While working for Company C overseas from July to December 2009, Applicant 
resided in a hotel. The hotel was connected to a mall. There was a sliding door from the 
mall to the hotel. After a certain time each night, the door was secured. On two 
occasions, Applicant went through the sliding door after it was secured. He claimed that 
he was given permission from the guard in the mall to use the door on both occasions. 
After the second occasion, the hotel management was upset and threatened to kick out 
all of the U.S. contractors from the hotel. Company C agreed to send Applicant back to 
the United States to appease the hotel. He acknowledged that he was given a written 
warning because of this incident. He also stated that he did not consider it a termination 
because he was told it was not his fault and the company would find him another job. 
He met with a company representative for another job opportunity overseas, but soon 
thereafter his father passed away and his mother was in the hospital, which precluded 
him from taking that job. In his e-QIP, he did not list the reason for termination of 
employment with Company C. Two months later he accepted employment with another 
employer, Company A.17 
 
SOR ¶¶ 2.f and 2.g – falsification allegations. Applicant submitted his e-QIP 
on October 14, 2010. He responded “No” to two similar questions in Paragraphs 2 and 3 
of Section 13C – Your Employment Record. The question in Paragraph 2 asked, “Have 
you received a written warning, been officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined 
for misconduct in the workplace.” The question in Paragraph 3 asked, “Have you 
received a written warning, been officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for 
violating a security rule or policy.” Of note, Applicant responded “Yes” to the question in 
Paragraph 1 of Section 13C that asked if, for example, he had even been fired, left a job 
under unfavorable circumstances or been laid off, checked the block “laid off,” and 
disclosed his termination of employment during the six-month probationary period 
discussed in SOR ¶ 2.b, above.18 
                                                          
15 GE 2 at 13-15. 
16 Tr. 72-77.   
17 Tr. 77-84, 88-92; GE 2 at 11-13; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.   
18 GE 1.   
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant stated that he did not disclose the written warnings he received from 
Company A (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c) in his e-QIP because they slipped his mind. (Allegation in 
SOR ¶ 2.g). When he submitted the e-QIP, he was working at an overseas location and 
did not have access to all of his records. He acknowledged that he made a mistake in 
completing the e-QIP, but claimed the errors were accidental. Because of the way the 
written warnings were presented to him and what the program manager had told him, 
he did not believe the warnings were actually filed and they were not something that 
stuck in his mind.19  
 
 Applicant admitted that he also made a mistake in failing to disclose in his e-QIP 
the written warning he received for the 2009 incident as set forth in SOR ¶ 2.c. 
(Allegation in SOR ¶ 2.f). He acknowledged that he received the written 
warning/reprimand and wrote a lengthy rebuttal to it. He noted that, while completing his 
e-QIP, he was rushed and did not disclose this incident due to an oversight.20 
 
 Non-alleged Conduct.21  
 
 In his background interview, Applicant acknowledged that he received a written 
reprimand in 2006 from a company that he did not list on his e-QIP. The reprimand was 
issued because he reported late to work. In the interview, he claimed he did not list that 
employment and the reprimand on his e-QIP because he forgot about them.22   
 
 In his background interview, Applicant acknowledged receiving a written 
disciplinary action for making an incorrect log entry. While standing a watch at a post, a 
person came to the post and was assisting him. Applicant assumed this person was his 
relief and made an entry in the log to that effect. The person, however, was not his relief 
and the entry did not match who actually relieved him. This incident apparently occurred 
while he was working for Company C from July to December 2009; but is not clear 
when this incident happened.23 
 
 Applicant testified that, since completing his e-QIP, he occupied a security 
position in Afghanistan for 26 months. While there, he received a written warning for 
oversleeping and being late once or twice for his watch. While serving as an armorer, 
he also received a written reprimand for an inaccurate weapons count. He was also 
                                                          
19 Tr. 51-59, 104-106; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
20 Tr. 84-92, 104-106; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
21 Non-alleged misconduct will not be considered for application of the disqualifying conditions, 
but may be considered for application of the mitigating conditions, assessing credibility, and evaluating 
the whole person.  
22 GE 2 at 18. Of note, the question in Paragraph 2 of Section 13C does not have a timeline for 
reporting official reprimands received for workplace misconduct. 
23 GE 2 at 13. 
 
8 
 
 
written up for having cats in his living area. He received the last written reprimand in 
2014.24 
 
 Applicant received two non-judicial punishments (Article 15, UCMJ) for military-
related offenses. One offense involved having a cell phone in his locker while he was in 
training from September 2003 to December 2003. He did not disclose either non-judicial 
punishment on his e-QIP. When asked about the offense during his background 
interview, he initially stated he received a written warning. Upon being confronted with 
information about the non-judicial punishment, he stated that it was a company-grade 
Article 15, which would have been removed from his service record after a few months. 
From the information in the record, I am unable to determine whether Applicant was 
required to disclose that punishment when he responded “No” to the question in his 
October 2010 e-QIP (Section 15d) about being subject to such proceedings in the last 
seven years.25 
 
 Character Evidence. Applicant presented letters of reference that describe him 
as an exemplary guard and outstanding individual. He also provided certificates 
showing he became an EMT in 2015.26  
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
                                                          
24 Tr. 96-104. 
25 Tr. 103-104; GE 1, 2 at 18-19.  
26 AE A-F. 
 
9 
 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶ 33 sets forth the security concerns for the handling of protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or unwillingness and 
ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
I have considered all of the handling of protected information disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 34 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
10 
 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; and  
 
(h) negligent or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by 
management.  
 
 In early 2010, Applicant committed a number of security violations that resulted in 
him being issued written warnings and being returned early from an overseas 
assignment. AG ¶¶ 34(g) and 34(h) apply. 
 
 There are three handling of protected information mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 35: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and 
 
(c)  the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
 
 As the Appeal Board has stated, once it is established that an applicant has 
committed security violations, he or she has a “very heavy burden” of persuasion as to 
mitigation. Such violations “strike at the heart of the industrial security program.” 
Accordingly, a judge must give any claims of reform or rehabilitation “strict scrutiny.” 
ISCR Case No. 11-09219 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 31, 2014).   
 
 The conduct in question happened over six years ago. While Applicant has not 
committed any other security violation since then, this conduct should not be considered 
in isolation, but should be examined in relation to his other questionable conduct as 
alleged under Guideline E. When viewed in that manner, I am unable to find that his 
conduct happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. In reaching this conclusion, I also considered 
that the security violations happened shortly after he started a new job and he claimed 
he had not received adequate training. Nevertheless, I find that his security violations 
continue to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. None of 
the mitigating conditions fully apply.  
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
 
 
11 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available evidence 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior. . . ; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; (4) 
evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s time or 
resources. 
 
I did not find Applicant’s testimony convincing that he forgot about the written 
warnings he received for the security violations in 2010 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c), or the written 
counseling he received for dereliction of duty and falsification of a document in 2009. 
The security violations happened about six month before he submitted his e-QIP. Due 
to those security violations, he was sent home from an overseas location, placed on 
probation, and was not employed for the intervening six months. It is not believable that 
he would have forgotten about those recent events when he submitted his e-QIP at the 
start of his next job. His claim that he did not have the records or written warnings with 
him when he submitted the e-QIP is likewise not persuasive. I find that Applicant 
deliberately falsified his 2010 e-QIP when he failed to disclose those written warnings 
and counseling. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.  
 
12 
 
 
Applicant was charged with a domestic assault in 2009, terminated from a 
probationary job in 2009, counseled for misconduct at the work place in 2009, 
terminated from employment due to misconduct in 2009, and committed multiple 
security violations that resulted in his early return from an overseas assignment and 
employment probation in 2010. Viewed in its entirety, his conduct reflects a pattern of 
unreliability, untrustworthiness, and poor judgment. AG ¶¶16(c) and 16(d) apply.  
 
Five personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant’s alleged conduct, including his e-QIP falsifications, occurred over five 
years ago. He denied the falsifications in his Answer to the SOR and at the hearing, 
which shows that he has not reformed and rehabilitated himself.  All of his misconduct 
must be viewed in its entirety. From the evidence presented, I am unable to find that his 
questionable conduct happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. None of the Guideline E mitigating 
conditions fully apply.  
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. After considering the whole-person evidence 
in the record, I continue to have questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. From the foregoing, I conclude that Applicant failed to 
mitigate the handling protected information and personal conduct security concerns.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    AGAINST APPLICANT    
     Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
    
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT    
     Subparagraphs 2.a-2.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
