1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-07611 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on March 5, 2012, to obtain a security clearance required for employment with a 
defense contractor. (Item 3) Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator from 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on March 29, 2012. (Item 4) After 
reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) could 
not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance.  
 
On August 11, 2014, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns for drug involvement (Guideline H) and personal conduct 
(Guideline E). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
2 
 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective in the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
  
Applicant answered the SOR on August 25, 2014. He admitted the four 
allegations of drug involvement with explanation and the one allegation of personal 
conduct. He elected to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 2) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on March 28, 2015. 
Applicant received the file of relevant material (FORM) on December 18, 2015, and he 
was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not provide any 
information in response to the FORM.  
 
There was no direct information in the case file concerning Applicant’s service 
and his illegal drug use in Afghanistan. Department Counsel requested additional 
information from Applicant. On May 19, 2016, in response to Department Counsel’s 
request, Applicant provided information to clarify his use of drugs and service in 
Afghanistan. (Item 5) Department Counsel also added to the case file Applicant’s 
response to a DOHA Interrogatory concerning use of drugs and service in Afghanistan 
that was not included in the original case file. (Item 6) In addition, Department Counsel 
provided clarifying information concerning the work performed by Applicant’s employer 
in Afghanistan when Applicant was deployed there with the company. (Item 7) I was 
assigned the case on March 29, 2016. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview with an OPM investigator (Item 4) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the Personnel Subject Interview summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, 
so he waived any objection to the admissibility of the Personal Subject Interview 
summary. I will consider information in the Personal Subject Interview in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 25 years old and graduated from high school in 2009. Applicant 
attended a community college from August 2009 until June 2011, without earning a 
degree. He worked at various part-time jobs while attending college. In June 2011, he 
started employment with his present defense contractor employer as an electronics 
intercept specialist. This work was performed under heavy combat conditions at a 
3 
 
Forward Operating Bases (FOB) in Afghanistan from June 2011 until March 2012. It 
appears he is still employed with the same contractor but the work is performed in the 
United States. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated August 11, 2014; Item 4, Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI), dated January 15, 2014; Item 7, Article, dated August 7, 2011) 
 
The SOR alleges and Applicant admits drug involvement by using marijuana at 
various times from June 2009 until July 2013 (SOR 1.a), using Ambien from August 
2013 until October 2013 (SOR 1.b), using LSD once in February 2011 (SOR 1.c); and 
illegally using Xanax that had not been prescribed for him from June 2010 until August 
2010 (SOR 1.d). The Personal Conduct allegation under Guideline E is for using 
marijuana while deployed to Afghanistan in July 2013. (Item 2.a) All of the information 
concerning illegal drug use was provided by Applicant either in the e-QIP, his response 
to interrogatory questions, or questions from an OPM security investigator. 
 
In response to illegal drug use questions on his e-QIP, Applicant reported that he 
used marijuana two or three times from June 2009 until August 2010.  He described 
himself as not a habitual user. He reported using Xanax that was not prescribed for him 
two or three times in August 2010. He admitted experimentally using hallucinogenic 
mushrooms one time on his birthday in February 2011. During this time of drug 
involvement, Applicant was between eighteen and twenty years old. He stated on his e-
QIP that he did not intend to use marijuana in the future. (Item 3) 
 
In response to interrogatory questions concerning illegal drug use, Applicant 
stated that while working in Afghanistan in July 2013, he shared a joint of possible 
marijuana with co-workers. He also reported taking Ambien pills provided by medical 
personnel four or five times from August 2013 until October 2013. The Ambien was 
taken to aid in sleeping because of constant combat.  
 
In response to questions from Department Counsel, Applicant stated that the 
substance he used may not have been marijuana. He was told by some of his co-
workers that the substance was marijuana. Others said it was a compressed tobacco. 
However, Applicant believed at the time of use that he was using marijuana. Ambien 
was provided by the medics on the FOB to enable personnel to sleep. The medical 
people were not doctors but were responsible for providing medical support to the 
personnel on the FOB. The FOB was under constant mortar and small arms fire that 
made sleep difficult. (Item 5)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Administrative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . .” The 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
The use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, because it may impair judgment and 
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction. Drugs are defined as mood and behavior 
altering substances, including drugs material and other chemical compounds identified 
and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970. Marijuana and LSD cannabis is 
included in the Schedule 1 list. (AG ¶ 24)  
 
5 
 
All information concerning his drug use was provided by Applicant during the 
security clearance process. He used marijuana two or three times as a teenager with 
friends between June 2009 and August 2010. During the same periods, he used Xanax 
not prescribed for him a few times and hallucinogenic mushroom once. In 2013, while 
working as a civilian on a FOB in Afghanistan, he was provided Ambien by medical 
personnel for sleep. Applicant’s use of marijuana in 2009 to 2010, LSD in February 
2011, Xanax in August 2010 and Ambien from August to October 2013 raises the 
following Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 25 (a) (any drug use). 
 
 I considered the following Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 
26: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as; (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation). 
 
While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or 
sufficient time has passed since the incidents, a determination whether past conduct 
affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows a significant period of 
time has passed without evidence of drug involvement, there must be an evaluation of 
whether that period of time demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation. 
 
 These mitigating conditions apply. Applicant admits to intermittent, limited use of 
marijuana and other illegal drugs as a teenager in 2010. He did not use illegal drugs 
again for about three years before using marijuana once in 2013 as a civilian in 
Afghanistan. He has not used illegal drugs since 2013. Applicant now realizes that he is 
an adult working in the defense industry and as such he cannot use illegal substances. 
He stated a clear indication not to use illegal drugs in the future. His last use of 
marijuana was over three years ago, and other illegal drugs about six year ago. His 
Ambien use in 2013 was for a valid reason and provided by medical personnel. His 
usage of illegal drugs was infrequent and under circumstances that are not likely to 
recur. Applicant’s present environment is one of maturity and a professional life that 
prohibits illegal drug use. There has been an appropriate period of abstinence, and a 
change in lifestyle and circumstance. Applicant mitigated security concerns for drug 
involvement.  
 
 
6 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. (AG ¶ 15). Personal conduct is 
always a security concern because it asks whether the person’s past conduct justifies 
confidence the person can be trusted to properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information.  
  
 Applicant used marijuana and other illegal drugs on a limited basis with friends 
while a teenager in 2009 to 2010. He used it again once in 2013 while he was a civilian 
employee of a defense contractor serving in Afghanistan in a combat heavy 
environment. He disclosed his illegal drug use on his March 2012 e-QIP. He was honest 
and truthful demonstrating his reliability and trustworthiness. Applicant was a civilian in 
Afghanistan when he last used marijuana. I do not find Applicant’s use of Ambien in the 
combat zone to be illegal. Ambien was provided by the medical personnel to personnel 
serving on an FOB so they could get some sleep. Applicant’s use of marijuana under 
these circumstances potentially raises the following security concerns under Personal 
Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace; and 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rules violations. 
 
I considered Personnel Conduct Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
7 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
This mitigating condition applies. Applicant used marijuana only one time with co-
workers while in Afghanistan. In fact, what he used may not have been marijuana. 
However, Applicant thought it was marijuana. He was working from an FOB with heavy 
combat in the area. The FOB received mortar and small arms fire continuously. 
Applicant only used marijuana once in over six years, and that use was over three years 
ago. His use of marijuana was infrequent, and his use was unique as a young civilian 
serving on a FOB under heavy combat conditions. Applicant mitigated personal conduct 
security concerns for his use of marijuana in Afghanistan. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant served 
over nine months as a civilian in a combat zone under heavy fire while working in an 
unique and important mission for a defense contractor. Applicant admitted using 
marijuana with varying frequency while a student. He used is as a civilian one time in 
Afghanistan. His last use of marijuana was over three years ago. These facts leave me 
without questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to 
classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated 
drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
