KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge based his decision, for the most part, on evidence of Applicant’s
cooperation with the U.S and the considerable hardship and danger he faced as a result of that
cooperation.  It was appropriate for the Judge to consider this, in light of applicant’s assumption
of “a high level of risk on behalf of the U.S.”  We find no error in the manner in which the Judge
balanced the conflicting considerations, including Applicant’s service in a foreign military
organization.  The record in this case provides a reasonable basis for the Judge’s conclusion that
MC 8(b) applied with sufficient force to overcome the Government’s security concerns under
Guideline B. Favorable decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-08823.a1
DATE: 05/06/2016
DATE: May 6, 2016
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-08823
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
2, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On January
28, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Marc E. Curry granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s favorable
decision is arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law, in that it is unsupported by the weight of the
record evidence and fails to consider an important aspect of the case.  Consistent with the following,
we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant was born and raised in Iraq.  He was commissioned in the Iraqi military.  After the
U.S.-led coalition toppled the Iraqi regime and disbanded the military, Applicant joined coalition
efforts to stabilize the country.  He agreed to assist the U.S. because he agreed with this country’s
values.  “Applicant’s service was extraordinary.”  Decision at 2. He assisted the U.S. in counter-
terrorism operations, putting his life on the line in support of U.S. objectives.  He survived multiple
assassination attempts, and, in the mid-2000s, terrorists kidnaped and/or killed members of his
family.  A member of the U.S. military stated that despite threats to his life and safety, Applicant
“never diminished his commitment to the common American and Iraqi goal of building a safe, more
stable Iraq.”  Id. at 3.  Applicant and his immediate family have become naturalized citizens. 
Applicant’s mother and two of his siblings live in Iraq.  Applicant talks with them about once a year. 
He has siblings who live in other countries.  
Since the U.S. military withdrew from Iraq, sectarian and ethnic divisions have widened,
threatening the country’s stability.  U.S. citizens in Iraq are in danger of being kidnaped, and
terrorist organizations operate within the country.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances met the criteria for mitigation under
Mitigating Condition (MC) 8(b): 
[T]here is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S. that
2
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(b).  
He stated that Applicant has been living in the U.S. for nearly a decade and is “profoundly
committed to promoting U.S. values.”  Decision at 5.  He cited to evidence of Applicant’s service
in the Iraqi military on behalf of U.S. objectives despite threats to his life and attacks on his family.
Discussion
Department Counsel’s brief includes an extensive summary of the record evidence, providing
many favorable details about Applicant’s service on behalf of U.S. objectives that the Judge did not
include.  Department Counsel does not challenge the Judge’s findings about Applicant’s bravery in
the face of multiple threats to himself and his family.  However, she argues that the record does not
support the Judge’s favorable application of MC 8(b).  She argues that Applicant has few ties within
the U.S. and that his Iraqi relatives are highly visible, having been targeted many times.  She also
states that Applicant’s service in the Iraqi military entails a possible conflict of interest.
We have evaluated Department Counsel’s argument in light of the record.  The Judge based
his decision, for the most part, on evidence of Applicant’s cooperation with the U.S and the
considerable hardship and danger he faced as a result of that cooperation.  It was appropriate for the
Judge to consider this, in light of prior cases in which we held that an applicant’s assumption of “a
high level of risk on behalf of the U.S.” constitutes important evidence under MC 8(b).  ISCR Case
No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2008).  However, although such service should be addressed,
it will not necessarily be dispositive in any given case.  It must be balanced against other evidence
that might weigh against an applicant and diminish the probative force of his risks on behalf of the
U.S.  With that understanding, we find no error in the manner in which the Judge balanced the
conflicting considerations, including Applicant’s service in a foreign military organization.  The
record in this case provides a reasonable basis for the Judge’s conclusion that MC 8(b) applied with
sufficient force to overcome the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B.
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.   
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
3
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
