 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09565 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelly, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jacob T. Ranish, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by his past financial trouble. He 
addressed his financial situation by receiving financial counseling, reaching out to his 
creditors, and has either paid or is paying his debts. He also successfully disputed 
incorrect information appearing on his credit reports. He currently manages his finances 
in a responsible manner. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On May 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his 
circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish his continued 
eligibility for access to classified information (Answer). 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On December 14, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice scheduling the hearing for January 21, 2016.2 The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 5. 
Applicant testified, called a character reference as a witness, and offered Applicant 
exhibits (Ax.) 1 – 2 and A – G. Applicant’s request for additional time to submit matters 
for my consideration post-hearing was granted. He timely submitted Ax. H – J. All 
exhibits were admitted into the record without objection. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was 
received by DOHA on February 1, 2016, and the record closed on February 26, 2016.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his late thirties. He served in the U.S. military from 1995 to 2003. 
His military service included multiple sea deployments. He was a shift supervisor during 
these deployments, supervising 20 – 30 other U.S. military members. He held a security 
clearance while in the military, received multiple awards and decorations for his military 
service, and received an honorable discharge. (Tr. at 12-13, 54; Gx. 1.) 
 
 Applicant has been with his current employer, a federal contractor, since 
approximately 2011. He is a network systems engineer. He has held a security 
clearance since 2006. A former co-worker writes that Applicant has worked on a 
number of highly sensitive U.S. Government projects and always handled the 
information he was granted access to properly and with the utmost discretion. Applicant 
is well regarded by current and former colleagues and friends for his professionalism, 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He mentors young people through youth 
sports programs. (Tr. at 13-14, 55-58; Gx. 1; Ax. F.) 
 
 Applicant incurred a number of past-due debts after a government contract he 
was working on was not renewed and he was unemployed for a time. Also, he moved 
from his former home in State A to State B, with a higher cost of living. Upon moving, 
Applicant deferred his student loans, but failed to contact his lenders at the end of the 
deferment period and the loans went into default status. He disclosed his past-due 
debts on his recent security clearance application and discussed his finances in detail 
during his background investigation.  
 
In early 2014, Applicant contacted the creditors holding his student loans and 
rehabilitated them. He has been paying his student loans on a consistent monthly basis 
through automatic debits from his bank account since January 2014. He has been 
making additional monthly payments towards paying down the principal. He has 
reduced the balance owed from approximately $25,000 to about $13,000. His student 
loans, which are referenced at SOR 1.a – 1.d, are current. (Tr. at 15-18, 27-36; Ax. 1; 
Ax. G; Ax. H.) 
                                                          
2 Prehearing correspondence (including the notice of hearing), case management order, and Department 
Counsel’s discovery letter are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) I – III, respectively.  
 
3 The record was originally kept open until February 5, 2016, but was extended at Applicant’s request. 
Post-hearing correspondence is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) IV.  
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant also contacted the creditors for the debts listed at 1.g – 1.i, and paid 
the debts. He was unaware of the debts until receiving the SOR, as the bills had gone to 
his former home in State A. (Tr. at 18-20; Ax. 2.)  
 
 Upon receiving the SOR, Applicant also became aware that security concerns 
were being raised about three debts that he thought he had already addressed. 
Specifically, the $14,000 credit card debt referenced at 1.e and the two relatively minor 
debts totaling about $200 referenced at 1.f and 1.j. (The debt in 1.f is for a utility bill from 
his former residence in State A and the debt in 1.j is for monthly music club dues.) In 
2014, when Applicant first became aware that these debts were appearing on his credit 
report, he hired a credit repair company (CRC). The CRC disputed the three debts and 
they were subsequently removed from Applicant’s credit reports. Of note, of the three 
credit reports admitted into the record, the three debts at issue only appear on an earlier 
2012 report, but not more recent reports from 2014 and 2015.  
 
Applicant was recently advised by a representative from his bank to file additional 
disputes with each of the creditors for the three debts referenced at SOR 1.e, 1.f, and 
1.j. Applicant, after conducting his own internet research, became concerned that the 
incorrect entries on his past credit report might be due to confusion with a close family 
member with the same name. He filed written disputes with each of the creditors and 
credit agencies. In doing so, he followed the advice and tailored his dispute letters to the 
model provided on the website of a U.S. Government agency. (Tr. at 21-27, 36-48; Gx. 
4; Gx. 5; Ax. B - Ax. E; Ax. I.) 
 
 Applicant has received formal and informal financial counseling through his bank, 
a U.S. Government agency sponsored online money management program, and his 
sister who is a loan officer at a bank. He earns approximately $110,000 annually. His 
current credit report reflects no negative entries and all accounts, including his student 
loans, are in good standing. (Tr. at 14-15, 51-54; Gx. 5; Ax. J.) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Applicant’s past financial issues raise the Guideline F security concerns. The 
record evidence also establishes the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 Applicant bears the burden of mitigating the security concerns raised by the 
evidence. The financial considerations guideline lists a number of conditions that could 
mitigate the concern. The following mitigating conditions are most relevant: 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems originally stemmed from short-term unemployment 
and a move to a higher-cost area of living. Although he took longer than would be 
expected from a cleared contractor to address his financial situation, it is generally well 
understood that it can take some time to resolve past financial difficulties. More 
importantly, he took the necessary steps to address and resolve his financial situation.  
 
 First, over two years ago, he contacted the creditors for his student loans – by far 
the largest of his outstanding debt – and rehabilitated the loans through consistent 
monthly payments since January 2014. Second, he paid the other debts that he had not 
been aware until receiving the SOR. Third, he provided corroborating, documentary 
proof of payment and of having successfully disputed the debts that were inaccurately 
reported on his 2012 credit report. Fourth, he is taking proactive, responsible steps to 
avoid having the incorrect information from wrongly being reported again. Fifth, he 
received financial counseling and manages his financial affairs consistent with the 
advice he received, to include paying down the principal on his student loans.    
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to classified information.4 Applicant met his burden. Specifically, I find 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
6 
 
 
that AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) either apply in full or in part and, when considered 
together with the whole-person matters noted herein, mitigate the financial 
considerations security concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of all the relevant 
circumstances, to include the factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my 
comments under Guideline F, and note some additional whole-person factors. Applicant 
has been candid about his past financial problems since the start of the security 
clearance process. He served honorably in the military and has held a clearance for 
approximately 20 years without apparent issue except for the past financial problems 
listed in the SOR. He addressed his past debts and currently manages his finances in a 
responsible manner. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts about Applicant’s continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
