 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10798 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Harris Ammerman, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by the accumulation of delinquent 
debt. Her financial situation was not a result of living beyond her means, but instead of 
reflection of the high cost associated with her own medical issues and providing for the 
care of close family members. Her finances were also negatively impacted by her 
husband becoming disabled several years ago, leaving her as the family’s sole wage 
earner. She took action to resolve her finances and provided documentation that she is 
repaying her debts through a confirmed Chapter 13 plan. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On June 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
her circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish her 
continued eligibility for access to classified information (Answer). 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 23, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice scheduling the hearing for February 18, 2016.2 The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 4. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant exhibits (Ax.) 1 – 13. All evidentiary exhibits 
were admitted into the record without objection. Applicant, through her counsel, also 
submitted a brief, which was marked and appended to the record as Hearing exhibit 
(Hx.) I. Department Counsel’s index of exhibits was marked Hx. II. The hearing 
transcript (Tr.) was received by DOHA on March 1, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, who is in her early forties, is married with four children. She is a 
contract security officer and holds a supervisory position. She has been with her current 
employer, a defense contractor, for the past 14 years. She has earned awards and 
received letters of appreciation for her work performance. Applicant’s coworkers 
submitted letters reflecting their favorable opinion regarding her work ethic and overall 
character. (Tr. at 12-15; Gx. 1; Ax. 10.) 
 
 Applicant has dealt with persistent medical issues since 2007. Her condition has 
resulted in two significant medical procedures, with the most recent procedure occurring 
in 2013. Applicant has had to take time off from work due to her medical issues and to 
care for, first, her ailing grandmother and, now, her mother who suffers from Alzheimer’s 
and dementia. Her mother’s condition deteriorated to the point that she now lives with 
Applicant and her husband. In 2008, Applicant’s husband started suffering from an 
undisclosed condition that within a year left him disabled and unable to work. Since 
2009, Applicant has been the family’s sole wage earner. She earns approximately 
$65,000 annually. (Tr. at 16-18, 34-36, 39-41, 44-45; Ax. 12-13.) 
 
 Applicant started falling behind on paying her bills, including numerous medical 
debts listed in the SOR, due to a combination of the above circumstances. She 
disclosed her adverse financial situation in response to relevant questions on her recent 
security clearance application (SCA), and discussed her finances during the course of 
the reinvestigation of her background. She initially attempted to resolve her debts 
through a debt consolidation program (DCP) offered by a private company, which she 
was referred to by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) contract investigator who 
conducted her background interview. After a year of paying for the DCP service, 
Applicant discovered that the company was not providing the essential service it had 
promised, namely, to consolidate and redistribute a portion of her monthly DCP 
payments to pay her overdue creditors. (Tr. at 18-21, 37-38, 50-51; Gx. 1 - 2; Ax. 12.) 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 The case was originally assigned to a different administrative judge. On January 12, 2016, I was 
assigned the case. Prehearing correspondence and the notice of hearing are attached to the record as 
Hx. III.  
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant sought the assistance of a bankruptcy attorney to resolve her financial 
situation. She was advised that she was eligible to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy and, if 
she did so, she could potentially wipe out all her debt. Applicant, instead, elected to file 
for Chapter 13 bankruptcy and resolve her debts through a court-approved wage 
earners plan. She took the required financial counseling course, and then submitted her 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. She provided the bankruptcy trustee copies of her 
federal and state income tax returns for 2011 through 2014. Applicant’s proposed 
Chapter 13 plan was recently confirmed by the bankruptcy court, and she has 
consistently made the required monthly payments. Her payments will now be 
automatically deducted from her pay. The confirmed bankruptcy plan is for 48 months. 
In addition to the required monthly payments, Applicant voluntarily agreed to forfeit any 
tax refunds to the bankruptcy trustee to use as additional funds to repay her creditors. 
(Tr. at 21-24, 42, 49-50; Ax. 1 - 7; Ax. 10.) 
 
Pursuant to the Chapter 13 plan, Applicant will be required on a yearly basis to 
file with the bankruptcy trustee an income and expenditure report. She will also have to 
provide on a yearly basis to the bankruptcy trustee her federal and state tax returns. 
Finally, she is required to take and complete a debt management course before her 
bankruptcy case is completed. (Tr. at 28; Ax. 6; Ax. 8.) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
4 
 
 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems raise the financial considerations security concern. 
The record evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions are most relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems stem from her own medical issues and those of 
her close family members. She has been the sole wage earner and main source of 
financial support for her family for the past seven years. She started falling behind on 
debts with a decrease in household income and an increase in expenses attributable to 
her own medical expenses and the high cost of care for close family members. She 
initially attempted to resolve her past-due debts through a DCP but the company did not 
follow through with its promise to help her consolidate her debts and pay them. She has 
now consolidated her debts and is paying them through a court-approved Chapter 13 
bankruptcy plan. Of note, Applicant could have elected the easier route of resolving her 
debts through Chapter 7, but decided to repay her creditors through the longer and 
more arduous process of Chapter 13. This decision by Applicant raises a favorable 
inference regarding her reliability, the sense of responsibility she has for her legal 
obligations, and other essential character traits expected of those granted access to 
classified information. 
 
 Although it arguably took Applicant longer than some would expect from a 
cleared contractor to confront her financial situation and take positive action to resolve 
her past debts, she has now responsibly addressed her overall financial situation and is 
paying the debts she accumulated over the past few years. Moreover, over the next five 
years, not only will she be paying her debts through a court-administered repayment 
plan, but she will also have to provide proof to the bankruptcy trustee that she is 
financially solvent and meeting her other legal financial obligations.  
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to classified information.3 Applicant met her burden by demonstrating 
that she has taken responsible action to address her longstanding financial problems 
and, though her finances may not be perfect, they no longer raise a concern about her 
eligibility for a security clearance. Specifically, I find that AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) 
either apply in full or in part, and when considered together with the whole-person 
matters noted herein, mitigate the financial considerations security concern.  
 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of all the relevant 
circumstances, to include the nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my 
comments under Guideline F, and note some additional whole-person factors. Applicant 
has been upfront and candid about her troubled financial situation during her current 
and past security clearance background investigations. She has held a clearance for the 
past 14 years and for the majority of that time served as a supervisory contract security 
officer protecting sensitive U.S. Government property and personnel. Her financial 
situation was not the result of poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations. Rather, her financial situation was a result of medical 
issues and high cost of care for her close family members, including her mother who 
suffers from Alzheimer’s and dementia. She formulated a plan with her bankruptcy 
attorney to resolve her financial situation and implemented it. In short, Applicant 
mitigated security concerns raised by the accumulation of past-due debts. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s continued 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence)        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.t:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
