1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
        )       ISCR Case No. 12-10894)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Jacob T. Ranish, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On June 15, 2015, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 2, 2015. A notice of
hearing was issued on February 26, 2016, scheduling the hearing for March 22, 2016.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-4 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant
testified, and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-I at the hearing. I kept the record open
until April 5, 2016, for additional documentation, which was timely received. AX J was
entered into the record without objection. The transcript was received on March 30,
2016. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access
to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under
Guideline F. He provided explanations for each alleged debt.
 
Applicant is 66 years old. He received his graduate degree in 1977. He served in
the Air Force on active duty from 1972 to 1992, receiving an honorable discharge.
Applicant is married and has two adult children. He has been with his current employer
since 2004, where he serves as a tactical expert. He completed a security clearance
application in 2012. (GX 1) He has held a security clearance since 1972.
The SOR alleges two charged-off accounts in the amount of approximately
$55,872. Applicant has received a 1099-C for the account in SOR 1.a. (AX A) He also
received a 1099-C for the account in SOR 1.b. (AX B)
Applicant admitted that about four years ago he became “significantly over
extended.” (GX 1) He was not certain, but believed he had about $90,000 in delinquent
debt. (Tr. 42) He acknowledged that it was due to inattention to detail. (Tr. 66) He stated
that the delinquent accounts that are now charged-off were lines of credit and a credit
card. (Tr. 24) He would transfer balances to other accounts. He acknowledged that
gradually it got to the point where he suddenly realized that he was unable to make
payments on all of his debts. (Tr. 24)  He could not even make minimum monthly
payments. He received calls from the creditors. (Tr. 27) He stated that he was “getting
harassed by the creditors.” He did not want this to become an issue for his security
clearance. (Tr. 29) Applicant contacted Freedom Debt Relief (FDR) in the 2010-2011
time frame. He paid them about $1,200 a month to settle or resolve five accounts. He
contacted the creditors and told them about the plan. Three accounts were successfully
settled and resolved for less than the full amounts. In 2012, Applicant notified his Facility
Security Officer (FSO) about the debts and his work with FDR. (Tr. 30) The other two
accounts, which are alleged in the SOR were charged-off.
In his 2012 security clearance application, Applicant noted in Section 26
(Financial Record) that he became severely overextended with credit card debt.  He
noted that active negotiations were in progress with the bank in allegation 1.a. (GX 1) He
also reported his need for a loan modification on his primary residence due to
overextended credit. He also listed two international trips taken during that time to visit
family. (GX 1) 
He noted that he pays monthly installments on his daughter’s student loan. (Tr.
23) He spent about $7,000 for her wedding. He also remodeled part of his home so that
his daughter and son-in-law could live with him. He realized that he could not maintain
the payments on the lines of credit.
As to SOR allegations 1.a and 1.b, Applicant claims the banks would not
negotiate with the FDR. The amount charged-off in 1.a is $38,306. He does not
remember what he bought with the line of credit. He may have transferred balances from
3
other credit cards. (Tr. 49) However, a credit report shows that the account was already
charged-off in November 2011, after having been past-due for some time. (GX 3)
Applicant stated that he received notice that the debt was charged off just before
2013. He was notified by FDR that the bank had written off the account and also advised
that he may owe taxes. When the IRS contacted Applicant, he discovered that he could
not appeal it, and so he made an initial payment and asked for a payment plan. (Tr. 33)
He believes the 2013 taxes are paid in full. (Tr. 30, AX F)
As to why Applicant was charging so much on credit cards, he did not have an
answer. He just bought things. (Tr. 42) He stated that he would buy items, charge them
on a credit card, and then make the minimum payment. Applicant’s credit report reflects
that he had extensive available credit with many creditors. (GX 4)  He also noted that he
would use one card to pay off another card. He acknowledged that was “typical bad
judgment.” (Tr. 43) He admitted that he also fell behind in his mortgage payments but
was able to work with the bank and restructure his mortgage, which is current.
As to the debt in 1.a on the SOR, Applicant claimed that he did not learn about
the charge off until the security investigation. (Tr. 51)  He opened the line of credit in
2007. He also stated that they offered it to him, and because it was available, he
accepted. (Tr. 48)  He thinks he used it to transfer other account balances. It first
became delinquent in 2011. (GX ) He did not make any payments because he thought it
was more important to make his car payment and his mortgage. The line of credit was
not at the top of the list. (Tr.49) He testified at the hearing that he thought FDR was in
the process of settling the account. He, however, never monitored the progress. He did
not receive a 1099-C until 2014. (AX J)  He contacted FDR and they notified him that
they had been sent the 1099-C. (Tr. 34) He filed an amended return a week before the
hearing. (AX B) He now owes almost $10,000 to the IRS. He wants an installment plan
of 72 months. (Tr. 52)
As to the debt in 1.b on the SOR, the account was charged off for $17,566. This
was an individual credit card. He believes he opened it in 2007 because it was easy to
get credit. This account first became delinquent in 2011. (GX 2) He did not attempt to
make any payments after 2011. In 2012, the bank cancelled the debt. However, he did
not report the cancelled debt on the tax return for 2012 (Tr. 58) In 2012, he received a
refund of $5,231 for the 2012 tax year. He did not consider paying down his debt
because he was working with FDR.
 When Applicant contacted FDR he told them about five accounts. Three accounts
were resolved. However the two banks that eventually charged off the debts did not
agree to negotiate. Applicant never followed up with the two banks. (Tr. 46) He admitted
that he had no idea what was going on, and he left it to FDR, without making any
inquires or monitoring progress. He noted that he had access to the information online.
(Tr. 68) Applicant made payments to FDR; however, he did take two vacations abroad to
visit family. (Tr. 62)
4
Applicant earns about $120,00 a year. (AX G) He has no new delinquent
accounts. He has a monthly net remainder of about $2,280. He completed a financial
counseling course. (AX H) He now adheres to a firm budget. He uses cash for
purchases. He has not opened any lines of credit since 2012. (Tr. 39) He has $237,000
in retirement savings and some money in company stock.
Applicant received a balance of about $21,000 from FDR from the escrow
account with FDR. He used some of the money to pay for the taxes that he owed (Tr.
70) He remembers that he received another 1099-C for another charged-off account.
(Tr.59) When questioned at the hearing, Applicant indicated that he would be willing to
make payments if the allegation in SOR 1.b had not been charged-off, but he has not
made any attempts to do so. (Tr. 63, AX E)
As a post-hearing submission, Applicant wrote a narrative stating that he
reviewed his tax filings for tax years 2012, 2013 and 2014. He emphasized that he
received a 1099-C from another charged-off account and paid additional taxes. He
noted that he filed his amended tax return for tax year 2014. (1.a)
He does not believe he will owe additional tax for tax year 2012, but he will
consult a tax professional. He intends to pay any tax that he owes. (AX F, AX J)
Applicant submitted three letters of recommendation. Each attests to his reliability
and technical expertise. He is described as a loyal and trusted employee. Applicant’s
FSO wrote that she has known Applicant since 2004. He has been forthcoming about
his financial circumstances. (AX I) 
He received awards and medals while in the military, which are numerous,
including a joint service commendation medal, and Air Force meritorious service medals
and several other meritorious service medals after completion of various assignments.
(Tr. 18)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
5
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
6
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. It also states that an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant admitted that he incurred delinquent debt from a line of credit and a
credit card. The two accounts were eventually charged-off.  Consequently, Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations)
apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against
him and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant’s financial difficulties
occurred in the past five years. He was nonchalant about the accumulation of large
amounts of credit card debt. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating
Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. Applicant waited to contact FDR
after receiving harassing calls from creditors. I note that he informed his FSO about the
matter because he was concerned about  his security clearance. He made no attempts
to pay on the charged-off accounts, although he had the ability to do so.  
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has some application. Applicant as noted above
made efforts to resolve the issue when he could no longer make the minimum payments
on his credit lines by contacting FDR and making payment on several non-SOR debts.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
but there are not  clear indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is under
control) partially applies.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
7
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 66 years old. He has been with his current employer since 2004. He is
married and has two adult children. He is a mature and educated man. He has held a
security clearance without incident since 1972.  He served honorably in the military and
received numerous medals and awards. He has a wealth of experience in his field.
Applicant admits that he showed poor judgment when he kept opening credit
cards and lines of credit without regard to his ability to repay the resulting debts.
because he could. He admits buying things, but has no idea what they were. He began
transferring balances from one credit card to another. He became concerned about his
security clearance and contacted FDR to help him resolve five accounts. He paid them
$1,200 a month to do so. He did not monitor the progress FDR was making. He felt he
did what he should by handing the accounts over to them. He did not make any
payments on the two charged-off accounts alleged in the SOR, even though they had
been delinquent for a period of time. He learned that they were charged-off and he
believed that he did not owe any money. He received money from FDR’s escrow
account, but did not apply any to the charged-off accounts. I find that he spent money
for his daughter’s wedding, student loans, and home remodeling, because as he stated
the two charged-off accounts were of a lower priority. I find his poor judgment and
inattention to detail troubling. He had three accounts successfully settled. However, I
have doubts about his judgment and reliability because of his failure to pay the debts in
the SOR when he had the financial means to do so. Any doubts must be resolved in
favor of the Government
   Applicant has not presented sufficient information to carry his burden of proof in
this case. He has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern. Any doubts
must be resolved in favor of the Government.
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline : AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
