 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-11933 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 24, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 18, 2015. He did not request a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On September 21, 2015, the government requested a 
 
2 
 
 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 22, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 22, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 16, 2016. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on March 24, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR with explanations.1 After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He earned some college credits, but did not receive a 
degree. He married in 1995 and divorced in 2015. He has two children from the 
marriage, ages 20 and 17. Applicant pays child support for his younger child.2 He 
served in the military from 1988 to 2008 and retired in the paygrade E-6. His ex-wife is 
entitled to a portion of his military retirement pay. From 2008 to November 2011 he 
worked for a federal contractor overseas. From November 2011 until February 2012 he 
was intentionally unemployed. From February 2012 until May 2012 he worked for a 
department store. He has worked for his current employer since May 2012 and has a 
part-time job as a barber.3  
  
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in July 2012 and 
answered “no” in the section which asked if he had ever had a security clearance 
eligibility/access authorization denied, suspended or revoked. He deliberately failed to 
disclose that his security clearance was revoked and access to sensitive compartment 
information (SCI) was withdrawn in 2005 by his military branch. His security clearance 
was revoked, and his access to SCI was withdrawn in part, due to deliberately omitting 
delinquent financial accounts on his previous SCA. Applicant requested the revocation 
decision be reconsidered. In his request for reconsideration, he indicated that he 
answered “no” to questions about his financial delinquencies. He denied he was 
intentionally attempting to hide his financial problems.4 He stated he had asked his 
security officer about the questions that inquired about his finances, and he was told the 
government would review his credit report so he believed the inquiry was asking if his 
financial burdens would cause him to betray his country. His reconsideration request 
was denied. Applicant’s explanation for failing to disclose on his 2012 SCA that his SCA 
                                                          
1 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c refer to debts Applicant failed to disclose. Those debts are listed as ¶ 1.a through 
1.t. This is clearly a typographical error and should refer to debts in SOR ¶¶ 2.a through 2.t. I will refer to 
the debts as such. 
 
2 AE C. 
 
3 Tr. 22-31. 
 
4 Applicant’s delinquent debts began in 2003. 
 
3 
 
 
had been revoked in the past was because he was distracted by interruptions when he 
was completing it.5 
 
Applicant also failed to disclose on the July 2012 SCA that in the past seven 
years he had debts that had been over 120 days delinquent or were currently 120 days 
delinquent. Applicant testified he believed his wife was taking care of the bills and he did 
not have delinquent debts. He was working in the United States at the time he 
completed this SCA. He explained he was in a monitoring mode in 2012 and believed 
his “local” debts were paid. That is, his monthly expenses. He testified he did not 
believe he had other delinquent debts. His testimony was not credible.6 
  
Applicant completed a previous SCA in July 2009 and failed to disclose he had 
been 180 days delinquent on any debt or that he was currently over 90 days delinquent 
on any debt; or that he had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or 
canceled for failing to pay as agreed.  
 
Applicant’s explanation for his failure to disclose his financial delinquencies on 
his July 2009 SCA was that he was working overseas and assumed his wife was paying 
their bills. He testified he had no knowledge of the delinquent debts until the 
government investigator advised him of them. He stated that he was aware he had two 
car payments that were past due and a student loan that was 30 days past due, but 
believed the others were being paid by his wife. He said he did not have a credit report 
to review while overseas, and he wanted to be specific with his disclosures. He stated 
his wife had a power of attorney and was opening accounts without his knowledge, and 
he was unaware of the debts alleged. He also testified that he had knowledge of some 
delinquent debts, but did not know how many there were or the extent of them.7  
 
Applicant further explained that when he was interviewed by a government 
investigator in 2009 he was confronted with a credit report that listed his delinquent 
debts. He stated he subsequently printed his own copy of the credit report, showed it to 
his wife, and told her to pay the bills while he was overseas. He instructed her to pay 
the small bills first. He stated she failed to do so. Applicant also told the investigator that 
he believed his wife was the victim of identity theft.8 
 
Applicant testified that when he and his wife divorced the decree indicated each 
of them would be responsible for only their individual accounts. The divorce judgment 
only comments on credit card debts indicating: “Each party shall be responsible for any 
credit card issued in their sole name.”9 It does not indicate which party is responsible for 
                                                          
5 Tr. 74-79, 88-89; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. 78-88. 
 
7 Tr. 31-42. 
 
8 Tr. 31-42, 47-48; GE 5. 
 
9 AE A.  
 
4 
 
 
joint accounts. Applicant testified he had no idea who would assume responsibility after 
the divorce for the joint accounts.10  
 
Credit reports from August 2009, August 2012, December 2014, and June 2015 
support the debts alleged in the SOR. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 2.c through 2.t are listed as 
individual accounts. The debts in ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b are listed as joint accounts. Applicant 
provided a document to show the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 2.d was paid in 2014.11 He 
also provided a document to show the debt in SOR ¶ 2.c is a student loan that was 
deferred for a period when he was attending school. He provided proof that he has been 
making $100 payments on the debt since February 2014.12  
 
Applicant provided a credit report from March 2016 that does not reflect the 
status of the delinquent debts alleged, indicating they have dropped off his current credit 
report. Applicant testified he paid some debts listed on the SOR, but did not have 
receipts. He did not provide proof that certain debts are the responsibility of his ex-wife 
or why he is not responsible for joint accounts. He indicated he does not have the 
money to pay the delinquent debts. There is no documented proof, other than what is 
previously mentioned, that he paid his delinquent debts. There is no evidence Applicant 
disputed any delinquent debts alleged on the SOR.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
10 Tr. 43-48. 
 
11 GE 4, 7, 9, 10; AE B reflects two letters referring to two different account numbers. These numbers are 
different than the account alleged in the SOR. I will give Applicant the benefit of the doubt that this 
account is paid. 
 
12 AE D. 
 
13 Tr. 49-74. 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
 
6 
 
 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose, on his July 2012 SCA, that in 2005 his 
security clearance was revoked and his access to SCI was withdrawn. He also 
deliberately failed to disclose, that in the past seven years he had accounts suspended, 
charged off, or canceled for failing to pay them as agreed. He did not disclose that in the 
past seven years he had debts that were over 120 days delinquent or were currently 
over 120 days delinquent. Applicant failed to disclose the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 
2.b, and 2.d through 2.t.  
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose on his July 2009 SCA that he had 
accounts that had been suspended, charged off, or canceled for failing to pay as 
agreed. He also deliberately failed to disclose he had been over 180 days delinquent on 
any account or that he was currently over 90 days past due on any debts. He 
deliberately omitted the information in SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.e, 2.f, 2.h, 2.j and 2.j through 2.t.  
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose requested information in his July 2012 
SCA and his July 2009 SCA. I did not find Applicant’s testimony credible that he was 
distracted and he did not have a credit report while overseas so he wanted to make 
sure he was specific in his answers. I did not find Applicant’s explanation credible that 
he was unaware of any of his delinquent debts, and they were all attributed to his wife. 
His testimony that he was aware of some debts, but not the extent of them raises 
questions about his truthfulness and reliability. Applicant has a long history of financial 
delinquencies and completing SCAs. It is not believable that he would not know he 
needed to provide information about his delinquent finances when he completed a SCA. 
Applicant indicated that he is only responsible for individual debts. Most of the debts 
alleged are for individual accounts in his name. The above disqualifying condition 
applies. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct he omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant’s repeated falsifications on his 2012 and 2009 SCAs are not minor, 
infrequent, and did not happen under unique circumstances. Applicant was aware his 
security clearance was revoked in 2005, in part, because he deliberately failed to 
 
7 
 
 
disclose his delinquent financial accounts. His repeated failure to be honest casts doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(b) do not 
apply. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.14 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of unwillingness to satisfy financial delinquencies starting 
when his security clearance was revoked in 2005 due, in part, to his financial 
delinquencies that began in at least 2003. He again experienced financial problems in 
2009 and his delinquent debts were reflected on credit reports from 2009, 2012, 2014, 
and 2015. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
                                                          
14 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
8 
 
 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of failing to pay his debts and meeting financial 
obligations. He provided proof that he is paying his student loan reflected in SOR ¶ 2.c 
and paid the debt in SOR ¶ 2.d. Although his delinquent debts are not reflected on his 
latest credit bureau report, he failed to provide proof that he paid any of the remaining 
SOR-listed debts. Applicant’s behavior is recent and there is significant evidence his 
conduct is likely to recur and did not occur under unique circumstances. His conduct 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply.  
 
 For the application of AG ¶ 20(b), there must be evidence that conditions beyond 
Applicant’s control resulted in a financial hardship. Applicant attributed some of his 
financial problems to his wife opening accounts that he was unaware of and her failure 
to pay the debts while he was overseas. It has been several years since he returned 
from overseas. He indicated he is only responsible for individual accounts. Most of the 
debts alleged in the SOR are individual accounts. He failed to provide evidence that the 
joint accounts are not his responsibility or that he paid his individual accounts. AG ¶ 
20(b) does not apply. 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. Applicant has 
resolved one account and is current on his student loans. There is evidence that the 
debts alleged in the SOR are not on his most recent credit report, but there is no 
evidence he has paid or resolved these debts. AG ¶ 20(c) applies to the extent that 
creditors are no longer actively pursuing him for his delinquent debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶ 2.c and 2.d because they are paid or current. There 
is no evidence Applicant paid the other delinquent debts. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(d) does 
 
9 
 
 
not apply to them. Applicant disputes that he is responsible for joint debts alleged. He 
did not provide documentary evidence to show actions he has taken action to dispute 
the debts or show why he is not responsible. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 46 years old. He is retired from the military. Applicant has a history of 
financial difficulties dating back to at least 2003. He had his security clearance revoked 
in 2005, due in part, to his financial delinquencies. Although, the debts alleged in the 
SOR may no longer be enforceable, Applicant did not provide evidence that he paid or 
resolved them, except for the ones in SOR ¶¶ 2.c and 2.d. He has a poor track record of 
being fiscally responsible. Of greater concern, are his repeated and deliberate 
omissions about his past financial delinquencies on two SCAs in 2009 and 2012. His 
failure to be truthful during the security clearance process is a serious security concern. 
Applicant’s conduct raises questions about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations and personal conduct guidelines.  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.c-2.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.e-2.u:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
