 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 12-11779
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant is not exercising dual citizenship with Canada in order to receive
benefits from the Canadian government. He has mitigated the security concerns
associated with his Canadian citizenship. His request for access to classified
information is granted.
Statement of the Case
On July 20, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to renew his eligibility for access to classified
information required as part of his employment with a defense contractor. After
reviewing the completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD)
adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included five exhibits (Items 1 - 5) proffered in support of the3
Government’s case.
2
On July 13, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that
raise security concerns addressed under Guideline C (Foreign Preference).  On July 27,2
2015, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. On
October 26, 2015, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant3
received the FORM on November 3, 2015, and had 30 days from the date of receipt to
submit additional information in response to the FORM. The record closed on
December 3, 2015, after Applicant timely submitted additional information (FORM
Response) within the time allotted. The case was assigned to me on January 5, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline C, the Government alleged that Applicant exercises dual
Canadian and U.S. citizenship because he expects to receive monetary retirement
benefits from the Canadian government beginning in 2021 (SOR 1.a), and because he
intends to retire in Canada (SOR 1.b). Applicant denied, with comments, both
allegations. (FORM, Item 1) I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked since June 2005. He previously worked in a similar position for a different
defense contractor from August 2001 until June 2005. He first received a DOD
clearance in connection with that job in 2003 or 2004. (FORM, Item 3)
Applicant was born and raised in Canada. He holds bachelor’s and master’s
degrees in engineering from a Canadian university. He immigrated to the United States
in September 1980 after being recruited for work by a U.S. company, and he was
naturalized as a U.S. citizen on January 26, 1989. Other than occasional visits of less
than a week at a time to see his elderly mother, he has not lived in Canada since 1980.
(FORM, Items 3 and 5)
After living and working in Canada until 1980, Applicant became eligible to
receive a retirement benefit starting in September 2016 at age 62. As of 2001, his
monthly payment (from a total account balance of about $5,000) was estimated to be
about $80. There is no requirement that Applicant be a Canadian citizen in order to
receive this benefit, which is akin to the U.S. social security program. (FORM, Item 3;
Response to FORM)
Applicant stated in his EQIP that he planned on retiring in Canada if his wife
agreed. He made a similar statement to a Government investigator when interviewed
during his background investigation. When he responded to the SOR, he averred that
he and his wife also are considering retirement in the warmer climate of the southern
United States. In response to the FORM, Applicant stated definitively that he has no
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
3
plans to return to Canada to live. After his mother dies, he will no longer have any
reason to travel to Canada. (FORM, Items 2 - 5; Response to FORM) 
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
 AG ¶ 11(b) (the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship) 10
4
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Foreign Preference
The security concern under this guideline is expressed at AG ¶ 9 as follows:
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States.
Of the specific disqualifying conditions listed under AG ¶ 10, only the following is
potentially applicable here:
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member. This includes but is not limited to: . . . (3) accepting educational,
medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign
country.
This does not apply. Applicant still holds Canadian citizenship only because he
has not actively taken steps to renounce it. While it might benefit Applicant were he to
renounce his foreign citizenship,  doing so is not a prerequisite of clearance eligibility.10
Indeed, Applicant already holds a DOD security clearance. Nor is Canadian citizenship
required to receive the Canadian retirement benefit. Finally, the retirement benefit at
issue is a future interest that Applicant might also never receive. SOR 1.a is resolved for
Applicant.
As to the Government’s concern that he might retire to Canada, it has not been
established that his status as a dual citizen is also a prerequisite for moving to Canada.
It also has not been established what benefits he would receive from the Canadian
government under such circumstances. SOR 1.b is resolved for the Applicant.
In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative
factors under Guideline C, I have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has resided permanently in the
United States for more than 35 years. He has been a U.S. citizen for 27 years, and he
has held a security clearance for work in the U.S. defense industry for more than 10
5
years. A fair and commonsense assessment of all available information shows that the
security concerns related to his dual citizenship have been mitigated.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to continue to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for
a security clearance is granted.
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
