 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-12192 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 8, 2015, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on August 14, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on September 2, 2015. As of November 5, 2015, he had not 
responded. The case was assigned to me on November 18, 2015. The Government 
exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. It is unclear whether he is a current employee or a 
prospective employee of a defense contractor. He has a bachelor’s degree that was 
awarded in 2007. As of 2012, he was married without children.1   
 
Applicant has not had steady employment. He lost jobs due to lay-offs and loss 
of contracts. He went through periods of unemployment and underemployment. He 
vacationed in a foreign country in January 2011 and January 2012.2 
 
The SOR alleges 25 delinquent debts totaling about $48,000. The debts are 
listed on a June 2012 credit report, a December 2014 credit report, or both credit 
reports.3 
 
Seven of the debts alleged in the SOR, totaling about $37,000, are student loans. 
Applicant indicated that the five student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e 
($25,039) were in a current status with the next payment due in June 2015. He provided 
a June 2015 statement showing that the five loans and four additional loans were not 
reported as past due. The last payment on the loans was made in September 2013. The 
balance of the nine loans was $44,721. Applicant admitted owing the two remaining 
defaulted student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($1,827) and 1.y ($10,920). He stated that 
he had not been able to pay the loans because of his unemployment.4 
 
Applicant admitted owing the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 1.i 
($424), but he mistakenly thought the debts were traffic citations that he had not 
received.5   
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.t ($205) and 1.u ($105) are traffic citations that 
Applicant received in 2011. He stated during his August 2012 background interview that 
he intended to pay one of the tickets in September 2012. The citations are listed by 
Experian and TransUnion on the June 2012 combined credit report. They do not appear 
on the December 2014 Equifax credit report. He wrote in his response to the SOR that 
the debts were paid in 2012 and: “I would request more time to provide official 
settlement letter from creditor and to have my credit report updated to reflect status.” It 
is unclear whether Applicant was given additional time to respond to the SOR. However, 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3.  
 
2 Items 1-3.  
 
3 Item 1, 4, 5.  
 
4 Item 1, 3-5.  
 
5 Item 1, 3, 5.  
 
3 
 
he submitted his SOR response on June 8, 2015, and he received the FORM on 
September 2, 2015. He had more than three additional months to submit matters, but 
he did not submit anything.6 
 
Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g (cable television 
account - $383), 1.p (mail-order music - $84), and 1.v (payday loan - $475). He stated 
that he was unable to pay the cable television account because of unemployment, and 
he was unable to contact the two other creditors.7 
 
Applicant denied owing the $1,218 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. He wrote in 
response to the SOR that he appeared in court and “satisfied it shortly after.” He did not 
submit any supporting documentation. The judgment is listed on the December 2014 
credit report.8 
 
Applicant denied owing the remaining debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.m (credit card - 
$470), 1.n (bank overdraft charges - $191), 1.o (satellite television - $86), 1.q (utility 
company - $131), 1.r (bank - $3,378), 1.s (credit card - $617), 1.w (insurance - $686), 
1.x (bank - $1,341), and 1.y (telecommunications - $421). The debts are all listed by 
Experian or TransUnion on the June 2012 combined credit report. None of the debts 
appear on the December 2014 Equifax credit report. Applicant wrote in response to the 
SOR that he paid the debts and: “I would request more time to provide official 
settlement letter from creditor and to have my credit report updated to reflect status.” He 
did not submit any additional matters. Little else is known about Applicant’s finances.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
6 Items 1, 3-5.  
 
7 Item 1, 4, 5.  
 
8 Item 1, 5.  
 
9 Item 1-5.  
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant was unable or unwilling to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s periods of unemployment and underemployment were circumstances 
beyond his control. However, he also vacationed in a foreign country in January 2011 
and January 2012, and when he was interviewed in August 2012, he had not paid his 
2011 traffic citations.  
 
Applicant stated in his response to the SOR that a number of the debts were paid 
and: “I would request more time to provide official settlement letter from creditor and to 
have my credit report updated to reflect status.” It is unclear whether he was given 
additional time to respond to the SOR, but he had more than three additional months in 
which he could have provided documents in response to the FORM. The Appeal Board 
has held that “it is reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present 
documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts.” See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 
2006)). Applicant receives little benefit from the fact that the debts are not listed on the 
2014 Equifax report because the debts at issue were not reported by Equifax on the 
2012 combined credit report; they were reported by Experian or TransUnion. 
 
Applicant had not made any payments on five of the student loans since 
September 2013, but the student loan servicing agency reported in June 2015 that the 
 
6 
 
five loans and four additional loans were not past due. Applicant still has to pay those 
loans, but at this time, those loans are mitigated. There is no proof that any of the other 
debts are paid or otherwise resolved. 
 
There is insufficient evidence in the written record for a determination that 
Applicant’s financial problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable 
to find that he acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith 
effort to pay his debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b) is 
partially applicable. None of the other mitigating conditions are applicable. I find that 
financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.y:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
