 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-06967 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esquire 
                                          For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement).1 Applicant answered the SOR on July 20, 2015. He admitted three of the 
four allegations raised and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on October 
28, 2015. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 6, 2015, setting the hearing 
for November 24, 2015. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered two documents, accepted without objection as exhibits 
(Exs.) 1-2. Applicant offered testimony and five documents, accepted as Exs. A-E. The 
record was kept open for 30 days in the event the parties wished to submit additional 
materials. The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 4, 2015. With no additional 
materials received, the record was closed on December 24, 2015.  
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old software adjuster who has worked for the same 
defense contractor for about two years. In secondary school, he was active with sports 
and other extracurricular activities. In late 2013, he graduated from college, earning a 
bachelor’s degree in computer information.2 (Tr. 18) He is single and has no children. 
He admitted his past drug use in his 2014 security clearance application (SCA). 
 
 Applicant first used marijuana, an illegal drug, when he was a freshman or 
sophomore in secondary school. (Tr. 18, 39) At his school, marijuana was readily 
available, and a substantial number of students used it and drank beer. Applicant used 
both “rarely . . . . [a] couple times a month” (Tr. 20, 40)  
 
At university, where the drug was also prevalent, he again used marijuana 
“occasionally.” (Tr. 21) He estimates that he used it “a couple, or a few times a month,” 
usually outdoors, and almost always with his circle of friends over alcoholic beverages 
at parties. (Tr. 46, 59) He never drove while using alcohol or marijuana. As in high 
school, he would pool his money with “a few school buddies” to purchase and evenly 
divide the marijuana purchase, usually obtaining about an ounce of the drug.3 (Tr. 22-
23) Sometimes Applicant would be the purchaser on behalf of the group, buying the 
drug from a peer or other collegiate school source. At other times, another of his peers 
would make the purchase. Applicant used money from a part-time job to help pay his 
tuition, and some of that income was devoted to the drug purchases.  
 
Applicant quit his drug-related abuse and ventures nearly two and a half years 
ago, when he completed his college academic program.4 (Tr. 21-22, 42, 63-64) 
Applicant quit using the drug because he “was entering the real world, and things like 
that are not accepted,” and to show his older sister that he had equal and solid 
aspirations and goals. (Tr. 21, 43) In facing the working world, he accepted that it was 
time to face adult experience and start a profession. (Tr. 43-44)  
 
In addition, from May 2009 to August 2009, while Applicant was a full-time 
freshman working his way through college, Applicant briefly used cocaine. During that 
period, he first tried, then used a small amount of cocaine that he had bought from a 
peer who has since quit using drugs. Using the drug only by himself, Applicant “nursed” 
the “very tiny,” marble-sized amount of cocaine over a three-month period. (Tr. 25-26) 
                                                          
2 In his 2014 security clearance application, Applicant repeatedly wrote 2014 with regard to the year he 
completed his collegiate studies and stopped using drugs, when he meant 2013. (See, e.g., Tr. 45) 
Applicant corrected similar mistakes during a June 2014 investigative interview process.  
 
3 Four friends would usually contribute about $75 each toward the drug purchase. Any profit made by the 
buyer would only amount to $5-$10. (Tr. 23-24, 58)  
 
4 Contrary to SOR allegations 1.a and 1.c, Applicant credibly denied that he ceased his association with 
marijuana in 2013, not 2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
When the cocaine was exhausted, he quit using the drug. He did not really enjoy or 
know how to use the drug. (Tr. 38) He classifies the purchase as an “experiment.”  
 
Today, Applicant is drug-free. He still maintains contact with some of the people 
he knew in school who used drugs at the time, but they have since matured and ceased 
using them. He no longer has “any association with drugs or drug-related individuals. 
I’m very, very conscientious about who [sic] I allow in my circle.” (Tr. 27) His former 
academic peers who once used drugs have successfully moved on to professional 
careers. This includes at least two of his references, who quit drugs and work in a legal 
field or are graduate students. (See Ex. A) Applicant is committed to avoiding contact 
with anyone he believes uses or has returned to using illegal drugs.  
 
Since quitting drugs before college graduation, Applicant has matured and 
concentrated on both building a professional career and being active in his community. 
At the request of his former secondary school’s principal, he is now an enthusiastic 
volunteer sports coach. He enjoys mentoring the school’s students, warning them of the 
dangers and implications of using illegal drugs, and advising them against using 
electronic cigarettes, liquid tobacco, and other questionable substances. (Tr. 29) With 
that regard, he initiates discussions with parents whose children he believes are at risk.  
 
Moreover, Applicant is now also active with church food drives in his community, 
volunteering with meal and clothing programs for the homeless, and regularly donates 
blood. He is highly regarded by the school’s full-time coaching staff, including an 
assistant coach who once coached Applicant and the school’s president. (Tr. 34-35; Ex. 
A) Friends, associates, and his work supervisor also speak highly of Applicant. (Tr. 36-
37; Exs. B-C) He is well-regarded at work. None of his references use drugs. Applicant 
lives responsibly and currently rents a house. His family knows of his past drug use.  He 
has never had problems with law enforcement concerning his past drug use. He regrets 
his past dealings regarding, and abuse of, both marijuana and cocaine. He submitted a 
statement of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future or risk automatic revocation of 
any security clearance granted. (Tr. 13-14; Ex. E) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
 
 
 
 
4 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement  
 
The security concern for this guideline is set forth in AG ¶ 24:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:  
 
(1)  Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.  
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find that AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse) and AG ¶ 25(c) (illegal drug 
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or 
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia) potentially apply. Applicant 
recreationally used marijuana with varying frequency from 2006 through 2013, and used 
cocaine in 2009. As well, he occasionally possessed, bought, and sold marijuana, and 
also purchased and possessed cocaine. Therefore, AG ¶ 25(a) and AG ¶ 25(c) apply 
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions have 
thus raised security concerns under Guideline H. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the burden 
shifts to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition.5  
 
 Guideline H also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply to Applicant’s case: AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) 
and AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the 
environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation).  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) applies because Applicant’s drug use was limited to his student 
years. Well over two years have passed since his last collegiate use of marijuana and 
nearly seven years have passed since he experimented with cocaine. He credibly 
testified that his high school and college drug use was limited, irregular, and something 
he has put behind himself since finishing his university academic program. Since that 
time, he has become focused on his future and his career. He has moved on with his 
life, as a young working professional, enthusiastic community volunteer, and youth 
mentor. He was forthcoming with investigators and credible at the hearing regarding 
mistakes in the record, thus lending a certain degree of credence to his corrections on 
other SCA entries and attributed comments. Applicant appears to understand the 
security concern involving illegal drug use. Now more mature and concentrating on 
work, he will not risk jeopardizing his budding career by returning to illegal drug use.  
 
In addition, AG ¶ 26(b) applies because Applicant has credibly expressed his 
commitment to staying drug-free and focusing on a responsible future. He has not used 
illegal drugs for nearly three years. While that may not be a tremendous amount of time, 
it is a lengthy period for one his age. His illegal drug use was limited to school. He has 
matured considerably. He no longer associates with friends who use drugs. He provided 
a signed statement of intent to refrain from illegal marijuana use with the understanding 
that his security clearance will be automatically revoked for any violation. He will not 
demonstrate such poor judgment regarding illegal drugs again.  
                                                          
5 See ISCR Case No. 02- 31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005). 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, one must evaluate security clearance eligibility 
by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. 
Consideration shall be given to the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). 
The final determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and conducted a whole-person 
analysis based on the record. In addition to Applicant’s past illegal drug involvement, I 
considered his present life, candor at the hearing, and credible explanations. 
 
Applicant is a mature and highly credible young man. His is single and has no 
children. He worked his way through college, earned a degree, and has become both 
an active community volunteer and youth mentor. Against his own background of drug 
abuse, which ended nearly three years ago as he finished his collegiate academic 
program, he now urges students to eschew drugs. He will not associate with those who 
abuse drugs. He is committed to remaining drug-free and will not jeopardize his career. 
Applicant fully understands the consequences that additional illegal drug use may have 
on his future. He has met his burden and mitigated drug involvement security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
