 Exhibit 1 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 14-03809
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Orest J. Jowyk, Esq. 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for
access to classified information. He met his burden to present sufficient evidence to
explain and mitigate the foreign influence security concern stemming from his family ties
to India. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on November 18, 2013.  After reviewing the application and1
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).     
 Tr. 11–12.4
 Exhibit 2; 14–15.  5
 Appellate Exhibit I; 72–74. 6
 Tr. 26–27, 70–71.7
2
(DOD),  on December 23, 2014, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR),2
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant him eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a3
complaint. It detailed the reasons for the action under the security guidelines known as
Guideline B for foreign influence and Guideline C for foreign preference. He answered
the SOR in writing on February 9, 2015, and requested a hearing.         
The case was assigned to me on October 28, 2015. The hearing was held as
scheduled on January 7, 2016. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on
January 15, 2016. 
Procedural Matters 
At the beginning of the hearing, Department Counsel withdrew the foreign
preference allegation under ¶ 1 of the SOR, which was based on Applicant’s use of an
Overseas Citizen of Indian (OCI) registration certificate (essentially a visa) issued by the
government of India to facilitate travel to India.  Accordingly, the foreign preference4
matter under Guideline C is not an issue in this case.
Without objections, I granted Department Counsel’s written request to take
administrative notice of facts concerning the country of India.  In addition, on my own5
motion, I took administrative notice of recent statements made by Defense Secretary
Ash Carter concerning the defense partnership between the United States and India, a
partnership rooted in shared ideals, mutual interests, and a spirit of innovation.6
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 61-year-old program manager for a technology company.  He7
described himself as a multi-disciplinary talented person with a scientific, technical, and
 Exhibit A. 8
 Tr. 5, 18–21. 9
 Tr. 32–43. 10
 Exhibit B. 11
 Tr. 38. 12
 Tr. 40–41. 13
 Exhibit E. 14
 Exhibits B, C, D, and E; Tr. 74–84.15
 Tr. 76. 16
 Tr. 80, 82. 17
3
management background.  His education includes bachelor’s degrees in mathematics8
and electronics and a master’s degree in computer science. He married his second wife
in 2000, as his first marriage ended in divorce. He has two adult sons from his first
marriage. 
Applicant has worked for this technology company since September 2012. The
DOD granted him a security clearance at the secret level in October 2012, and his
current application is to upgrade the level to top secret.  With the benefit of an interim9
top-secret clearance, he deployed twice to Afghanistan, once in 2013 for about 30 days
and again in 2014 for about 30 days.  As described by the company’s chief executive10
officer (CEO), Applicant volunteered to be the first person from the company to go to
Afghanistan to lead the transition of the contract and ensured the success of continued,
uninterrupted operations of manned intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance flight
missions in support of U.S. military in Afghanistan.  The living conditions were11
difficult,  and the bases where Applicant lived and worked were subject to indirect fire12
on a regular basis.  Back in the United States he continues to perform important work13
by leading a technical group working on matters involving satellite resources.  14
Applicant presented extensive evidence (four statements and one witness) of his
good character.  Taken together, this information shows Applicant is highly regarded by15
his work colleagues and they consider him to be an honest, reliable, and trustworthy
person. The witness described Applicant as a “brilliant engineer” who has a wide range
of experience that is applicable to much of the work the company performs for the
Defense Department.  He believes Applicant has a “strong moral compass” and is16
“absolutely top” in the areas of reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.17
 Exhibit A. 18
 Exhibit N. 19
 Tr. 6820
 Tr. 63–64. 21
 Tr. 63. 22
 Tr. 29. 23
4
1. Applicant’s background in India and immigration to the United States
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in India. He studied and was awarded
the two bachelor’s degrees in 1974 and 1977, respectively. He worked as a
programmer analyst for an Indian electrical firm during 1974–1978. He immigrated to
the United States in January 1979 on a student visa. He was awarded the master’s
degree in May 1980. Thereafter, he began a long career working in technology,
including working for major financial institutions.  18
During 1996–2004, he founded and served as the CEO of his own technology
company. He grew the business to a 400-employee company with offices in the United
States, Australia, India, and the United Kingdom. He sold the company and used the
sale proceeds to support his family for the next eight years while he and his wife took an
extended sabbatical, the details of which are discussed below. 
2. Applicant’s ties to India and the United States  
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in March 1988.  His current U.S.19
passport was issued to him in 2008. His wife is also a native of India as well as a
naturalized U.S. citizen. She is employed by the same technology company as
Applicant, as she has subject-matter expertise working with financial management
software. The DOD granted her a security clearance at the secret level for her current
employment.  His twin sons are native-born U.S. citizens who are living and working in20
the United States. One son is an attorney and the other is a research scientist. Both are
unmarried. In addition to his wife and sons, Applicant has a large extended family who
are citizens of and residents in the United States.  This includes a younger brother who21
is employed by a communications and information technology company.  22
Applicant’s father, age 88, and mother, age 84, are both lifelong citizens of and
residents in India. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b) He described his father as mobile, but
significantly aged, while his mother is ill and bedridden.  His father retired in 1992 after23
a career spent working for two privately-owned companies. His mother has never
worked outside the home. They both reside on a farm that contains a small school for
underprivileged children in a small village in rural India. His father or mother have never
had any employment with or other service connected to the Indian government, and
 The financial matters in India were not alleged in the SOR. 24
 Tr. 30. 25
 Exhibit F. 26
 Tr. 71. 27
 Tr. 43–46. 28
5
neither receives a pension or income based on any service with the Indian government
or military. Applicant calls his parents regularly, generally on a weekly basis, and he
sees them in person when visiting India. 
Applicant has two sisters in addition to his younger brother. One sister is 56
years old and she is a citizen of and a resident in India. (SOR ¶ 1.c) She runs the
school for underprivileged children on her father’s farm. Her husband works as a jewelry
designer. The school serves children from the local village who are unable to afford the
small fee to attend the local school. She has never had any employment with or other
service connected to the Indian government. She receives no pension or income from
the Indian government or military. Applicant calls his sister regularly, generally weekly,
and sees her in person when he is in India visiting their parents.
Applicant’s other sister is 58 years old and she is a citizen of and a resident in
the United States, although she travels back and forth to India to provide care for her
parents. (SOR ¶ 1.d) She lives with her daughter and granddaughter in the United
States. 
In addition, Applicant has a small bank account (worth about $1,000 to $2,000) in
India co-owned by him and his wife that they use to help his parents, and a small
bungalow in India (valued at about U.S. $50,000 to $60,000) co-owned by his wife and
mother-in-law.  Applicant understands that he has no property rights or financial24
interests in the bungalow. The bungalow is now on the market for sale.  Otherwise,25
Applicant has no financial, business, or property interests in India. Here in the United
States, in addition to a household annual income of about $300,000, they have financial
assets worth about $1.1 million.  The assets include two residential properties, one of26
which they have owned since at least 2000. The second home in their state of current
residence was purchased in February 2015 for about $500,000.27
3. Applicant’s extended sabbatical in Indian during 2004–2012
After successfully selling his technology company, Applicant decided it was the
right time and he was the right age to explore a longstanding philosophical or spiritual
question.  To that end, he along with his wife lived in India for the next eight years28
 Exhibit 1. 29
 Tr. 45–46. 30
 Tr. 48–49. 31
 Tr. 49–50. 32
 Tr. 50–53. 33
 Tr. 53. 34
 Exhibit 1. 35
 Tr. 53. 36
 Tr. 54. 37
6
during 2004–2012. He disclosed his travel, his residential addresses, and employment
in India in his security clearance application.29
Upon arrival in India, Applicant rented living quarters for his wife near her
extended family. He then wandered, going to different spiritual places where he met
with spiritual masters (e.g., yogis and mahatmas) who guided him on his spiritual
journey.  He would be away for six months or so at a time, returning to visit his wife and30
his parents. And he would sometimes perform some form of charity work on the
instruction of the spiritual masters. He eventually found his own spiritual master or guru,
a man who was over 100 years of age, who is now deceased.  31
During this period, in 2008, Applicant’s wife and mother-in-law bought the
bungalow in India.  In addition to the spiritual journey, Applicant worked periodically,32
without financial compensation, consulting for three companies in India.  He relied on33
the proceeds from the sale of his company to support himself and his wife during this
period.  In addition to the time in India, he and his wife traveled to the United Kingdom34
in 2009 and to France in 2010 for tourism or vacation.  35
During a trip to the United States in 2011, Applicant met with the CEO of the
technology company who invited him to join the company due to his expertise.  He36
returned to India and consulted with his spiritual master who advised him to do the work
for the company; his wife was also ready to return to the United States after more or
less living on her own for eight years; and his twin sons were 25 or 26 years old and he
wanted to see them get settled.  He and his wife returned to the United States in 2012,37
and they began their respective jobs with the technology company. Other than his
deployments to Afghanistan, Applicant has lived and worked in the United States
without interruption since 2012. His intention was to return to the United States once he
 Tr. 60–62. 38
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to39
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.40
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 41
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 42
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).43
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.44
7
completed his spiritual journey, and he never considered renouncing his U.S. citizenship
or giving up his U.S. passport.38
4. Applicant’s credibility during the hearing
Applicant was businesslike, thoughtful, and respectful throughout the hearing,
and he answered questions in an open and honest way. I was favorably impressed by
Applicant, and I had no concerns about his credibility or truthfulness. 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As39
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt40
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An41
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  42
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting43
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An44
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.45
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.46
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 47
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).48
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.49
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 50
8
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate45
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  46
In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a
preponderance of the evidence.  The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s47
reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence
standard.48
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it49
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
The gravamen of the SOR under Guideline B is whether Applicant’s family ties to
India disqualify him from eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline
B for foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into50
doubt due to foreign connections and interests. The overall concern is:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
 AG ¶ 6. 51
 Exhibit 2.52
9
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.51
There are three additional considerations in analyzing the evidence in this case.
First, in the defense industry, foreign-born engineers and scientists play a critical role in
developing and implementing new technology, and that technology may be of interest to
others whose interests are contrary to the United States. Second, most foreign travel is
for vacation, business, education, or to visit family, which is normal and not by itself a
security concern. The significance of foreign travel depends upon the country involved
and the nature of an applicant’s contacts in that country. Third, foreign travel is also
relevant when it is an indication of the strength of an applicant’s family ties to that
country. 
The guideline contains several disqualifying conditions. Given the evidence of
Applicant’s family ties to India, I have considered the following disqualifying conditions: 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect classified information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing
that information. 
Based on U.S. concerns about (1) industrial and economic espionage, (2) the risk of
terrorism in India, (3) India’s relationships with Iran, Pakistan, and Russia, and (4)
human-rights matters, India meets the heightened-risk standard in AG ¶ 7(a). This
conclusion is based on the facts set forth in Department Counsel’s administrative notice
request.   52
Applicant’s family ties to India are sufficient to raise a concern. Applicant is a
U.S. citizen living in the United States, but his elderly parents and one sister are citizen-
residents of India, and his second sister is a regular visitor to India. It was obvious to me
that Applicant has close ties of affection or obligation or both to his parents, a
circumstance I am certain that Applicant does not dispute. In addition, his travel to and
residence in India during 2004–2012 is indicative of the strength of his ties to his family
to India. Taken together, these matters are sufficient to justify further review.
 AG ¶ 2(a)(7) (“the motivation for the conduct”). 53
10
The guideline also contains several mitigating conditions. Given the evidence
here, I have especially considered the following mitigating conditions:  
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States; and 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
Applicant is a successful engineer and entrepreneur who has spent the majority
of his adulthood living and working in the United States. He has lived, obtained higher
education, and worked in the United States since 1979, excluding the eight-year period
of 2004–2012, when he was in India. Nearly all of his financial assets are in the United
States, as are his wife, twin sons, sister, brother, and extended family members. His ties
or connections to his family in India are what you would expect given his age and family
circumstances. There is nothing unusual or odd about his family ties to India. 
Applicant’s travel to and residence in India during 2004–2012 is an unusual or
special circumstance. It is not the type of special purpose travel for shorter periods that
is sometimes seen in security clearance cases (e.g., tax havens and adoption of
children). In assessing this circumstance, I have considered Applicant’s motivation for
his travel to and residence in India.  Based on the totality of facts and circumstances, I53
am persuaded that his primary motivation was to undertake a rather challenging
spiritual journey, which required him to meet with various spiritual masters. It was a bit
of a happenstance that the spiritual masters were in India. The fact that Applicant was
born in India and had parents and a sister living there were part of the equation too, but
not his primary motivation. 
The security clearance process is not a zero-risk program, because nearly every
person presents some risk or concern. Many cases come down to balancing that risk or
concern. Here, Applicant has family ties to India. Those circumstances should not be
dismissed or overlooked as fanciful or unrealistic, especially considering the matters the
United States views of concern in India. Nevertheless, on balance, I am satisfied that
his ties to the United States outweigh and overcome his ties to India, a country he left in
1979 so he could immigrate to the United States. Indeed, he appears to be a model
immigrant in many ways. He also took the extra step of volunteering to deploy to
Afghanistan, in 2013 at the age of 59 and again in 2014 at the age of 60, to perform
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).54
11
important work under difficult and dangerous conditions in support of the U.S. military.
Those matters are entitled to substantial weight, they reflect great credit upon Applicant,
and they are indicative of his dedication to the United States. Viewing the record
evidence as a whole, I am confident that Applicant can be expected to resolve any
potential concern or potential conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
Applicant met his burden to present sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate
the foreign influence security concern stemming from his family ties to India. I have no
doubts about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. In reaching this
conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence
outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the
whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I conclude that he has met his ultimate burden of54
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him
eligibility for access to classified information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: Withdrawn 
Subparagraph 1.a: Withdrawn 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
