 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02462 
  ) 
  )  
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Russell W. Farr, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline J, 
criminal conduct The Guideline D, sexual behavior, and Guideline E, personal conduct, 
security concerns was not established. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines J, E, and D. 
DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on March 30, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 7, 
2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on November 9, 2015, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 7, 
2015. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into the 
record (an objection to GE 3 was overruled). Department Counsel’s discovery letter, 
which included a listing of exhibits, was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant 
testified, called two witnesses, and offered exhibits (AE) 1 through 6 that were admitted 
into the record without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 29, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he denied all the allegations. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor for about eight 
years. He was married in 1986. He has four children. He has a high school diploma and 
has taken some college courses. He served 20 years in the Navy, retiring in 2007, in the 
paygrade of E-6 with an honorable discharge. He held a security clearance while in the 
Navy and as a contractor, apparently without incident.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes being arrested and charged with 
a felony offense of sexual assault (rape, forcible sodomy, and forcible sexual abuse) in 
June 2011. This conduct is alleged under Guideline J, Guideline E, and Guideline D. 
  
 In May 2011, Applicant’s daughter2, AB, disclosed at school that she had been 
sexually abused by her father (Applicant). AB was asked to write a paper about her 
father for a class she was taking. She was in tenth grade at this time. When she started 
the assignment, with the assistance of her peer-tutor (AB is mentally and 
developmentally challenged as will be more fully explained supra), she began crying 
and according to the peer-tutor, AB related that she had been touched inappropriately 
by her father and that it happened when she was also in the sixth and eighth grades. AB 
told the peer-tutor that AB’s mother did not know about this. The peer-tutor told all the 
above information to a police officer during the course of an investigation into this 
incident. The peer-tutor immediately notified a teaching assistant. The teaching 
assistant related to a police officer that AB told her that her father touched her 
inappropriately and she was afraid of him. AB further stated she had been touched in 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 32, 123-124; GE 1. 
 
2 AB was adopted by Applicant and his wife when she was two years old. AB’s biological mother is 
Applicant’s wife’s sister. AB’s biological mother abused drugs and AB was taken into custody by the 
Department of Child and Family Services (DCFS) before the adoption. There is some evidence to indicate 
AB was sexually abused by her biological father at some point in time. Both biological parents’ rights were 
terminated. See Tr. at 32-35; AE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
her lower area (vaginal area) and her upper area (breast area). AB did not disclose this 
information to her mother because she thought her mother would get mad at her. 
School officials notified DCFS and the police.3  
 
 A police officer and a representative from DCFS jointly interviewed AB on May 
19, 2011. The interview was summarized in a police report. No direct statement by AB 
was included in the record. What follows is the information AB provided during the 
interview as summarized by the police officer. AB stated she refused to write a class 
paper about her father because he touched her inappropriately. She stated he walked 
behind her and touched her breasts sometime between the ninth and tenth grade. She 
further stated that earlier in time, her father made her get naked and lie on the bed. He 
then would put her legs over his shoulders and lick her vagina. This happened when her 
mother was not home and after school. He told her not to tell anyone about what 
happened or he would go to jail. He also put his hands on her thigh and she did not like 
that. She also stated he touched her when she was in the sixth grade and they lived in a 
different state. This included putting his penis in her vagina. She remembers there being 
white stuff between her legs after it was over. She washed it off in the shower. No one 
was home when this occurred.4   
 
 The day after AB’s interview, she was given a medical examination. No 
examination results were included in the record. The police report described a further 
disclosure made by AB during the exam. She stated her father used a black object to 
touch her vagina. She said it was small, black, and had a button to turn it on. He would 
rub between her legs with it and stick it inside her. He kept it under the bed on his side. 
With this information, the police eventually obtained a search warrant, which they 
served and found two small vibrators. One was purple and the second was silver. They 
both had on/off switches. No testing of the vibrators was indicated.5  
 
 In June 2011, the county attorney’s office filed criminal charges against the 
Applicant for rape, forcible sodomy, and forcible sexual abuse. In November 2011, the 
presiding judge dismissed the charges due to “witness problems.” No further 
explanation was given in the police report. In February 2012, a family court judge 
ordered the state DCFS to “unsubstantiate” the finding of abuse by Applicant.6 
 
 In June 2011, AB (at age 15 years and 11 months) was evaluated and tested by 
a clinical and forensic neuropsychologist. The testing showed her to have an IQ score of 
47 (intellectually deficient). Her academic abilities in word reading measured at the 
kindergarten (K) level, sentence comprehension was at less than K level, spelling was 
at grade level 1.2, and math computation was at grade level 1.5. She also showed 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 32-35; GE 3; AE 1. 
 
4 GE 3. 
 
5 GE 3. 
 
6 GE 3; AE 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
“severe impairment” in the areas of cognitive flexibility and memory abilities. She was 
diagnosed with moderate mental retardation. The psychologist said, “AB will never be 
able to live independently, hold a job, or engage in higher education.” The psychologist 
further stated, “AB will likely continue to demonstrate significant behavioral problems 
and her sexual behavior is likely to be promiscuous or irresponsible in the future. AB’s 
current preoccupation with boys and sexual matters may also place her in a vulnerable 
position as a potential victim for others and she is likely to display irresponsible sexual 
behavior with persons her own age.” AB did not bring up the allegations of abuse by her 
father during the evaluation. In January 2011, a DCFS-approved therapist began 
working with AB’s family. After the allegations were made and Applicant was removed 
from the home, the therapist worked more closely with AB. In referring to the 
allegations, AB told the therapist that “people put words in her mouth” and she “was not 
correctly understood.” Later in August 2011, AB told the therapist, one of the people in 
her head “. . . knows the truth. He knows my Dad did not touch me.”7  
 
 AB has been hospitalized three times (August 2011, October 2011, and October 
2012) because she has expressed homicidal auditory hallucinations. She refers to being 
told by a man in her head to “kill all the people that I love.” No injuries have ever been 
inflicted on any one. The doctor’s clinical impression stated after her last hospital visit 
was that she was experiencing conversion disorder, bipolar disorder, and 
schizophrenia.8  
 
 Applicant’s wife (CD) testified at the hearing and stated that AB told her the 
allegations against Applicant were not true. AB told CD she made up the allegations 
because she was mad at her parents for taking away her iPod the day before as a 
disciplinary measure. CD denied coaching AB to recant the allegations. CD was asked 
where AB may have learned some of the sexual terms she used in her disclosure. CD 
responded that AB may have learned them in school or by watching TV. She was in a 
traditional sex education class, not a special education class. The family became aware 
that AB was watching adult TV shows without their knowledge. They contacted their 
cable provider and stopped the service. CD also stated that the vibrators found were 
hers. They were kept in her bedroom. AB had seen them before, and brought them out 
and asked questions about them.9 
 
 CD related that Applicant was involved in the personal hygienic care for AB. 
Because AB was not independent with her hygienic care, she had to be monitored to 
ensure she properly wiped her bottom so that it did not rash or chaff. When CD was not 
around Applicant would do it. He even changed her tampon on occasions when it was 
necessary. If CD was around when Applicant assisted AB in this manner, she never 
                                                          
7 AE 1, 5. 
 
8 Tr. at 53-54; AE 3-4. 
 
9 Tr. at 41-43, 55-58, 60-62, 123-124; GE 1. 
 
 
5 
 
 
noticed that he appeared aroused from his actions. She said he was just a dad helping 
his child.10 
 
 AB testified at the hearing. She is now 20 years old. I asked her if she knew the 
difference between telling the truth and telling a lie. She answered affirmatively. An 
example was used to show the difference between the truth and a lie and she seemed 
to understand it. She was asked about her earlier allegations that Applicant touched her 
in inappropriate places. She stated that those earlier statements were lies. She referred 
to the statements she made to school personnel, DCFS personnel, and the police as all 
being untrue. When asked why she made such untruthful statements she replied, “I had 
a bad day.” She further explained that statement by saying she was mad at her parents 
for taking away her iPod and made those statements to get her parents in trouble. She 
admitted knowing what a penis is and further stated that she has never touched 
Applicant’s penis and he has never touched her with his penis. He also has never 
touched her vagina. She stated that she is not scared of Applicant and wants to 
continue to live with him and her mother. I specifically asked her if anyone told her what 
to say at the hearing and she denied that she was coached to testify in any certain way. 
She also talked about the voice in her head. He is the one who told her to kill her family. 
She does not hear his voice when she takes her medicine.11 
 
 Applicant testified and denied touching AB in any inappropriate manner at any 
time. He stated that before she made the allegations against him, he helped her with 
hygienic issues, such as wiping her bottom, because even though she was 15 years old 
chronologically, her life-skills were that of a five or six year old. He did this to ensure she 
stayed hygienically clean. Since AB made these allegations, he now leaves all of those 
personal issues for his wife to handle.12 
  
 This case turns on which version of AB’s statements regarding her father’s 
alleged actions are more credible. Although AB made seemingly similar initial 
disclosures about being abused by her father to school officials, a DCFS official, and the 
police, there was no direct statement from AB describing the events. All I was presented 
with was a summarized police report. In conflict with the summary of AB’s disclosures 
was her direct recanting of her earlier statements during the hearing. During her 
testimony, I was able to ask direct questions, view her demeanor, and assess whether 
she may have been coached into giving certain testimony. Additionally, I considered the 
evidence presented about her psychological conditions in evaluating her past 
statements and hearing testimony. Weighing all these factors, along with all the other 
evidence in the case, I find AB’s hearing testimony more credible than her earlier 
disclosures concerning alleged abuse by her father. 
 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 37-40. 
 
11 Tr. at 72-90. 
 
12 Tr. at 92-93, 97, 101, 112. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
In June 2011, Applicant was arrested and charged with felony counts of sexual 
abuse against AB. In November 2011, all charges were dismissed by the District Court 
because of “witness problems.” I find that both the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense. 
 Based upon a consideration of all the evidence and the credibility finding above, 
substantial evidence exists that Applicant did not commit the offense. AG ¶ 32(c) 
applies.  
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
I have considered all of the sexual behavior disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 
13 and the following is potentially applicable: 
 
8 
 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 There is insufficient credible evidence to determine that Applicant engaged in any 
criminal sexual behavior with AB. AG¶ 13(a) does not apply.   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group; 
 
 Based upon a consideration of all the evidence and the credibility finding above, 
substantial evidence exists that Applicant did not commit the offense. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 
16(e) do not apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Even if any of the disqualifying conditions were established under Guideline E, 
the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 17(f) applies under these facts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant provided sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the criminal conduct security concern. The sexual behavior and 
personal conduct security concerns were not established. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph:  1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph:  2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline D:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph:  3.a:    For Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
