 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-04283 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire 
                                    For Applicant: Jacob T. Ranish, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On November 5, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1  
 
In an undated SOR Response, Applicant admitted four of seven allegations 
under Guideline F and denied the sole allegation raised under Guideline E. She also 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on October 28, 2015. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on November 2, 2015, setting the hearing for December 3, 2015. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered 10 documents, which were accepted without objection 
as exhibits (Exs.) 1-10. Applicant offered testimony and 15 documents, which, after 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
review, were accepted as Exs. A-O. The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 11, 
2015. On January 11, 2016, the Government forwarded three packets of information 
that were received from Applicant to supplement the record. They were accepted as Ex. 
P-R without objection. The record was then closed.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old operational architect who has worked for the same 
defense contractor since 2013. She was born into a military family, which inspired her to 
work for the government. Early on, she spent many years struggling as a single mother. 
Later, while working full time, she earned a bachelor’s degree, then a master’s degree 
in systems engineering. She is now married and her child is grown. Applicant received 
financial counseling in 2013. (Ex. H) She had two abrupt periods of unemployment, in 
2012 (July through November) and 2013 (July through October), due to contractual 
problems at work. (Tr. 17, 36-39, 52-54) She has otherwise been continuously 
employed since 2004. Applicant hopes to wind down her career and retire within the 
next three years. (Tr. 55) She has held a security clearance for many years without 
incident. (Tr. 34) 
 
Through 2001, Applicant was living within her means on a salary of 
approximately $125,000. In 2008, she experienced the effect of a national real estate 
downturn. She went “underwater” with her house, the value of which decreased 
markedly. (Tr. 85-86) Over time, and periods of unemployment in 2012 and in 2013, 
additional debts were acquired and became delinquent. In addition, a potential buyer for 
her house breached their contract in early April 2014, protracting the disposal of the 
property and satisfaction of related debt. (Tr. 87-88) This led her to file for bankruptcy 
2014. At issue in the SOR are the following financial issues or delinquent debts:  
 
1.a  May 2014 Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition – Applicant completed her payments on 
the bankruptcy in October 2015, and her debt was discharged on January 8, 2016. (Ex. 
P-R) This was completed two years earlier than originally contemplated due to her 
return to work and diligent allocation of incoming funds. (Tr. 47-49) 
 
1.b  Mortgage account past due in the approximate amount of $54,997 with a loan 
balance of $415,387. The home was originally purchased for about $220,000, but 
multiple refinances were sought for upgrades and repairs, such as a new driveway, 
HVAC system, new garage, updated electrical wiring, etc. (Tr. 58-59) Other sums were 
spent toward outstanding bills, including a used car loan. (Tr. 59) Due to a 2014 short 
sale, which was completed after a contract breach and then a protracted period of time 
to gaining approval for a short sale, this account is now at zero. (Ex. D) 
 
1.c  Charged-off home equity loan with an approximate balance of $51,168. This 
account was settled in full. (Exs. E, F; Tr. 24) 
 
1.d  Charged-off account (ending -3605) for about $5,592. This debt was satisfied via 
bankruptcy payments and ultimate bankruptcy discharge. (Exs. A, R; Tr. 24-26, 56) 
 
 
 
 
3 
1.e  Collection account in the approximate amount of $3,718 for a failed business 
venture Applicant tried during a period of unemployment. Debt was satisfied through 
bankruptcy payments and ultimate discharge. (Exs. A, R; Tr. 24-26, 56) 
 
1.f   Medical collection account for $39. Debt was satisfied through bankruptcy 
payments and ultimate discharge. (Exs. A, R; Tr. 24-26, 56) 
 
1.g  Medical collection account for $440. Debt was satisfied through bankruptcy 
payments and ultimate discharge. (Exs. A, R; Tr. 24-26, 56-57) 
 
 In completing her April 2013 security clearance application (SCA), nearly a year 
before she filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, Applicant wrote “no” in response 
to “Section 26 – Financial Record. . . Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts (other 
than previously listed, have any of the following happened? . . . You are currently over 
120 days delinquent on any debt? (Include financial obligations for which you are the 
sole debtor, as well as those for which you are a cosigner or guarantor).” At the time, 
some of the above delinquent accounts were existent. However, Applicant was only 
given one weekend to complete her SCA and was unaware of the debts or the contents 
of her credit report. She saw no reason to think she needed to check whether there had 
been any changes from her previous SCA. She made no attempt to mislead 
investigators.  (Tr. 50-51) She only knew she was behind on her mortgage, which, since 
she was under a good-faith forbearance plan, she assumed was not at issue in the 
Section 26 inquiry. (Tr. 82) Otherwise, she did not believe she was delinquent by 120 or 
more days on the other accounts. (Tr. 51) She attributes her inaccuracy to “a mistake,” 
conceding she was not fully focused at the time she completed the form. (Tr. 52, 81, 84) 
Later, before her investigative interview convened, she notified the investigator that she 
had made mistakes on her SCA in her haste to complete the form. (Tr. 53) 
 
 Today Applicant earns $98,000 a year. With that salary she was able to finish her 
bankruptcy payments. She is now able to live fully within her means without difficulty. 
(Tr. 54) Never having had significant economic issues earlier in her life, she attributes 
her recent problems to having had two layoffs within a year and to the breach of 
contract that protracted her disposal of her property. (Tr. 54, 87-88)  
 
Applicant does not dispute any of the balances at issue. She is current on her 
taxes. Although they maintain separate accounts, her household income is 
supplemented by her husband, who earns about $50,000 a year. The only family 
vehicle in her name is a 2001 truck; a motorcycle in her name was purchased on behalf 
of her husband and is to be retitled to him in the near future. As a family, their vehicles 
are either paid for or currently in timely repayment. (Tr. 90) Applicant’s recent marriage 
was simple and the couple did not take a honeymoon. They live simply. She no longer 
lives paycheck to paycheck. She will not jeopardize her job by straining her finances. 
She is now saving money for the first time in her life. (Tr. 88) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
       Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
 
 
 
 
5 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant filed for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy and acquired multiple delinquent debts. This is sufficient to 
invoke two financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
Prior to 2008, Applicant balanced her life as a single mother and working student 
on a manageable salary and lived within her means. In 2008, when an unforeseeable  
decline in the market occurred, the value of her mortgaged home went “underwater.” As 
she managed to satisfy payments related to her real estate, interruptions in her 
employment contracts caused her to be unexpectedly unemployed for a combined 
period of almost 10 months between 2012 and 2013. Then, in 2014, a potential buyer’s 
breach of contract to purchase her home protracted her ability to dispose of the house, 
satisfy related debt, and address other obligations. As a result, she filed for Chapter 13 
 
 
 
 
6 
bankruptcy in 2014. She completed her payments on her bankruptcy schedule 
expeditiously. As a result, her debts were discharged early, in January 2016.  
 
Today, Applicant earns about $100,000 a year. She enjoys a stable work 
environment, is current on her taxes and accounts, and lives within her means. Her 
household income is supplemented by that of her husband, who earns about $50,000 a 
year. She is intent on continuing to live simply and responsibly maintaining her security 
clearance. She and her husband work together in allocating financial responsibilities. 
Applicant, for the first time, is saving money for her future. Now debt-free and living 
within her means, I find AG ¶ 20(b), (d), and (e) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, where the 
significance of conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations is defined (“[p]ersonal conduct can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information”). Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process.  
 
In completing her April 2013 SCA about a year before she filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy protection, Applicant wrote “no” in response to “Section 26. In essence, this 
denied she was currently over 120 days delinquent on any routine accounts. In her 
haste to complete the SCA under a deadline, she did not check her credit reports. She 
knew she was late on her mortgage, but believed that being in a forbearance program 
excluded its inclusion as an answer to the question posed. Otherwise, she earnestly 
believed her other accounts, even if past due, were not past 120 days delinquent. When 
she first met with investigators, she raised the issue that she had some debt. I find 
Applicant highly credible on this issue and find there is no direct evidence she 
intentionally falsified her answer. Without an intent to falsify, none of the personal 
conduct disqualifying conditions are applicable.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
 
 
 
 
7 
the two guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a mature and credible 64-year-old operational architect from a 
military family whose goal has been to work in government service in some capacity. 
She earned her degrees while balancing her life as a single mother and full-time 
employee. She lived within her means until 2008, when a downturn in the economy 
adversely affected the value of her house. Then, nearly 10 months of unemployment 
between 2012 and 2013 led to delinquent bills, followed by an unexpected breach of 
contract by a buyer for her home in 2014. Since then, she has settled her largest debt. 
She has also seen the approximately $9,700 in charge-off or collection accounts at 
issue successfully, and, through her diligence, prematurely discharged.  
 
Although the plan she implemented to address her debts included bankruptcy, 
which is not the preferred manner for addressing one’s obligations, it is legally 
permissible. Also, to her credit, she filed under Chapter 13, made timely payments, and 
worked to satisfy her share of the balance ahead of schedule. As for her SCA, I find 
Applicant did not intend to falsify her answers. In sum, I find that Applicant mitigated 
financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns.       
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
