1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-06990
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Daniel C. Stafford, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the foreign preference and foreign influence security
concerns. Clearance is granted. 
Statement of the Case
On July 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD)  issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines C, foreign preference,
and B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG).
Applicant answered the SOR on April 24, 2015, denying all of the allegations  and
requesting a hearing. On October 23, 2015, the case was assigned to me. On November
6, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing
On November 23, 2015, Department Counsel filed a memorandum notifying Applicant’s counsel that some1
of the source document  of the facts that he was requesting that I administratively note were voluminous and
encyclopedic in nature, containing extraneous information that was not germane to the security profile of
Taiwan vis-a-vis  the United States. As such, he was only submitting the relevant excerpts. Applicant’s counsel
did not object.
ADP Case No. 06-14978 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 11, 2007).2
2
scheduling the case for December 9, 2015. I held the hearing as scheduled and
considered two Government exhibits (GE), marked as GE 1 and 2, and 18 Applicant
exhibits (AE), marked as AE A through Q, and AE S. I reserved on the admission of AE
R because it was not written in English. Also, I took administrative notice, at Department
Counsel’s request, of the facts set forth in 12 documents (Hearing Exhibits (HEs) I-V; VII-
XII, and HE XIX)  and I took administrative notice, at Applicant’s counsel’s request, of the1
facts set forth in six documents (HE XIII-XVIII). I declined to take administrative notice of
HE VI, the U.S. Office of the National Counterintelligence Center, Annual Report to
Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, because it was
published in 2000, and as such, is not sufficiently current in order for me to gauge the
geopolitical profile of Taiwan vis-a-vis the United States.   2
At the close of the hearing, I left the record open to allow Applicant’s counsel to
submit  additional exhibits, including a translation of AE R. Within the time allotted, he
submitted four exhibits (AE T - AE V), and he submitted a document containing
additional facts about Taiwan that he requested I administratively note (HE XX).
Department Counsel did not file an objection. I have incorporated these documents into
the record. He did not submit a translation of AE R, therefore, I decline to admit it. The
transcript was received on December 29, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old married man with three children, ages 9, 11, and 12. He
is a federal contractor who has been working for his current employer since 2012. (AE S)
Between 2012 and 2014, he worked on a consultant basis, and since 2014, he has been
working full-time as the company’s technical director of nanotechnology. (Tr. 38)
Applicant was born and raised in Taiwan. He immigrated to the United States to
pursue graduate studies in 1991. By 1996, he had completed both a master’s and an
undergraduate degree in engineering. (GE 1 at 11) He works part-time on the staff of his
alma mater as an adjunct professor.
Before immigrating to the United States, Applicant completed mandatory service
in the Taiwanese army. He has never voted in any elections in Taiwan.
Applicant has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 2004. (Tr. 40) His wife, also a
native of Taiwan, became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2013. (GE 1 at 18) His children
are all U.S. citizens by birth.
Applicant’s former employer is a U.S. multinational company.3
3
Applicant’s parents are retired elementary school teachers. In 2007, they moved
from Taiwan to the United States, obtaining permanent U.S. resident status with the
intention of becoming naturalized U.S. citizens. (Answer at 3) In approximately 2012,
they both began experiencing major health problems. Because Taiwan has a warmer
climate and free health care, they decided to return. (Tr. 75-76) Applicant talks to them
frequently and visits them in Taiwan approximately two to three times per year. He also
supports them financially, giving them approximately  $2,000 to $3,000 per visit. (Tr. 73)
Although Applicant’s parents remain unable to travel, their application for U.S. citizenship
remains open, as they hope to recover and return to the United States.
Applicant has two sisters who are both Taiwanese citizens. One lives in Taiwan.
She originally worked in the engineering field, but recently switched careers to marketing
and business development. She lives with their parents and helps take care of them.
Because of a large age gap, Applicant and this sister have little in common, and they
rarely speak. (Tr. 75, 88) Applicant’s other sister lives in Australia and is a nurse.
Applicant speaks with her once a year on holidays. None of Applicant’s family members
have ever worked for the Taiwanese government. (Tr. 58)
Applicant’s mother-in-law is deceased. Applicant’s father-in-law lives in the United
States and has permanent residence status. (Tr. 107) Before moving to the United
States, he worked in the lumber business. Applicant does not support his father-in-law
financially. Applicant’s wife has two siblings. Both are U.S. citizens and residents. 
Applicant owns no assets in Taiwan. (Tr. 40) He owns seven properties in the
United States. None of these properties is mortgaged. (Tr. 44) His net worth is between
1.5 and 2 million dollars.
Applicant has traveled worldwide, participating in conferences, seminars, and
symposiums related to his field of expertise. These events constituted opportunities to
discuss the latest innovations and to discuss joint ventures. (GE 1 at 31-39; AE J-Q) Of
the 26 international trips he has taken since 2007, ten were to either the People’s
Republic of China or to Taiwan. All of his trips were paid for by either his current or
former employer. (Tr. 62)3
As of the hearing date, Applicant possessed a valid Taiwanese passport. He has
possessed one since immigrating to the United States, and renewed it in 2012. After
realizing the security implications of a foreign passport, in September 2015, Applicant
surrendered it to the Taiwanese consulate, and expressed an intention to renounce his
Taiwanese citizenship altogether. (AE U; Tr. 92) Later, the Taiwanese consulate
returned it to him through the mail, together with forms for him to complete to facilitate
the citizenship renunciation. Per the consulate, Applicant was to return these completed
forms with the passport. As of the hearing date, Applicant was in the process of
gathering the requested information, and was not going to surrender the passport until
he had finished gathering the information, as instructed.
4
After the hearing, Applicant physically altered his Taiwanese passport by cutting
off the lower right hand corner of the cover, and he returned it to the consulate with a
letter of surrender. (AE V, AE W)
The United States and Taiwan enjoy a “robust unofficial relationship.” (HE V at 1)
Bilateral relations between the United States and Taiwan are at their highest point in
decades. (HE XV at 3) The U.S. is Taiwan’s largest foreign investor. (HE XIV at 1)
Taiwan is one of less than 40 countries where tourists are allowed to visit the United
States without a visa. Criteria for waiving visa requirements include compliance with
security and information sharing requirements, and the maintenance of high
counterterrorism, law enforcement, border control, aviation, and document-security
standards. (HE XIII)
In December 2005, the then-Principal Deputy assistant Secretary of State for East
Asian and Pacific Affairs pled guilty to keeping numerous classified documents in his
home and to concealing his relationship with a Taiwanese intelligence agent. (HE VII at
3) In 2009, the U.S. Treasury Department designated two Taiwanese-based companies
as proliferators of weapons of mass destruction, isolating them from the U.S. financial
system and prohibiting any U.S. person or company from doing business with them.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied together with the factors
listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
5
Analysis
Foreign Preference
Under this guideline, “[w]hen an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United
States” (AG ¶ 9). Here, Applicant’s possession of a Taiwanese passport triggers the
application of AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member.”
In September 2015, Applicant initiated the process of renouncing his Taiwanese
citizenship. In December 2015, Applicant invalidated his Taiwanese passport by cutting
off the lower right hand corner of its cover page and mailing it to the Taiwanese
government with an affidavit of surrender. AG ¶ 11(b), “the individual has expressed a
willingness to renounce dual citizenship; and 11(e), “the passport has been destroyed,
surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated,” apply.
Applicant has mitigated the foreign preference security concern.
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if
the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in the United States interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign
interest.” Moreover, “adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located,
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known
to target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with
a risk of terrorism.” (AG ¶ 6)
Department Counsel provided evidence, which I administratively noted, of several
examples of criminals, some of whom were Taiwanese nationals living in the United
States, who have illegally exported sensitive U.S. goods and military technologies.
Generally, these examples are insufficient to conclude that either the Taiwanese
government or the Taiwanese government through corporate or academic intermediaries
are targeting the United States for sensitive or classified information. However, the case
of the senior State Department official who was arrested, in part, for sharing sensitive
information with a Taiwanese intelligence agent with whom he was having an affair,
poses a significant exception. This case alone is sufficient to conclude that Applicant’s
contacts with his family members who are Taiwanese citizens may generate “a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,”
(AG ¶ 8(a)).  
Applicant rarely speaks to his sisters. One of them does not live in Taiwan. AG ¶
8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that
6
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,”
applies to these relationships.
Applicant’s father-in-law lives in the United States. Taiwan is a friendly country.
Although friendly countries can conduct espionage against the United States as readily
as unfriendly ones, Taiwan is certainly not the latter. It is not competing aggressively with
the United States by any means necessary, including the exploitation of its citizens living
in the United States. I conclude that Applicant’s relationship with his father-in-law does
not pose a security concern.
Applicant has been living in the United States for 25 years, completing his
advanced studies, raising his family, and building his career. He owns no property in
Taiwan. In contrast, since immigrating to the United States, he has accrued a net worth
of between 1.5 and 2 million dollars, including seven properties that he owns free and
clear of any mortgages. His frequent international lectures and attendance at
professional conferences are a byproduct of a successful career that he has cultivated in
the United States. All of his worldwide trips to professional and academic conferences
were paid for by either his current or former employers, both U.S. multinational
companies. Under these circumstances, AG ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person group,
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected to
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” applies to Applicant’s
relationship with his parents and to any potential conflict generated by his participation in
international conferences.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered these whole-person factors in my application of the mitigating conditions.
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a : For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
