 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03994 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Lawrence Berger, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Ans) the SOR on May 6, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On October 19, 2015, I was assigned the case. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 9, 2015, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 8, 2015. 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence 
 
2 
 
without objection. Department Counsel’s discovery letter sent to Applicant, which 
contained an exhibit list, was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and 
offered exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 29, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations with explanations. These admissions 
are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 63-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
this employer since 2011. He is a retired federal employee with approximately 22 years 
of service. He retired from federal service in 2009. Between 2009 and 2011, he was 
unemployed. He has a bachelor’s degree. He spent two years in the Marine Corps from 
1971 to 1973 and was honorably discharged. He is married for the second time and has 
two stepchildren. He has held a security clearance since 1987.1  
 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts in the amount of approximately $19,893. 
The debts were listed in credit reports from October 2013 and July 2014.2  
 
 Before Applicant retired from federal service, he was earning a yearly salary of 
approximately $120,000. He characterized his retirement as mandatory without 
providing an explaination. He further explained that his wife experienced some medical 
issues about the time of his retirement that caused her to be hospitalized. None of the 
SOR debts are for medical expenses. After his retirement, he sought employment, but 
was unable to find a job until about 2011. He testified that his retirement income was 
between $60,000 and $70,000. However, he furnished documentation showing that in 
2013 his gross retirement income was approximately $86,000. After his 2009 
retirement, he was having difficulty paying all of his debts, including his home mortgage 
payments. He purchased the home in 2000 for approximately $242,000. He refinanced 
it in about 2002 for approximately $436,000. He used some of the proceeds from the 
refinancing to pay other loans and debts. He sought the assistance of legal counsel to 
explore options, in particular, the possibility of seeking a home loan modification. 
Applicant stopped paying his mortgage at some point and the home went into 
foreclosure. At the time of the foreclosure, Applicant owed more than the value of the 
home. Eventually, after going through mediation and failed attempted short sales, his 
home sold in January 2013. There were no proceeds from the sale and he was not 
responsible for any deficiency.3  
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 18-21, 24; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 2, 4. 
 
3 Tr. at 21-24, 28 29, 31-32, 40, 48-50, 57-58; Ans; GE 3 (See interrogatory answer, “exhibit 10”). 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant received a job offer in 2011 that required a move to a different state. 
He paid for the move. The amount of hours he was working at the job he relocated for 
was not satisfactory. This caused continual financial problems with his remaining debts. 
In April 2013, he contacted a second attorney about his remaining debts, including the 
SOR debts. Applicant was advised that bankruptcy was not appropriate for his situation 
and was told to refrain from paying any of the credit card debts because they were 
beyond the statute of limitations. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant relied on the 
statute of limitations argument as a rationale for nonpayment. Applicant claims this 
second attorney sent correspondence to the creditor of SOR ¶ 1.d, but he did not 
provide the correspondence.4 
 
 In May 2014, Applicant’s father passed away. Applicant decided to move to the 
state where his father lived (Applicant’s current location). He was able to continue his 
job from this new location. Applicant inherited approximately $45,000 from his father’s 
estate. He did not use any of this money to pay his SOR debts, but rather used it for a 
down payment on a home he built in his new location. After the SOR was issued, 
Applicant retained counsel of record who in May 2015 sent all four SOR creditors letters 
to establish contact. No responses were received from the creditors and counsel resent 
similar letters in December 2015, shortly before this hearing. No responses were 
received. Department Counsel pointed out that the addresses on the letters were 
different from the addresses of the creditors as stated on the credit report in evidence. 
Applicant claimed that he always was diligent about completing change of address 
information. Aside from the contacts made by his two attorneys, Applicant made no 
effort to contact the creditors on his own. The status of the SOR-related debts is as 
follows:5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (credit card debt $8,630): 
 
 This account was opened in 2005. The date of last action on the account was 
May 2010. The original creditor went out of business, but a subsequent financial 
institution owns the debt. No proof of payment or established payment plan was offered 
into evidence. This debt is unresolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b (consumer debt $2,512): 
 
 This is a consumer debt for a computer purchase. The account was opened in 
2007. The last action on the account was in June 2009. No proof of payment or 
established payment plan was offered into evidence. This debt is unresolved.7  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 33-34, 37; Ans; GE 3 (See Applicant’s two page narrative explanation labeled 
“Attachment”). 
 
5 Tr. at 43-46, 55-56; Ans; GE 3 (See Applicant’s two page narrative explanation labeled 
“Attachment”); AE A-D. 
 
6 Tr. at 25-26; Ans; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 26; Ans; GE 2. 
 
4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c (credit card debt $1,341): 
 
 Applicant admitted this was a charge account at a retail establishment. The 
account was opened in 2006 and the last action on the account was in October 2010. 
No proof of payment or established payment plan was offered into evidence. This debt 
is unresolved.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d (credit card debt $7,410): 
 
 This account was opened in September 2010. The last action on this account 
was in September 2013. No proof of payment or established payment plan was offered 
into evidence. This debt is unresolved.9 
 
 According to his personal financial statement completed in June 2014, Applicant 
listed his net monthly income as $7,698 and his expenses and obligations as $4,240. 
This total left him with monthly discretionary income of $3,458. Other than his 
discussions with three different attorneys about his financial situation, there is no 
evidence of formal financial counselling.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
                                                          
8 Tr. at 27; Ans; GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. at 27; Ans; GE 2. 
 
10 Tr. at 47-48; GE 4. 
 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant has four delinquent debts that remain unpaid. The evidence is sufficient 
to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
6 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Although Applicant’s debts are dated, they are still owed. Other than attempting 
to contact the creditors after receiving the SOR on debts that are years old, Applicant 
has taken no substantial action to resolve these debts. His inaction shows a lack of 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s post-retirement unemployment and his move to take a new job is a 
condition beyond his control. However, he has done nothing to address the debts. 
Applicant did not contact the creditors on his own. He waited until the SOR was issued 
before he had his attorney attempt to contact the four creditors. An attorney earlier told 
Applicant not to pay the debts because they were unenforceable due to the applicable 
statute of limitations. He failed to provide proof of payment or established payment 
plans for any of the debts. Overall, the record evidence does not support that 
Applicant’s action were responsible under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable.  
 
 Applicant has not sought financial counseling, but he sought legal advice from 
three different attorneys about his financial situation. Given the unpaid status of all the 
SOR debts, his failure to apply any of his discretionary income toward the debt, and his 
failure to apply any of his inheritance toward his outstanding debt, there are not clear 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. His earlier reliance on 
the statute of limitations and his late attempt to contact the creditors do not constitute 
evidence of good-faith efforts to pay or resolve the remaining debts.11  AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 
20(d) do not apply.  
                                                          
11 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the predecessor mitigating condition to AG ¶ 20(d)], 
an Applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the Applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service and the circumstances by which he 
became indebted. However, I also considered that he has made little effort to resolve 
his financial situation. He has not established a meaningful track record of debt 
management, which causes me to question his willingness to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an Applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [AG ¶ 20(d)].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.d:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
