 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-06592 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision on Remand 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 28, 2012, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 9, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 12, 2015. Applicant requested 
his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
On September 28, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s 
written case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of 
Items 1 to 6, was provided to the Applicant on September 28, 2015. He was given the 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant received the file on October 13, 2015.  
 
Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed 
that would have expired on November 12, 2015.  
 
 Department Counsel submitted six Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 
3 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the 
summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the 
Office of Personnel Management on April 23, 2012. Applicant did not adopt it as his own 
statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report 
of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating witness. In 
light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
I received the case assignment on December 18, 2015. I issued a decision on 
February 3, 2016, finding Applicant was not eligible for a security clearance.  
 
                                           Procedural Matters 
 
 Applicant appealed the denial to the DOHA Appeal Board (Board). On April 20, 
2016, the Board remanded the decision for reconsideration of the documents submitted 
as Items 4-6 to determine which debts were paid. Based upon reconsideration of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR. There are six financial allegations. 
(Items 1, 2)  
 
Applicant is 34 years old, married, and has one child. He served six years in the 
U.S. Air Force, from December 2001 to December 2007. Since leaving active military 
service in 2007 he worked for a company that terminated him when he took a job with 
another defense contractor. At his first civilian job he would work four months and be 
unemployed for three months. He would collect unemployment insurance and have any 
money he saved from working the four months. Therefore, he would work eight months 
of every year.  The only e-QIP in the file is from September 2012 and Applicant states in 
it his “current employment” is from October 2007 to “present” which would mean 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
September 2012, His debts started being delinquent in 2012. Applicant did not provide 
any information about the current terms and conditions of his present employment. 
However, in his Answer dated August 12, 2015, he reiterated he was unemployed for 
four months.  (Answer; Items 1, 2) 
 
Applicant owed a bank on a home mortgage (Subparagraph 1.a). The mortgage 
balance is $247,990, and the monthly payments were past due in the amount of 
$19,204. Applicant’s Answer states he was told by his mortgage lender that to take 
advantage of a short sale procedure he would have to stop paying on his mortgage. He 
did so and the house was sold in a short sale. The credit report of September 28, 2015, 
states the house was sold and the balance owed has been paid. The debt was resolved 
in June 2012. This debt is resolved. (Items 1, 2, 4-6) 
 
Applicant owed $622 on a credit card (Subparagraph 1.b). The credit report of 
September 28, 2015, states the account was charged off and paid. Applicant’s Answer 
states he paid off the debt. This debt is resolved. (Items 1, 2, 4-6) 
 
Applicant owed a debt collector $1,274 on a credit card (Subparagraph 1.c). The 
debt became delinquent in that time period when Applicant was unemployed. The credit 
reports and Applicant contend he paid off this debt. The September 28, 2015 credit 
report shows that the debt is paid. This debt is resolved. (Items 1, 2, 4-6) 
 
Applicant owed a university for tuition the amount of $1,157 (Subparagraph 1.d). 
Applicant admits this debt because the G.I. Bill did not cover this expense and he was 
unemployed making him unable to pay the debt. The credit report of October 7, 2014, 
states this debt is charged off and not paid. The September 28, 2015 credit report states 
the debt is a paid charge off. This debt is resolved. (Items 1, 2, 4-6) 
 
Applicant owed a bank $810 (Subparagraph 1.e). He admitted the debt and 
attributed his inability to repay it to the four month unemployment period between his job 
with his current employer and his former employer. The debt delinquency started in 
December 2012. The credit report of September 28, 2015, shows Applicant disputed the 
debt and the creditor charged it off. The debt is now showing as a paid charge off 
account. It is resolved according to the latest credit report. (Items 1, 2, 4 (at account #7, 
and 5, 6) 
 
Applicant owed a bank on a real estate mortgage with a loan balance of 
$146,274 and a past-due monthly payment of $2,833 (Subparagraph 1.f). Applicant 
admits this debt and was not able to pay it because he was unemployed for a four 
month period. The September 28, 2015 credit report shows the account is paid as 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
specified in the loan agreement. This debt is resolved. (Items 1, 2, 4 (at account #7, 5, 
6) 
 
     Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2012 to the present, Applicant accumulated six delinquent debts, totaling 
$25,900, which remained unpaid or unresolved when the SOR was issued. These two 
disqualifying conditions are established. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Two mitigating conditions may apply:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the loss of employment were shown by Applicant to 
have a substantial effect on his ability to repay his debts. In the past seven years, 
Applicant was unemployed for four months at some time, he claims. The termination of 
employment by his previous employer when he obtained a position with a defense 
contractor was unforeseen and beyond his control. He had the new job commitment and 
was awaiting his security clearance. He continued to pay what debts he could. He met 
his burden of proof of acting responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant proved AG ¶ 20 (d) applied because he did show that he made good-
faith efforts to repay the debts with what funds he had during his four months of 
unemployment. The three credit reports show his continuing efforts to pay his debts for 
the past several years. This mitigating condition applies.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
 
 
 
 
7 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He suffered an unforeseen four month period of unemployment 
when he changed employers that adversely affected his ability to repay his debts at that 
time. Now he has rectified the situation and has resolved or is resolving his remaining 
debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or substantial doubts 
as to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
    
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
