 
1 
 
 
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 14-03792 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 In 2005 Applicant was terminated by her employer for embezzling $280. She 
failed to disclose that information in a 2013 security clearance application. She did not 
mitigate the criminal conduct or personal conduct security concerns. Based upon a 
review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case  
 
On August 15, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing 
security concerns under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within DoD for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
On November 10, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR in writing, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge (Answer). On February 12, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On February 16, 
2016, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing. The case was heard on March 2, 2016, as 
scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through F into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript on 
March 14, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three allegations contained in 
the SOR. Her admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. (Answer.) 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old, single, and a 2002 college graduate. After graduation, 
she worked as a salesperson, flight attendant, bank teller, and branch manager. In June 
2006 she began working for her current employer, a federal contractor. On occasion 
she has been sent overseas for her job. She has a dedicated attitude about performing 
well in her job and has accomplished numerous goals. She has never been disciplined 
by her employer nor had a security incident. (Tr. 27.)  
 
 Applicant’s performance evaluations document a history of exceeding job 
expectations with her current employer. (AE D.) A past supervisor for eight years said 
that Applicant “was one of the finest directors that I have ever led.” (AE E.) A readiness 
manager stated that Applicant is a successful leader. Applicant’s immediate supervisor 
trusts her with confidential information and supports her request for a security 
clearance. A vice-president of her employer’s company highly complimented Applicant’s 
performance, character, and honesty. (AE E.) Applicant is also active in her community 
and is a successful fundraiser for cancer research, AIDS, and disabled veterans. (Tr. 
50.) She has held a secret security clearance since January 2010. (GE 1.) 
 
 In July 2004 Applicant started a position as a bank teller. She was 24 years old. 
At the end of January 2005, she embezzled $280 cash from the bank. She said she was 
having financial problems at the time. The next day she told her manager what she had 
done. The manager asked her to leave. Applicant later received a call from the 
company requesting that she report to headquarters that day. Applicant reported to the 
headquarters and returned the money. She was never charged criminally for her 
actions, nor did she receive a letter of termination. However, she clearly understood at 
that meeting with her employer that she would be terminated, if she did not leave. (Tr. 
18-20, 40, 44.)  
  
 In April 2009 Applicant submitted her first security clearance application (SCA-
2009). She was 28 years old. In response to questions in Section 13A of that SCA, 
inquiring about her employment history, Applicant listed the bank position, with 
employment dates from “7/2004 to 2/2005.” (GE 2.) She did not disclose any 
information about the January 2005 theft under the section titled “Explanation/reason for 
 
3 
 
 
leaving.” (GE 2.) Section 13C of that SCA-2009 specifically inquired into reasons for 
leaving a position. Applicant did not disclose any information. (GE 2.) She admitted she 
should have disclosed that she “Left a job by mutual agreement following charges of 
misconduct.” (Tr. 36.) She attributed the non-disclosure to a “lapse of judgment.” (Tr. 
25.) She subsequently received a security clearance. 
 
 In early August 2013, Applicant submitted a second security clearance 
application (SCA-2013) for purposes of upgrading her security clearance. (Tr. 42.) She 
was 32 years old. While completing the form, she stated that she did not think about 
disclosing the 2005 employment incident, but instead she simply updated information in 
it. (Tr. 27.) In response to the question inquiring about the reason for leaving her 
position at the bank, she wrote “pursuit of new opportunities.”1 After submitting SCA-
2013, an investigator interviewed Applicant later in August 2013 about her answers to 
questions in it. During this interview, she did not make an effort to disclose information 
related to the 2005 termination from the bank position.2   
 
 In March 2014 another investigator called Applicant to schedule a second 
interview. During that interview, the investigator specifically asked her three times 
whether she had any disciplinary actions while working at the bank. After the third time, 
Applicant disclosed the truth about the termination from the bank. (Tr. 38.) She told the 
investigator that she was embarrassed about the 2005 incident. (Tr. 39; GE 3.) In her 
Answer to the SOR, she admitted the 2013 falsification. 
 
 While testifying, Applicant expressed visible remorse and embarrassment over 
her misconduct. She realizes that her conduct was criminal and that she made a serious 
mistake when she stole money from the bank. (Tr. 21-23.) She said that her impulsive 
act was out-of-character. (Tr. 44-45.) She told her brother and one friend about the 
misconduct soon after it occurred. (Tr. 43.) None of her previous employers are aware 
of the 2005 incident, nor is her current employer. (Tr. 42.) Toward the end of the 
hearing, she said that she loves her job. She wants to continue supporting the DoD in 
its role in the world. (Tr. 49.) 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, those guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
1 Although she was looking for a new job at the time, it was not the primary reason that she left the bank. 
(Tr. 29.) 
2 The SOR did not allege a falsification charge relating to Applicant’s non-disclosure of requested 
information in her 2009 security clearance application. Nor did the SOR allege misrepresentations of the 
truth during two investigative interviews. Hence, said information shall not be considered in an analysis of 
disqualifying conditions; however, it may be considered in the analysis of mitigating conditions and the 
whole-person section. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Although not prosecuted, Applicant admitted that she engaged in criminal 
conduct when she embezzled $280 from her employer in January 2005. The evidence 
raises the above disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶ 32 provides a condition that could mitigate the security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant presented impressive evidence related to her employment performance 
since 2006. She admitted her criminal misconduct and exhibited remorse and 
embarrassment while testifying. She is active in her community and assists with 
fundraising for charitable organizations. These are positive factors of successful 
rehabilitation. Although there is no evidence of a similar crime since 2005, such as 
another theft, on at least four times between 2009 and 2014 she intentionally deceived 
the Government about the 2005 criminal incident. That deception is evidence of 
additional criminal activity and precludes a full finding of successful rehabilitation. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The security concerns pertaining to the personal conduct guideline are set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,  
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant admitted that she intentionally falsified her security clearance 
application in 2013, by not disclosing a criminal incident that occurred at her place of 
employment. Those actions could create a vulnerability to exploitation because said 
conduct, if known, could affect her personal and professional standing in the 
community. The evidence raises the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 17 includes four conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
  Applicant did not make a good-faith effort to correct the falsification in her April 
2009 security clearance application when she submitted her August 2013 security 
clearance application. Despite being asked about it during a second investigative 
interview in March 2014, she continued to deny it twice before admitting the incident. 
Up to that point her misconduct of deliberate non-disclosure spanned five years. AG ¶ 
17(a) does not provide mitigation. The non-disclosure of an offense is not minor, and it 
continued until a persistent investigator repeatedly confronted her about the truth. 
 
Applicant acknowledged the falsification in March 2014, but did not present 
evidence that she has taken positive steps to alleviate or understand the internal 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that underlie her initial behavior in 2005, and, more 
importantly, her subsequent pattern of non-disclosure. AG ¶ 17(d) does not apply. 
Although Applicant’s brother and girlfriend are aware of the 2005 criminal misconduct, 
 
7 
 
 
there is no evidence that they or anyone else are aware of Applicant’s intentional 
concealment of that information over the years, or that she has taken positive steps to 
reduce her vulnerability to exploitation based on those facts. The evidence does not 
establish mitigation under AG ¶ 17(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 35-year-old 
woman, who has successfully worked for a federal contractor since 2006. During that 
time she held a security clearance, and received impressive performance evaluations. 
She submitted letters from supervisors attesting to her impressive capabilities and 
trustworthiness. While that employment history is commendable, her decision to 
perpetuate a lie to the Government about a job termination for almost five years raises 
serious concerns about her ethics and current judgment. 
 
After observing her demeanor and listening to her testimony, I believe she is 
mortified, remorseful, and relieved to no longer be emotionally burdened by her secret. 
However, given the extent and seriousness of the ongoing falsifications, which are 
criminal, she has not presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns 
raised by that conduct, beginning with the 2005 criminal incident, and concluding when 
she reluctantly disclosed the job termination during a 2014 investigative interview. She 
seemingly has been unable to accept and admit her early criminal conduct for nine 
years. While the 2005 incident is concerning, Applicant’s denial of it for so many years 
is more concerning and at the core of this investigation. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the criminal conduct 
or personal conduct security concerns.  
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
      Subparagraph 1.a:    Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
      Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
      Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
