 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04962 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sean M. Bigley, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On February 7, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 18, 2015, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
provided to Applicant on October 29, 2015, and it was received on November 16, 2015. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object and Items 4 through 7 are admitted 
into evidence. In response to the FORM, Applicant submitted additional information, 
which was included in the record without objection.1 The case was assigned to me on 
March 15, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d. He denied the 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e. I have incorporated his admissions into the findings of fact. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He attended college, but did not earn a degree. He 
served in the military from 2001 to 2004 and was deployed to Iraq. He has a 60% 
service disability. He married in 1998 and divorced in 2005. He remarried in 2007. He 
has children ages 16, 6, and 2.2 He is the managing member of a company he has 
owned since 2004. He has worked in various jobs from 2004 until he began working for 
a federal contractor in October 2012.3 
 
 Applicant and his brother purchased an apartment complex as a business 
venture in 2007. Applicant disagreed with the business practices of the mortgage 
lender, took legal action, and the mortgage lender foreclosed on the property. Applicant 
indicated that he was financially solvent and able to pay the mortgage payments, but 
stopped on the advice of his lawyer. He lost the lawsuit and subsequently filed Chapter 
11 bankruptcy. The debt is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($142,888). He has been making 
consistent and timely payments to the lender of $4,100 a month in conformance with the 
bankruptcy order and intends to do so until the debt is repaid in full. The debt is being 
resolved.4 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($11,287) and 1.d ($2,979) are credit card accounts that Applicant 
used for the business he and his brother jointly owned. He signed a personal guarantee 
for the credit cards. He and his brother paid down their initial start-up business debts too 
quickly and exhausted their cash reserves. In 2007 and 2008, the business declined, 
and they eventually closed their business. Applicant has been paying the debts in SOR 
                                                          
1 The Response to the FORM included exhibits that were already marked. They are admitted into 
evidence as marked.  
 
2 Item 5. Applicant did not list his youngest child in his security clearance application, but indicated in his 
response that he has three children and their ages.  
 
3 Item 5. 
 
4 Items 4; Response to FORM, attachments AE-D, AE-E, AE E (1). 
 
 
3 
 
 
¶ 1.b since September 2012 and ¶1.d since July 2012, with consistent, albeit small 
monthly payments of $40. The creditor has been accepting the payments.5 
 
Applicant disputes the credit card debt in SOR ¶1.c ($6,030). He admitted the 
credit card became delinquent in 2010, but disputes the amount owed as inaccurate. He 
believed he owed approximately $1,500 and the amount alleged was the amount for the 
highest outstanding balance. He has contacted the creditor to resolve the debt, but did 
not make payments toward the disputed debt because he did not want to acknowledge 
the validity of the total amount alleged. He provided state law citations noting the debt is 
no longer valid or collectable after three years (2013). Applicant provided a letter he 
wrote to the creditor from 2012 indicating his dispute of the amount owed, requesting an 
investigation, and his willingness to fully settle the debt for the amount he owed after 
completion of a satisfactory investigation. Applicant did not receive a response from the 
creditor.6 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($27,979) is a second mortgage loan Applicant took out 
on a home owned by him and his first wife. During their divorce they realized they could 
not sell the property without taking a substantial loss, so they converted the property 
into rental units. Due to the downturn in the economy in 2007-2008, the units were no 
longer profitable, and Applicant was unable to refinance or modify the loans, and the 
property went into foreclosure in 2010. Applicant received a small settlement from a 
class action law suit filed against the primary lender by a third party for predatory 
lending practices. Under the state law where the property is located, the second 
mortgage was subrogated to the first mortgage when the first mortgage was foreclosed 
upon, thereby eliminating the second mortgage. However, under the state’s laws, the 
second lender had the right to sue for the deficiency amount alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, but it 
did not. Applicant obtained a copy of the foreclosure order issued by the judge for the 
property alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. The correspondence reflects Applicant did not contest 
the foreclosure and he was actively working with the lenders to avoid a deficiency 
judgment. The primary lender worked with Applicant, but the secondary lender failed to 
answer the petition and was in default. Applicant provided letters showing his attempt to 
find the second lender to see if there were any funds owed it. He was unable to find the 
creditor. The statute of limitations on filing suit ran in 2013.7  
 
It is noted that credit bureau reports submitted by the government from 
September 2015 and September 2014, do not reflect the name of the creditor or the 
successor creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. There is a delinquent account in the credit 
bureau reports that is roughly the same amount of the debt alleged under a different 
name.8  
                                                          
5 Item 4, attachments B and D; Response to FORM attachments AE F and G. 
 
6 Item 4. 
 
7 Items 4, 6, 7; Response to FORM, attachments H, I and J. 
 
8 Items 6, 7. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant provided character letters. He is described as loyal, respected, 
courageous, compassionate, fair, professional, talented, dedicated, and a person of 
great moral character who is a role model.9 Applicant provided a personal financial 
statement that reflects he and his wife have the financial resources to pay their bills. He 
provided certificates to show he has attended financial counseling.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
9 Response to FORM attachment C. 
 
10 Item 4. 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent mortgage debts and credit cards from about 
2007, which he was unable to resolve. I find the above disqualifying conditions have 
been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
 
6 
 
 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant experienced financial problems after his divorce and in 2007 when his 
business was affected by an economic downturn. He continues to make payments 
through a Chapter 11 bankruptcy and with monthly payments for delinquent credit 
cards. Applicant is financially stable and able to pay his current bills. He has not ignored 
his delinquent debts. Two of them are no longer enforceable. Given the economic and 
business circumstances which generated the debts, Applicant’s financial problems are 
unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies.  
 
Applicant’s divorce and economic downturn were conditions beyond his control. 
For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant is paying the largest debt through a Chapter 11 bankruptcy. 
He has been making consistent payments. He has been making consistent payments 
for almost four years on the two delinquent credit card debts. Two debts are no longer 
enforceable, but Applicant acted responsibly in addressing them. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
Applicant participated in financial counseling, is paying three of the debts alleged 
in the SOR. The remaining mortgage debt the lender chose not to pursue the deficiency 
balance and it is no longer enforceable. There are clear indications that his financial 
problems are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply. 
 
Applicant disputed the amount owed to the creditor for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.c. He provided a copy of the letter he sent to the creditor in 2012 that requested it 
investigate the debt, but received no response. I find Applicant had a legitimate dispute 
that he attempted to resolve with the creditor. AG ¶ 20(e) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He served honorably in the military and deployed to 
Iraq in 2003-2004. He experienced some financial difficulties after his divorce and as 
the result of a failed business venture. Applicant has addressed the largest debt for a 
mortgage loan through Chapter 11 bankruptcy and is making consistent monthly 
payments. He has been paying two delinquent credit cards since 2012 with monthly 
payments. The lender on a second mortgage did not participate in the foreclosure 
proceedings and failed to pursue a potential deficiency. Applicant disputed one debt and 
the creditor failed to respond. His personal financial statement shows he and his wife 
are solvent and can meet their financial obligations. Applicant has provided evidence 
that he did not ignore his debts, but attempted to pursue resolution through legal 
means. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
