 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06620 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen from the United Kingdom (U.K.). He has not engaged in any 
actions or made any statements to indicate a preference for the United Kingdom. 
Furthermore, Applicant’s few friendships with individuals who are citizens and residents 
of that country are too causal and infrequent to serve as source of vulnerability for him. 
Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 12, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the foreign influence and foreign preference 
guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On December 29, 
2015, I issued a pre-hearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and 
submission of discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses.2  
The parties complied with the terms of the order.3 At the hearing convened on January 
13, 2016, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 
A through E, without objection.  After the hearing, Applicant timely submitted AE F 
through H, which were also admitted without objection.4 I received the transcript (Tr.) on 
January 19, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 55, has worked for a federal contractor since May 2012.  At the time 
he competed his security clearance application in September 2012, he was a citizen of 
the United Kingdom and a permanent resident of the United States. Applicant disclosed 
the following details of his U.K. citizenship on his security clearance application: (1) that 
he held a U.K. passport that did not expire until June 2013; (2) that he voted in a U.K. 
election in 1979; 3) that he owned two homes in the United Kingdom, which he 
disposed of in 1996 and 2011, respectively; 4) that he worked for the United Kingdom 
Defense Ministry from 1979 to 2007; and, 5) that he held a security clearance issued by 
the U.K. government in 1979. Applicant also disclosed having a bank account in the 
United Kingdom with an estimated balance of $320,000, as well as several extended 
family members and friends who are citizens and residents of the United Kingdom.5  
  
Applicant is a native of the United Kingdom. He began his career as an employee 
of the U.K. Ministry of Defence (Ministry) when he was 18 years old. In 1997, the 
Ministry detailed Applicant to a multi-national defense program based in the United 
States. Applicant expected that his U.S. posting would last no more than three years, 
but his assignment was extended for an additional seven years. In 2006, the Defense 
Ministry offered Applicant the choice of being recalled to the United Kingdom for an 
office position or early retirement. Applicant accepted the latter. In 2007, he retired from 
the U.K. civil service and received severance pay, which he deposited into a U.S.-based 
investment fund. Because of his length of service to the Ministry, Applicant is entitled to 
a pension from the U.K. government, which is payable when he turns 60.6  
 
After accepting early retirement, Applicant decided to remain in the United States 
with his U.S.-citizen wife, whom he married in 2001. They decided to continue living 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
3 The discovery letter, dated June 30, 2015 is appended to the record as HE II. 
 
4 Correspondence regarding the parties’ post-hearing submissions is appended to the record as HE IV. 
 
5 GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. 20-23.  
 
3 
 
near her relatives. Shortly after retiring from U.K. civil service, Applicant applied for U.S. 
permanent resident status, which he received in 2008. Applicant continued working on 
multi-national defense projects as a contractor with a U.K-based government 
contracting firm. His employment required him to maintain his U.K.-issued security 
clearance. In 2010, Applicant returned to the U.K. to complete an in-person interview for 
his periodic reinvestigation. Applicant’s employment with the U.K. contracting firm 
ended in 2012 when the company lost its contract. After that employment terminated, 
Applicant no longer had a need for a U.K. security clearance and he was read out of 
access. Applicant provided a letter from the Defence Ministry confirming that he no 
longer holds any U.K. security clearances and that Applicant had renounced his U.K. 
nationality.7  
 
Both Applicant’s wife and his father died in 2011 after suffering lengthy illnesses. 
After his wife’s death, Applicant decided to remain in the United States to remain close 
to his wife’s family. Applicant did not return to the United Kingdom to bury his father. He 
inherited cash and his father’s home. Applicant sold the home in August 2011. 
Currently, Applicant has approximately $584,000 in U.S.-based assets and 
approximately $150,000 (USD) in his U.K. bank account.8 
 
Applicant listed three friends on his security clearance application who are 
citizens and residents of the United Kingdom. He also discussed the relationships 
during his October 2012 background interview. Applicant last saw two of the three 
friends at his wedding in 2001. He last had telephonic contact with them in 2011. 
Applicant has not seen the third friend, a former Ministry of Defence co-worker, in 
person since at least 1992, and last had telephonic contact with her in 2015 to 
exchange Easter greetings. Also, because of the nature of his work on multi-national 
defense projects, Applicant has contact with employees of the Ministry of Defence. 
Since moving to the United States in 1997, Applicant has traveled to the United 
Kingdom on three occasions in 2001, 2003, and 2010. Each trip was alone and for 
professional reasons.9  
 
Applicant has no plans to return to the United Kingdom. He became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in 2014 and obtained a U.S. passport in 2015. Applicant considers himself 
fully integrated into American society. Applicant testified that even at work, whenever he 
enters a U.K.-controlled facility he is treated as a U.S. citizen and requires an escort.10 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
7 Tr. 20-22, 30-31, 36; GE 1; AE B. 
 
8 Tr. 18, 25-27, 36; GE 1; AE A, D. 
 
9 Tr. 29-31, 33-34; GE 1-2. 
 
10 Tr. 34-36. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
 A foreign preference exists when an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a 
preference for a foreign country or government over the United States. The concern is 
that the individual may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are 
harmful to the United States. The SOR alleges that Applicant has an allegiance and 
preference to the United Kingdom because he held a security clearance issued by the 
country from 1979 to 2012 and because he is entitled to a pension from that country 
based on his years of civil service. However, neither of these facts represents a current 
connection to a foreign government or a current exercise of foreign citizenship. 
 
 The record shows that Applicant has all but severed his connections with the 
United Kingdom. He renounced his U.K. nationality and became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. The overwhelming majority of his assets are held in U.S.-based financial 
institutions. In the 20 years he has lived in the United States, he has only returned to the 
United Kingdom on three occasions as required by his employment - not to visit his 
family or friends. He did not even return to the United Kingdom to bury his father and 
dispose of his assets. Instead, he elected to have a representative act on his behalf.  
 
 While Applicant is entitled to receive a pension from the U.K. government, it is a 
future interest not payable for at least five years. The Directive does not distinguish 
between present and future interests; however, it seems contrary to common sense to 
assess an applicant’s security worthiness based on the possible occurrence of a future 
event. Currently, Applicant is not exercising any right or privilege of foreign citizenship. 
He is not required to maintain any ongoing contact with the U.K. government to secure 
his pension. There is no current conflict of interest because of this future interest.  
 
  Ultimately, the record does not establish that Applicant has made any statements 
or engaged in conduct that shows allegiance to any country other than the United 
States. Applicant is a U.S. citizen. He does not have dual citizenship. He does not have 
a foreign passport. He last voted in a foreign election almost 37 years ago. He has not 
taken any action to maintain residency requirements in the United Kingdom. Given 
Applicant’s long history of civil service to the U.K government, the Government made a 
reasonable presumption about his allegiance to the United Kingdom. However, that 
presumption is not supported by the record.  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
“[F]oreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”11 The SOR alleges that 
Applicant’s real estate and other financial interests are potential sources of foreign 
                                                          
11 AG ¶ 6.  
 
 
6 
 
influence. However, Applicant has not owned real estate in the United Kingdom since 
2011. Applicant does maintain an account in a U.K.-based bank. This financial interest 
could subject the Applicant to a heightened risk of foreign influence.12 While the money 
in Applicant’s foreign bank account is not insignificant, it represents a fraction of 
Applicant’s overall net worth. The majority of his assets are held in U.S.-based financial 
institutions. Accordingly, the U.K. bank account is unlikely to result in a conflict of 
interest for Applicant or be used to influence, manipulate, or pressure him.13  
 
The SOR also alleges that Applicant maintains contact with a “host of friends 
who reside in and are employees of the U.K. Ministry of Defence.”  Applicant disclosed 
three friends who are citizens and residents of the United Kingdom on his September 
2014 security clearance application. Only one is an employee of the Defence Ministry. 
These connections create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s desire 
to protect sensitive information and technology and the desire to help foreign contacts 
by providing that information.14 However, these contacts are casual and infrequent. 
Applicant has not seen his former co-worker in the Defence Ministry in over 20 years 
and his only telephonic communication has been limited to exchanging holiday 
greetings. He has not seen his other two friends since his wedding in 2001. Given the 
minimal contact he has had with these friends over the years, it is unlikely that these 
relationships create a risk of foreign influence or exploitation. Applicant also admits to 
ongoing contact with various employees of the Defence Ministry through his 
employment on multi-national defense projects, however, the record does not support a 
finding that any of these relationships are so significant as to create a security 
concern.15  
 
Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s ability to protect and 
handle classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have considered the whole-
person factors in AG ¶ 2. Applicant’s case presents a unique situation – a long time 
clearance holder for a foreign country seeking to become a U.S. clearance holder. 
While this scenario certainly merits additional scrutiny, Applicant has sufficiently 
established that he has severed his ties with the United Kingdom and that his former 
connections with that country do not create a conflict of interest that would prevent him 
from performing his obligations as a U.S. clearance holder.  
                                                          
12 AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
13 AG ¶ 8(f). 
 
14 AG ¶ 7(b).  
 
15 AG ¶ 8(c).  
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Preference:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Foreign Influence:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
