 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03753 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 13, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F and E.1 DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
                                                          
1 The SOR initially contained Guideline J (criminal conduct) allegations. On January 8, 2015, 
Department Counsel amended the SOR. In that amendment, the Guideline J allegations were deleted 
and more Guideline E allegations were added.  
 
2 
 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. On November 24, 2014, Applicant 
answered the SOR and requested a hearing. He answered the amendment to the SOR 
on January 22, 2015. This case was assigned to three other administrative judges. 
Between February and September 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued four Notices of Hearing for the other administrative judges to hold a 
hearing in this case, but those hearings were not conducted. Two transcripts of earlier 
proceedings and Hearing Exhibits I through VIII are included in the record. On 
November 4, 2015, the case was assigned to me. On November 19, 2015, DOHA 
issued another Notice of Hearing and the hearing was held as scheduled on December 
9, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (Gx) 1 
through 21. Applicant’s objection to an unauthenticated personal subject interview (Gx 
2) was sustained, and it was not admitted into evidence. His objections to other Gxs 
were overruled. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax) A through S, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record of the proceeding was 
left open until January 6, 2016, to provide Applicant an opportunity to present additional 
matters. Applicant timely submitted documents that were marked as Ax T through BC 
and admitted into evidence without objection. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was 
received on December 18, 2015. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c. Applicant had no 
objection to that motion. The motion was granted. SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.c were also amended 
to change Section “26” to Section “22” to correct a typographical error.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old supply technician who works for a defense contractor. 
He graduated from high school in 1981 and earned an associate’s degree in 1982 and 
bachelor’s degrees in 1985 and 1992. He served in the U.S. Army from February to July 
1983 and in the National Guard from March 1989 to July 1992. He received honorable 
discharges. He has been married twice and has four children, ages 17, 24, 28, and 31. 
He married his current wife in 1998. He was granted a security clearance in 2003.3 
                                                          
2 Tr. 12-14, 39, 66, 84-85, 116-117. At the hearing, Applicant indicated that he believed a prior 
Department Counsel may have withdrawn other SOR allegations at an earlier hearing session that 
addressed his request to be represented by counsel. Review of the transcript of that session revealed 
that the Department Counsel indicated he was planning to withdraw SOR allegations, but those 
allegations were neither identified nor withdrawn at that session. See Tr. 33-34 of session held on March 
12, 2015.  
3 Tr. 5-7, 94; Gx 1; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (section on whole person). 
 
3 
 
 
As amended, the SOR alleged under Guideline F that Applicant had eight 
delinquent debts totaling $4,649 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.k). Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged 
that he falsified three responses on an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) (SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.c); that he was either apprehended, charged, or 
convicted of traffic infractions or other offenses on 19 occasions between 1991 and 
2011 (SOR ¶ 2.d-2.k and 2.n-2.x); that he misused a Government credit card in 2003 
(SOR ¶ 2.l); and that he uttered six worthless check in 1993 (SOR ¶ 2.m). In his Answer 
to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the allegations. He testified at the hearing. I did not 
find him to be a credible witness.4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – judgment for $684. This judgment was obtained by a credit union 
and entered against Applicant in August 2007. At the hearing, Applicant presented a 
letter from the credit union indicating the three credit reporting agencies confirmed the 
judgment no longer is reflected on his credit report. The letter does not reflect how the 
judgment was resolved. He testified it was resolved through arbitration.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – collection account for $702. This is a cell phone account that has a 
date of last activity of April 2012. Applicant claimed his contract had a “military clause” 
that allowed him to break the contract when he was assigned to a different location. He 
testified that it no longer is reflected on his credit report; however, it was still being 
reported by two credit reporting agencies. In his post-hearing submission, he provided a 
letter from a collection agency indicating the debt will be deleted from his credit report 
by all three credit reporting agencies. This debt is resolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – collection account for $448. This is a credit card account that has a 
date of last activity of June 2010. Applicant provided a letter from the creditor indicating 
that they were removing his telephone number from their file, but he would continue to 
receive correspondence and notices from them. There is no indication in the letter that 
this debt was resolved. Applicant claimed he paid this debt, but provided no proof of that 
payment. Insufficient evidence was presented to show this debt has been resolved.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g – collection account for $275. This is a cash advance account that 
has a date of last activity of April 2010. Applicant testified that this debt was removed 
from this credit report. In his post-hearing submission, he provided a copy of a money 
order dated December 29, 2015, showing this debt was paid.8 
                                                          
4 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. An attorney assisted Applicant in preparing his Answer to the 
SOR. Applicant was not represented by counsel at the hearing.  
5 Tr. 67-70; Gx 3; Ax N, U; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (Exhibit B).  
6 Tr. 70-80; Gx 3, 4; Ax B, M, Q, V; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (Exhibit C).  
7 Tr. 80-83; Gx 3, 4; Ax P. Q, W; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (Exhibit D). 
8 Tr. 83-84; Gx 3; Ax Q, X; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (Exhibit E). 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – collection account for $77. This is an insurance account that has a 
date of last activity of May 2013. Applicant provided a letter from a collection company 
indicating this debt was closed in their office and further inquiry about it should be 
directed to the original creditor. The collection company also advised the credit reporting 
agencies to delete its listing of this debt. Applicant claimed he contacted that original 
creditor and they indicated that they no longer had this debt. He also stated he provided 
the creditor proof that he had insurance with another company for the month in 
question. Insufficient evidence was presented to show this debt has been resolved.9 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i – past-due account for $863. This is a rental agreement account that 
has a date of last activity of August 2011. Applicant testified that the prior Department 
Counsel requested that this debt be deleted from the SOR. However, the transcripts of 
the previous proceedings do not support that claim. Insufficient evidence was presented 
to show this debt has been resolved.10 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j – collection account for $594. This is a utility account that has a date of 
last activity of August 2012. Applicant testified that he disputed this debt online. He 
provided a credit report that reflected it was deleted from the report. This debt is 
resolved.11 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k – repossession account with balance of $1,006. This is a vehicle loan 
that has a date of last activity of June 2011. A credit report dated December 2014 
reflected “redeemed or reinstated repossession note loan,” but a later credit report from 
the same credit reporting agency reflected the vehicle was repossessed. Applicant had 
at least two loans from this creditor. He pointed to credit report entries for the other debt 
claiming it showed the alleged debt was resolved. He also provided a copy of a vehicle 
title showing the lien was released, but the release was for the other debt. Insufficient 
evidence was presented to show this debt has been resolved.12 
 
Other financial matters.  Applicant’s e-QIP reflects that he has had continuous 
full-time employment in three different jobs since at least August 2003. He has received 
financial counseling. In his Answer to the SOR, he submitted a debt management 
membership agreement dated November 17, 2014. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.i 
were listed in the debt management plan. He provided no proof of payments under that 
plan. Attached to the plan was a budget that reflected his net monthly income was 
$2,600, his monthly household expenses were $1,879, his monthly secured debt 
                                                          
9 Tr. 85-87; Gx 3; Ax O, Q, Y; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (Exhibit F). 
10 Tr. 84-85, 87; Gx 3, 4; Ax M, Q, Z; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (Exhibit G).  
11 Tr. 87; Gx 3; Ax M, Q, AA; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (Exhibit H). 
12 Tr. 87-88; Gx 3, 4; Ax A, B, Q, AB; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (Exhibit I). The account 
number for the alleged debt ends in “2.” The account number for the other debt from this creditor that is 
resolved ends in “1.” The vehicle title contains the account number, which ends in “1.” 
 
5 
 
 
payments were $1,282, his monthly unsecured debt payments were $134, and his 
monthly debt management plan payment was $78, which left him a negative net 
monthly remainder of $773.13 
 
SOR ¶ 2.d – conviction for driving under the influence (DUI) in April 1991. A 
commander’s report of disciplinary or administrative action reflected that Applicant 
operated a vehicle in an erratic manner on a military base on April 2, 1991. The vehicle 
had an alarm that sounded like a police siren. A moderate odor of alcohol was 
emanating from him. He failed a field sobriety test and a breathalyzer test reflected his 
blood alcohol level was .176%. He was charged with horn and warning devices, 
reckless driving, and DUI. In September 1991, he was convicted in U.S. Magistrate’s 
court of DUI and sentenced to a fine and attendance at a DUI school. His driving 
privileges were also suspended for one year. The other charges were dismissed. 
Applicant denied this allegation. He initially testified that the DUI charge was reduced to 
a lesser offense, which he believed was reckless driving. However, he admitted the 
allegation when questioned about the commander’s report.14 
 
SOR ¶¶ 2.e-2.f – driving on a military base on September 10 and 14, 1991, while 
driving privileges were suspended. A military police report reflected that Applicant was 
apprehended for both driving offenses. Applicant testified that he was executing 
permanent change orders and notified a senior military police officer of his need to drive 
his vehicle off base. He claimed the supervisor did not notify the other patrolmen. He 
stated that, when he was taken to the police station, the matter was resolved, and he 
was released. The report of the first incident indicated that Applicant was processed and 
released on his own recognizance.15 
 
SOR ¶¶ 2.g-2.k, 2.m, 2.q, 2.s, and 2.u – bad check allegations. Applicant was 
charged with issuing seven bad checks totaling about $366 in 1992 and 1993 (SOR ¶¶ 
2.g-2.k), issuing five bad checks totaling about $386 to a grocery store in February 2005 
(SOR ¶ 2.q), issuing one bad check for about $51 to a grocery store in January 2007 
(SOR ¶ 2.s), and issuing eight bad checks totaling about $975 in November 2009 (SOR 
¶ 2.u). He was also charged with failure to return rental property in November 2009.  He 
was investigated for, but not charged with, issuing six bad checks totaling about $230 to 
a military billeting office in October 1993 (SOR ¶ 2.m). Applicant testified that the 
charges were dismissed after he made restitution. A bad check charge and the failure to 
return rental equipment charge were dropped when the company went out of business. 
Court records reflect that he was convicted of six bad check offenses in 1993. The 
remaining charges were dismissed.16 
                                                          
13 Tr. 128-130; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (Exhibit J). 
14 Tr. 88-93; Gx 5; Ax AO.  
15 Tr. 93-94; Gx 6; Ax AR. 
16 Tr. 50-52, 94-96, 99-101, 110-111, 113; Gx 8, 10, 14, 16, 18; Ax AD, AN, AQ, AW, AX, AY. The 
military police investigation dated February 18, 1994, also reflected that Applicant was suspected of 
 
6 
 
 
SOR ¶ 2.l – misuse of a government credit card in May 2003. A military police 
investigation reflected that there was probable cause to establish that Applicant 
committed the offenses of theft of government property, wire fraud, and forgery. It 
indicated that he used a government credit card to purchase gas for his personally 
owed vehicle and forged another person’s signature on the credit card receipt. The U.S. 
Attorney’s Office declined to prosecute and the command took no administrative action. 
Applicant testified that, while he was working in a temporary position at a military 
command, an employee asked him to fill the employee’s truck with gas using a credit 
card. He agreed to do it, but told the employee that he was going to sign the employee’s 
name to the bill. He stated the employee later asked him for the receipt for a log, but 
Applicant had not retained the receipt. Applicant claimed the amount of gas purchased 
was more than the amount that could be put in the gas tank of his car. He stated that 
everything was dropped, and he left that position for another job.17 
 
SOR ¶ 2.o – driving while impaired (DWI) and other offenses in December 1993. 
Applicant failed to appear in court for these charges in November 1994. In August 2011, 
the DWI charge was dismissed without adjudication because the state was unable to 
locate the original documents or they were destroyed. In September 2011, Applicant 
paid a fine for the civil revocation of his driver’s license charge.18 
 
SOR ¶ 2.p – misrepresentation to obtain unemployment benefits in 2002 and 
2003. Applicant was released from a job and collected unemployment benefits. He 
stated that he was going back-and-forth from an employed to an unemployed status, 
and this looked suspicious to state authorities. He claimed he did not receive 
unemployment benefits while he was working, but acknowledged that he was overpaid 
$7,000 in unemployment benefits. He was charged with multiple counts of 
misrepresentation to obtain unemployment benefits. He testified that those charges 
were dismissed and he never was arrested or went to jail for those charges. He also 
claimed that he was on probation for two years to pay restitution and, when the money 
was paid, the charges were dismissed. Court records reflect that he was convicted of 
two counts of misrepresentation to obtain unemployment benefits in December 2004 
and was sentenced to pay restitution of $7,661 and serve 75 days of community 
service. In his Answer to the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant provided a copy of his 
state rap sheet that reflected two charges of this nature that were dismissed. His rap 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
submitting a fraudulent travel voucher for the period of August 27, 1993, to September 10, 1993, after he 
was sent home for misconduct on August 27, 1993, and was suspected of issuing 35 bad checks to the 
military exchange system between July 1985 and September 1993. The suspected fraudulent travel 
voucher and 35 bad check offenses were not alleged in the SOR. Unalleged conduct will not be 
considered in applying the disqualifying conditions, but may be considered in assessing credibility and the 
whole person. See Gx 10.  
17 Tr. 96-99; Gx 9; Ax R, AC.  
18 Tr. 102-105, 131-134; Gx 12; Ax AV. In the criminal record, “FTA” means failure to appear. 
See: http://www.nccourts.org/Training/Documents/ACIS Inquiry RG.pdf. 
 
7 
 
 
sheet contained no entries showing the convictions, but it also did not contain entries 
reflecting the file numbers for the offenses for which he was convicted.19 
 
SOR ¶¶ 2.n, 2.r, 2.t, 2.v, 2.w, 2.x – driving-related offenses.  Applicant was 
charged with unauthorized use of a vehicle in August 1993 (SOR ¶ 2.n), speeding and 
driving while license revoked in August 2006 (SOR ¶ 2.r), use of foreign license when 
driving while license was revoked in May 2009 (SOR ¶ 2.t), driving while license 
revoked in November 2009 (SOR ¶ 2.v), use of foreign license when driving while 
licensed revoked in June 2010 (SOR 2.w), and driving while license revoked in 
November 2010 (SOR ¶ 2.x). The unauthorized use of a vehicle involved keeping a 
rental car a couple of days longer than the rental contract provided, which was 
dismissed after he paid restitution. He traveled frequently for work and obtained driver’s 
licenses in other states, which was the basis of the foreign license charges. He initially 
testified the traffic-related offenses were dismissed until confronted with evidence to the 
contrary. Court records reflect he was convicted of a no operator’s license charge 
(February 2008) and three charges of failure to notify the DMV of an address change 
(April 2011, June 2011, and July 2011). None of the fines awarded were greater than 
$300. He provided proof that his state driver’s license was restored in 2011. He also 
maintains driver’s licenses from other states. The latest criminal records check involving 
Applicant is dated October 2014 20 
 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2c – three falsification allegations           
 
In his e-QIP dated August 16, 2013, Applicant responded “No” to questions that 
asked (1) whether he had been issued a summons, citation, or ticket to appear in court 
in a criminal proceeding against him in the last seven years; (2) whether he had been 
arrested by any police officer, sheriff, marshal or any other type of law enforcement 
official in the last seven years; and (3) whether he had ever been charged with an 
offense involving alcohol or drugs. The question involving the issuance of citations also 
contained the following qualification, “(Do not check if all the citations involved traffic 
infractions where the fine was less than $300 and did not involve alcohol or drugs).”21 
 
                                                          
19 Tr. 105-110, 134-136; Gx 13; Ax C, S, AS, AU. In the criminal record, “SENT LEN: 030 D – 
SENT TYPE:  C” means 30 days of community punishment. In the state court records, a file number (e.g., 
XXCR XXX767 – numerals have been replaced by Xs for Privacy Act purposes) represents a separate 
charge. Applicant was convicted of offenses with file numbers ending in 767 and 768. Those file numbers 
do not appear on the rap sheet he presented. Only the file numbers ending in 764 and 765 appear on the 
rap sheet he presented and those charges were dismissed. File numbers ending in 766 and 769 were 
also missing from his rap sheet and those charges were also dismissed. Of note, his rap sheet had three 
or four charges listed per page and four known charges are not listed on his rap sheet. Consequently, it 
appears the rap sheet is missing a page. See: website in note 18, supra, for definition of “file number.”  
20 Tr. 101-102, 111-115; Gx 11, 15, 17, 19, 20, 21; Ax R, AE, AH, AI, AJ, AT, AZ. 
21 Gx 1; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
8 
 
 
Besides his DUI conviction in 1991 (discussed above), Applicant was also 
charged with DWI in March 1993. Court records reflect the March 1993 DWI charge was 
dismissed in September 1994.22  
 
Applicant testified that he did not list the summons and citations that he received 
in the seven-year period prior to submission of the e-QIP because each was less than 
$300 or was dismissed. Upon being informed his $300 qualification only applied to 
traffic infractions, he stated that he misinterpreted the question. He also testified that he 
was not arrested for any offense in the seven-year period prior to submitting the e-QIP 
and each of the listed offenses or infractions during that period only resulted in the 
issuance of a citation. Furthermore, he stated that he believed alcohol-related charges 
needed to be reported only if they had occurred within the past seven or ten years. He 
also claimed people informed him that he had to go back only ten years in reporting the 
alcohol-related charges. He admitted he made mistakes in interpreting the questions 
and in paying attention to what he was reading. He also stated that the questions on the 
e-QIP and procedures for completing it were different than those for his previous 
security clearance applications.23 
 
In his post-hearing submission, Applicant provided documentation showing a 
national agency check in 1982 reflected he received a favorable FBI result. He also 
provided a correction form for his August 2013 e-QIP in which he stated “[a]ll checks 
and traffic tickets [were] taken care of and [paid]” in discussing Section 26 – Financial 
Record. The correction form did not address any information in Section 22 – Police 
Record. Additionally, he provided an e-QIP certified on August 9, 2013, in which he also 
answered “No” to all of the Section 22, Police Record questions.24  
 
Character Evidence. Applicant’s sister testified that she is a pastor, and Applicant 
is a member of her congregation. She said that he had a good reputation for being 
truthful and honest and described him as a good-hearted person. She believed that his 
financial problems arose because he was trying to help others. Applicant also provided 
character reference letters and performance appraisals indicating that his performance 
met or exceeded expectations. In 2009, a commanding officer strongly recommended 
that he remain in the unit. 25 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
22 Gx 7; Ax AP, AV.  Applicant’s DWI arrest in December 1993 (SOR ¶ 2.o) was not alleged in 
SOR ¶ 2.b.  
23 Tr. 20-25, 50-52, 88, 115-128, 131; Ax AK.  
24 Ax AH, AI, AJ, AK. 
25 Tr. 61-64; Ax E-K, BA. 
 
9 
 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavourable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
 
10 
 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 sets forth the security concern for financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 sets forth several conditions that raise potential security concerns. The 
evidence presented at the hearing established two of those disqualifying conditions:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts that he was either unable or 
unwilling to resolve for an extended period. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
11 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of action to resolve the issue.   
 
 Applicant has a few delinquent debts that remain unresolved. He did not 
establish that his delinquent debts were the result of conditions beyond his control or 
that he has acted responsibly under the circumstances in attempting to resolve them. 
Nevertheless, he receives credit under AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) for the debts that 
he has resolved. 
 
 Applicant’s unresolved debts total less than $2,500, which is a relatively small 
amount. Those debts do not establish financial instability. However, they do cast doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. From the evidence presented, I 
am unable to find that Applicant will resolve the remaining delinquent debts in a 
responsible manner and that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. None of the 
mitigating conditions apply to the unresolved debts.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to Personal Conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
 
12 
 
 
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available evidence 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior. . . ; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; (4) 
evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s time or 
resources. 
 
While I found that Applicant was not a credible witness, I did find convincing his 
testimony that he was not arrested for any offenses within the seven-year period before 
he submitted his e-QIP in August 2013. None of the charges brought against him during 
that period were of the nature to have likely resulted in his arrest. Instead, they most 
likely would have only resulted in summons or citations to appear in court. I find for 
Applicant on SOR ¶ 2.b. Furthermore, he testified that all of his traffic citations within 
that seven-year period were either dismissed or resulted in fines less than $300. The 
evidence supports his testimony. Given that he was not required to disclose traffic 
citations that only resulted in fines of less than $300, his interpretation that he also was 
not required to disclose dismissed traffic citations is reasonable. He did not falsify his   
e-QIP by not disclosing that he received the traffic citations reflected in SOR ¶¶ 2.r, 2.t, 
2.v, 2.w, and 2.x. 
 
On the other hand, Applicant falsified his e-QIP by failing to disclose his 
summons and citations for the nine bad check charges reflected in SOR ¶¶ 2.s and 2.u 
and for failing to disclose his prior charges for alcohol-related offenses, i.e., his DUI 
conviction in 1991 and his DWI arrest in 1993. I did not find persuasive his claim that he 
misinterpreted the pertinent questions and received bad advice concerning those 
questions from others. He is well educated and has submitted security clearance 
applications in the past. I find that he knew that he should have disclosed those citations 
and charges and deliberately failed to do so. AG ¶ 16(a) applies to SOR ¶ 2.c and a 
portion of SOR ¶ 2.a.  
 
Applicant was convicted of DUI in 1991 and of two counts of misrepresentation to 
obtain unemployment benefits in 2004. Probable cause existed to suspect that he 
misused a government credit card and committed forgery in 2003; however, the U.S. 
Attorney’s Office declined to prosecute those offenses. He has a history of issuing bad 
checks and of receiving traffic citations. Viewed in its entirety, his conduct reflects a 
 
13 
 
 
long-term pattern of unreliability, untrustworthiness, and poor judgment. AG ¶¶ 16(c) 
and 16(d) applies.  
 
Five personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant’s latest traffic infraction/criminal conduct involved him being charged 
with driving while license revoked in November 2010 and being convicted of failure to 
notify DMV of address change in July 2011. His latest criminal records check in the 
record is dated October 2014. His e-QIP falsification occurred in August 2013. While 
much of his misconduct is dated, it should be viewed in its entirety and, when examined 
in that manner, establishes a pattern of questionable conduct. From the evidence 
presented, I am unable to find that his questionable conduct happened so long ago, was 
so infrequent, or occurred under unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.  None 
of the Guideline E mitigating conditions fully apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
14 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. After considering the whole-person evidence in the 
record, I continue to have questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For foregoing reasons, I conclude that Applicant 
failed to mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
    
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Withdrawn 
   Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.h-1.i:  Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
    
   Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 2.c-2.x:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
