KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s brief contains no assertion of error.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-06351.a1
DATE: 05/31/2016
DATE: May 31, 2016
In Re:
------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-06351
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 20, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On March 31, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Nichole L. Noel denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant requested that her case be decided on the written record and then did not respond
to the government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM).  Her appeal brief contains no assertion of
harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Rather, it contains a statement by the Applicant that her
financial situation has improved as evidenced by three attached credit reports which postdate the
decision in her case.
The Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Additionally,
the Board does not review a case de novo. The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case is limited
to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  Applicant has
not made an allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the decision of the
Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Catherine M. Engstrom        
Catherine M. Engstrom
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
