 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05870 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s failure to file his income tax returns from tax year 2000 to at least 
2013, demonstrates a lack of judgment and an unwillingness to abide by the law, rules, 
and regulations. He failed to mitigate the Guidelines F and E security concerns. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 30, 
2013. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. On June 20, 2015, the DOD Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline E 
(personal conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on September 4, 2015, and elected 
to have his case decided on the written record, in lieu of a hearing.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated November 9, 
2015, was provided to Applicant by transmittal letter dated November 10, 2015. 
Applicant received the FORM on December 7, 2015. He was allowed 30 days to submit 
any objections to the FORM and to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. 
Applicant submitted a two-page letter, dated December 9, 2015, as his response to the 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on April 29, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a, 2.a, and 2.b). 
His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a review of the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old machinist employed by a federal contractor. He 
graduated from high school in 1974, and shortly thereafter he enlisted in the U.S. Air 
Force. He honorably served in the Air Force from 1974 until January 2001, when he 
retired. Applicant met his wife in 1997, and they have been married since 1999. He has 
one adult stepdaughter.  
 
Applicant’s employment history shows that after his retirement in January 2001, 
he worked abroad for two federal contractors. He worked for the first federal contractor 
from January 2001 until June 2009. He has been working with his current employer, a 
federal contractor, since July 2009. Applicant believes that he has held a secret level 
security clearance since 1979 when he was in the service. Apparently, his clearance 
eligibility was continued to present. There is no evidence of any security violations or 
issues of security concern, except for those alleged in the SOR. 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in 2013. Section 26 (Financial Record) 
of the 2013 SCA asked Applicant to disclose whether in the last seven years he had 
failed to file or pay Federal, state, or other taxes when required by law. Applicant 
answered “yes,” and disclosed that he had failed to file his income tax returns for tax 
years 2000 through 2013.  
 
Applicant explained that although he has not filed his income tax returns, he was 
paying his taxes. He had money taken out of his paycheck on a monthly basis to pay his 
taxes. Applicant deliberately failed to file his income tax returns to protest several 
issues: the Government’s waste of tax dollars in spurious projects abroad and in the 
United States; the wrongful conviction and imprisonment of Leonard Peltier; the air and 
water pollution; and the U.S. economy. Applicant explained that he had written weekly 
letters (or emails) to President Obama, the IRS Director, and others to express his 
protests and concerns. Applicant decided that until the U.S. Government addresses his 
concerns, he will not file his income tax returns. He failed to present documentary 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
evidence to show that he filed any of his income tax returns for tax years 2000 to 
present. 
 
Applicant claimed on his 2013 SCA that he works abroad in a tax-exempt 
position. He presented no evidence to support this claim. I note that IRS publications 
state that a U.S. citizen’s income is generally subject to U.S. income tax, regardless of 
where the U.S. citizen is living (abroad or in the United States). And, that U.S. citizens 
living abroad are subject to the same income tax filing requirements that apply to U.S. 
citizens or resident aliens living in the United States. (See IRS Publication 54, Tax 
Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad, https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-
pdf/p54.pdf) 
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government background investigator in April 
2014. The investigator noted that Applicant’s income comes from his retired pay (which 
is taxed), and his salary as an employee of a federal contractor (tax free since he lives 
abroad). Applicant was paying taxes on both sources of income, and he was overpaying 
his taxes. Applicant told the investigator that he believes he owes no taxes because he 
has been overpaying his taxes. Applicant also believes that the U.S (IRS) owes him a 
refund for each year that he has not filed his taxes. During his interview, Applicant 
admitted that his failure to file his income tax returns showed bad judgment, and that a 
person that demonstrates bad judgment should not hold a security clearance. 
 
The IRS filed substitute income tax returns for Applicant for tax years 2000 and 
2001, and sent him tax refund checks for 2001 ($495) and 2002 ($2,048). Applicant told 
the investigator that he was not going to cash the checks and that he would return them 
to the IRS. Applicant submitted with his answer to the SOR copies of the two IRS 
checks, which he voided and did not cash.  
 
Applicant believes that he is not a security risk. He considers himself a loyal 
American and would never do anything to harm the United States. He noted that he has 
served his country for over 41 years (combined military service and working for federal 
contractors) without any security violations or issues of concern. Applicant stated that 
he enjoys working for the U.S. military and helping soldiers. He told the investigator that 
if he was required to file his back income tax returns as a means of receiving his 
security clearance, he would start working with the IRS on filing his delinquent income 
tax returns. 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant included two statements, the first dated July 
29, 2015. Applicant stated that he had been in contact with the IRS, and promised to 
resolve “this issue” at some point. In his September 2015 statement, Applicant noted 
that he had not filed his tax returns, but had been paying taxes on U.S. tax exempt 
wages. Applicant’s response to the FORM highlighted that he has been candid and 
forthcoming throughout the security clearance process, and that he disclosed his failure 
to file his income tax returns for tax years 2000 through 2013. He also noted that he has 
been voluntarily paying more in taxes than what he is required to do. Applicant stated 
that he intends to resolve his income tax filing problem over the next two years. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant presented no documentary evidence to show he has been in contact 
with the IRS or that he has filed any of his delinquent income tax returns. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant failed to file his income tax returns for tax years 2000 through 2013. 
Applicant’s actions raise the applicability of the following financial considerations 
disqualifying condition: AG ¶ 19(g) “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.” 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
6 
 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are raised by 
Applicant’s evidence. Applicant’s illegal behavior has been ongoing since 2000, and it is 
likely to continue. Applicant was made aware of the security concerns raised by his 
failure to file his income tax returns by a Government investigator in 2014. Applicant 
disregarded the security concerns and has chosen to continue his questionable 
behavior. Applicant’s failure to file his income tax returns demonstrates lack of judgment 
and an unwillingness to abide by the law, rules, and regulations.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  SOR ¶ 2 cross-alleged the same facts alleged under SOR ¶ 1 (Guideline F), 
which are incorporated herein by reference. Additionally, it alleged, and Applicant 
admitted, that he does not intend to file his past due or any future income tax returns 
until certain matters he is protesting are resolved by the U.S. Government. The security 
concerns raised by Applicant’s failure to file his income tax returns under Guideline E 
are similar to the concerns analyzed under Guideline F (questionable judgment and an 
unwillingness to abide by the rules and regulations).  
 
  Applicant’s failure to file his income tax returns triggers the applicability the 
following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
 
7 
 
 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 Considering the evidence as a whole, and for the reasons stated under the 
Guideline F analysis (supra), I find that Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to mitigate 
SOR ¶ 2. The above mitigating conditions are not raised by the facts and circumstances 
of this case. Personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my 
whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant receives credit for his years of military service and his years working for 
federal contractors. Applicant’s failure to file his income tax returns demonstrates lack of 
judgment, and an unwillingness to abide by the rules and regulations. He failed to 
mitigate the Guidelines F and E security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:      Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
