1
                                                                     
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-05481
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant underwent inpatient treatment in 2005 for alcohol dependence,
resumed drinking in 2008, then completed another course of treatment in 2011. He has
been abstinent since then, and did not falsify information about these events during the
clearance application process. Resulting security concerns were mitigated. Based upon
a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on May 1, 2014. On
May 29, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD
CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns
under Guideline G (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for
Access to Classified Information, effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant had no objection to these corrections. (Tr. 112-116.)1
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on June 16, 2015, and
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared
to proceed on October 7, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on October 15, 2015.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on
November 4, 2015, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 17, 2015.
Department Counsel participated by video teleconference. The Government offered
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered
Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted without objection, and testified on his
own behalf. Pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.17, I granted Department Counsel’s request to
modify SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 2.a, and 2.b, by correcting the words describing Applicant’s
alcohol-dependence diagnoses in May 2005 and February 2011.  I granted Applicant’s1
request to leave the record open until December 1, 2015, for submission of additional
evidence. On November 25, 2015, Applicant submitted AE H, which was admitted
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 3,
2015, and the record closed. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 60-year-old majority owner of a small software company, which he
founded in 1999. He earned a bachelor of science degree in 1977, and a master’s
degree in business administration in 1986. He has no military service. He has held a
security clearance since 2011, in connection with his company’s requirement for a
facility clearance to perform defense contracts. He is twice divorced, and has two
teenage children. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 5-7, 61-62.) 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b and denied the
remaining allegations, in whole or in part, with explanations. Applicant’s admissions and
statements are incorporated into the following findings.
Applicant began drinking alcohol socially during the mid 1970s, while in college.
His second child was born in 2001 with severe heart problems that necessitated a
series of six major operations over the next six years. Applicant suffered from severe
back pain resulting from chronic spinal conditions that became almost unbearable in
about 2003. He declined to take prescription pain medications, but began self-
medicating with alcohol after work every evening. Applicant realized that his alcohol
consumption was a problem, and he voluntarily entered a ten-day inpatient aversion
therapy course of treatment in a local hospital on May 6, 2005. (Answer; GE 3; AE A;
AE E; Tr. 32-37, 66-73.)
During this treatment, Applicant was diagnosed by his doctor with alcohol
dependence, continuous. He successfully completed the treatment on May 16, 2005,
and was discharged. On June 21, 2005, he returned to the facility for a standard two-
day “reinforcement” treatment. During 2006, he underwent spinal surgery to relieve his
continuing back pain. In 2007, he learned that his wife was having an affair with his
The most recent testing also included negative results for amphetamines, cocaine, opiates, cannabinoids,2
and PCP.
3
good friend. She refused to participate in marriage counseling, and he moved out of
their home in September 2007. During 2008 Applicant began dating other women, but
found that his abstinence from alcohol was socially limiting. He began socially drinking
again that summer while on dates. (AR; GE 3; AE A; AE H; Tr. 37-40, 90-93.)
Applicant’s divorce from his wife was finalized in December 2010, and included a
parenting plan that required him to demonstrate abstinence from alcohol for a period of
six consecutive months through random testing twice per week, and to successfully
complete a minimum of six months of parenting therapy in order to be permitted the
prescribed visitation with his children during summer vacation and to take his younger
son out of state. The plan also required that he not use any alcohol for 24 hours prior to,
and during, any visitation with his children. (AE B.)
Applicant was not initially successful in meeting the biweekly random testing
requirement. He successfully completed another course of inpatient aversion therapy at
the same facility from February 17, 2011 to February 28, 2011, in order to help him
demonstrate compliance with these requirements. The facility’s records indicate that this
treatment started with a course of alcohol medical detoxification, which he completed
without incident or complication. His doctor diagnosed him with alcohol dependence,
continuous, relapse; and alcohol withdrawal syndrome. There is no evidence to support
the SOR ¶ 1.c allegations that the detoxification period lasted for 72 hours, or that he
admitted drinking wine two weeks prior to this admission. (AR; AE A; GE 3.) Applicant
also returned for a “reinforcement” treatment on April 17, 2011. Applicant subsequently
completed the parenting plan’s specified biweekly six-month random abstinence testing
program from September 28, 2011 to March 31, 2012. (AE D.) 
Applicant underwent subsequent testing in order to further demonstrate his
ongoing compliance with the 24-hour abstinence rule for visitations; and to meet his
parenting plan’s additional requirement that he undergo an ethyl glucuronide (ETG) hair
follicle test for alcohol use within 14 days of any out-of-state travel with his children.
These ETG tests, which detect any alcohol use during the preceding 90 days, were
performed on hair samples he submitted on August 29, 2013; November 11, 2013;
March 17, 2014; June 26, 2014; and November 2, 2015.  All results were negative for2
ETG, indicating abstinence from alcohol. Since completing his 2011 inpatient treatment,
Applicant has been totally abstinent and dating a woman who has also stopped drinking
alcohol. He has no interest in drinking again. (AE A; AE C; AE F; Tr. 47-51, 109.)
SOR ¶ 2.a alleged that Applicant misrepresented material facts on his May 2014
SF 86 concerning his alcohol treatment by deliberately failing to disclose that he had
consumed alcohol after his 2005 treatment, and that he had been “detoxed” from
alcohol upon entering treatment in 2011. However, that SF 86 question only asked if he
had ever voluntarily sought counseling or treatment as a result of his use of alcohol. He
accurately answered, “Yes,” and described both times he underwent treatment. While
4
his answer might be interpreted to imply that he had not consumed any alcohol between
treatments, he did not say that. Furthermore, that answer was substantially the same as
his answer to the alcohol treatment question on the SF 86 that he submitted in July
2011, which resulted in his being granted his first security clearance. Applicant
explained that he knew investigators would talk to his ex-wife, who knew about his
drinking between 2008 and 2011, and he had no reason to conceal what he considered
social drinking during that period. The evidence does not support a finding that
Applicant’s May 2014 response to the alcohol treatment question was a deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts. (AR; AE H; Tr. 59-61, 81-85.) 
SOR ¶ 2.b alleged that Applicant falsified material facts during his June 18, 2014
interview with a DoD-authorized investigator by stating that he had not consumed
alcohol since approximately 2005. GE 4 is an unsworn, non-authenticated, and
uncorroborated summary of the interview written by the investigator. It says, on page 6,
“He has not had any alcohol since 2005.” Applicant was offered the opportunity to object
to the admission of this evidence pursuant to Directive E3.1.20, but declined to do so.
He did, however, object to the accuracy of this statement and described at length how
he and the investigator discussed his social drinking between 2008 and 2011 while
trying to reenter the dating scene. The weight of Applicant’s testimony, subject to
potential criminal penalty under 18 U.S.C. 1001 for falsifications, substantially outweighs
the uncorroborated and non-authenticated hearsay assertion in GE 4 that Applicant told
the investigator he had not consumed alcohol since 2005. (GE 4; AR; AE H; Tr. 20-26,
51-53, 58-60, 83-92.)
 A business associate, who has known and worked closely with Applicant since
2005, wrote a letter describing Applicant as an honest and dedicated person, who is
committed to his business, to his sobriety, and to being a good father to his children. He
further described Applicant’s good character and resistance to social pressures to
consume alcohol in both social and business-related settings. (AE G.) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
5
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 Analysis
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The DCs raised by the allegations in the SOR and record evidence are:
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent;
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol
dependence; and
6
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
Applicant developed his physician-diagnosed alcohol dependence after several
years of habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment. He
voluntarily underwent, and successfully completed, inpatient aversion-based alcohol
treatment in May 2005. For about three years, from 2008 to 2011, Applicant relapsed
into alcohol consumption. He successfully participated in another course of inpatient
treatment in 2011.  These facts support security concerns under the foregoing DCs.
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security
concerns:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment;
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse,
and is making satisfactory progress; and
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
Applicant recognized and acknowledged that he had an alcohol problem in 2005.
He underwent inpatient treatment, but under social pressures associated with his
separation and divorce he resumed drinking about three years later. When confronted
with the choice to continue drinking and lose visitation privileges with his children, or to
demonstrate abstinence, he participated in another successful course of inpatient
treatment in February 2011. He has not consumed alcohol since then, and has no
intention to do so in the future. His significant other has also given up alcohol
consumption. Under these circumstances, his former addictive alcohol consumption is
unlikely to recur, and does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment. Applicant thus established substantial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). 
7
Applicant did not meet the full criteria to establish mitigation under the terms of
AG ¶¶ 23 (b), (c), or (d). During testimony, he did not acknowledge his ongoing
alcoholism. He is not currently participating in a counseling or treatment program, does
not participate in Alcoholics Anonymous, and did not present a favorable prognosis by a
duly qualified medical professional. However, he medically documented his established
pattern of abstinence for almost five years after his second course of inpatient
treatment, as called for under AG ¶¶ 23(b) and (d). This establishes some additional,
partial mitigation under those provisions.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The DCs alleged in the SOR, but not supported by the evidence in this
case, are:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and
(b) deliberately provided false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other government representative. 
Applicant did not deliberately falsify his 2014 SF 86. The information he provided
was accurate, albeit easily subject to misinterpretation. He had recently been granted a
security clearance based on a 2011 SF 86 with a similar response to the question about
his alcohol treatment history. The record evidence also establishes that Applicant did
not tell the DoD-authorized investigator that he had not consumed alcohol since 2005,
as alleged. Security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (b) were accordingly not raised by
sufficient evidence under these facts. No discussion of MCs is warranted.
8
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature
individual who is accountable for his choices and actions, and who took necessary steps
to overcome and control his alcohol dependence. He demonstrated rehabilitation and
permanent behavioral changes after successfully completing a second inpatient course
of aversion therapy more than five years ago. The potential for recurrence, pressure,
coercion, and duress is acceptably low. Overall, the evidence alleviates doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
