KEYWORD: Guideline C; Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant argues that the case should be remanded for the Judge to consider the
imminent arrival of his parents in the US.  Applicant has asked for a remedy not available to
him.  The Board is authorized to remand a case to correct identified error.   A request to consider
new evidence does not constitute the correction of an error.  Absent a showing that an applicant
was denied a reasonable opportunity to prepare for the hearing or was denied a reasonable
opportunity to present evidence on his or her behalf, an applicant is not entitled to receive a new
hearing just so the applicant can have another chance to present his or her case. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 14-03347.a1
DATE: 05/27/2016
DATE: May 27, 2016
In Re:
-------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-03347
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Thomas G. Coale, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 28, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign
Influence) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a hearing.  On February 29, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: (1) whether the Judge failed to appropriately
consider a mitigating factor and (2) whether the Judge’s decision was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant was born and raised in Egypt.  He received a bachelor’s degree from an Egyptian 
university.  He entered the United States in 2000 and because a U.S. citizen in 2013.  He has never
been married and has no children. He earned a doctorate degree from a U.S. university.  He was
hired by his current employer, a federal contractor, in 2013. 
Once Applicant became a U.S. citizen, he no longer used his Egyptian passport to travel. 
In 2014, he surrendered his Egyptian passport to his facility security officer with the understanding
that it would not be returned to him.  He also expressed a willingness to renounce his Egyptian
citizenship. 
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Egypt.  His parents are in their late 60s and
he maintains regular contact with them.  In 2015, Applicant submitted an application for his parents
to become permanent residents of the United States.  The application was accepted and was being
processed.  His sister is a student at a U.S. university and has applied to become a permanent
resident of the United States. 
Applicant claimed all of his financial interests are in the United States.  After becoming a
U.S. citizen, Applicant has had no contact with the Egyptian government.  He stated that his
allegiance is  to the United States and that he has no allegiance to Egypt or any other foreign
country.
Egypt is a key partner with the United States in ensuring regional stability in the Middle
East.  It has experienced political and social unrest. It is a potential operating environment for
criminal and terrorist groups.  Human rights abuses are rampant there.
2
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant mitigated the foreign preference concerns.  He noted
Applicant’s sister was a citizen of Egypt even though she currently resides in the United States.  The
Judge concluded that, because Applicant had frequent contact and a close relationship with his
parents, those contacts created a risk of foreign exploitation and a potential conflict of interest.  The
Judge remarked that Applicant presented little evidence about his parents’ prior employment, their 
possible connections to the Egyptian government, their ownership of property in Egypt, and whether
they were dependent on the Egyptian government for their support and medical care.  He concluded
that the record evidence failed to support a determination that Applicant’s ties and sense of
obligation to the United States are sufficiently strong that he could be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the United States.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge failed to consider properly Foreign Influence mitigating
condition 8(a)1 because his parents would be moving to the United States in the near future.  At the
time of the hearing, Applicant’s parents had applied to become permanent residents of the United
States.2  No evidence was presented at the hearing to show their applications were approved or that
they were moving to the United States.  Information about them moving to the United States
constitutes new evidence, which the Appeal Board cannot receive or consider.  See Directive ¶
E3.1.29.  Applicant also argues that the Judge had no basis to conclude that Applicant presents a
security risk due to having family in Egypt.  This argument essentially amounts to a disagreement
with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, which is not sufficient to show that the Judge weighed
the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-06634 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 28, 2016). 
Applicant further argues that the case should be remanded for the Judge to consider the
imminent arrival of his parents in the United States.  Applicant has asked for a remedy not available
to him.  The Appeal Board is authorized to remand a case to correct identified error.  Directive ¶
1 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(a) states, “the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group,
organization, or government and the interests of the United States.”
2 Applicant’s Exhibits C and D reflected that applications were submitted for Applicant’s parents to become
permanent residents of the United States, but the applications were not complete. Applicant’s parents were also pending
an interview at the U.S. Embassy in Cairo. See the transcript at 22-23. 
3
E3.1.33.2.  A request to consider new evidence does not constitute the correction of an identified
error.  “It is well settled that ‘absent a showing that an applicant was denied a reasonable opportunity
to prepare for the hearing or was denied a reasonable opportunity to present evidence on his or her
behalf, an applicant is not entitled to receive a new hearing just so the applicant can have another
chance to present his or her case.’” ADP Case No. 06-15508 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2007) (citing
ISCR Case No. 04-01047 (App. Bd. Oct. 20, 2005)).  Compare ISCR Case 00-0250 at 4 (App. Bd.
Feb. 13, 2001) (“If the Board were to grant Applicant’s request for a new hearing or allow her to
submit new evidence in this case, then the Board would be giving her special treatment and denying
other, similarly-situated applicants of their right to receive the fair, impartial, and even-handed
application of Executive Order 10865 and the Directive.”)  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan        
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody      
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy         
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
