 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05619 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct, financial considerations, and 
alcohol consumption security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 7, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct), F (financial considerations), and G (alcohol consumption). The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 2, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on October 1, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
 
2 
 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on October 8, 2015. As of November 12, 2015, he had not 
responded. The case was assigned to me on December 4, 2015. The Government 
exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2001. He is a high school graduate. He married in 1994 and 
divorced in 2001. He married his second wife in 2004. He has three children, ages 20, 
17, and 11.1   
 
Applicant performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) on his father before he 
passed away in 2007. The event was traumatic, and Applicant’s doctor prescribed an 
antidepressant.2 
 
Applicant was drinking in about June 2009 when he threatened to kill himself by 
firearm or by the police (“suicide by cop”). His friend called the police. The police took 
Applicant into custody and transported him to a mental health facility. He was placed on 
a 72-hour hold, but he was released the same day.3 
 
In about September 2009, Applicant cut himself with a knife and made suicidal 
threats. He had consumed alcohol before the incident. His friend called the police. The 
police took Applicant into custody and transported him to a mental health facility. He 
was placed on a 72-hour hold and released the next day.4 
 
In late 2011 or early 2012, Applicant placed a fraudulent registration sticker on 
his car because he did not want to pay for a legitimate registration sticker. In December 
2012, he drove with his family in the car after drinking. He was arrested and charged 
with driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol; driving with a blood alcohol content 
(BAC) greater than .08%; child cruelty causing injury or death; and unlawful display of 
evidence of registration. He pleaded guilty to unlawful display of evidence of registration 
and the lesser charge of reckless driving. The remaining charges were dismissed. He 
was sentenced to a $1,200 fine and probation for three years.5 
 
                                                          
1 Item 3.  
 
2 Item 4.  
 
3 Item 2.  
 
4 Items 2, 4. Applicant only described one suicidal incident during his background interviews. In his 
response to the SOR, he admitted both allegations of the incidents. I therefore accept that there were two 
incidents. 
 
5 Item 2-4, 8.  
 
3 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
March 2013. He reported his DUI arrest and pending charges. He also reported a 
$4,000 delinquent debt. Section 21 asked if Applicant had “consulted with a health care 
professional regarding an emotional or mental health condition” or if he had been 
“hospitalized for such a condition.” Applicant intentionally falsified the SF 86 by 
answering “no” and failing to divulge his hospitalization and treatment as discussed 
above.6 
 
Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in March 2013. He 
discussed his financial issues and his DUI. He did not correct the false information on 
his SF 86, and he stated that he had never had any problems related to alcohol other 
than the DUI. He was interviewed telephonically about his finances in April 2013. He did 
not correct his false SF 86.7 
 
Applicant was interviewed again in July 2013, at which time he was confronted 
with the September 2009 incident. Applicant discussed the incident. He stated the 
doctor evaluated and discharged him with no follow-up because the doctor did not 
believe that Applicant was a risk. Applicant stated that he had never wanted to commit 
suicide before the event, and he did not plan to do it again. He stated that he was not 
receiving counseling and he did not feel that he had a drinking problem. He stated that 
he did not disclose the information on the SF 86 because he was embarrassed and 
worried about losing his job.8 
 
Applicant was interviewed telephonically in August 2013. He stated that after the 
September 2009 incident, he was advised to follow-up with his doctor. His doctor 
prescribed Prozac, which Applicant was still taking as of the date of the interview. His 
doctor also requested that Applicant obtain alcohol counseling. Applicant attended 
alcohol counseling once a week for a month, at which time he stopped because he did 
not believe he had an alcohol problem.9 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems for a number of years. He filed a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy case in 1998, and his debts were discharged the same year. He had more 
recent financial difficulties, which he attributed to his wife losing her job. He stated that 
his wife handled the finances and he was unaware of the extent of his financial 
problems.10 
 
The SOR alleges the Chapter 7 bankruptcy, an unpaid $1,920 judgment, and 15 
delinquent debts totaling about $13,700. Applicant admitted all the financial allegations, 
except he stated that his wages were garnished to pay the judgment. The judgment and 
                                                          
6 Item 3.  
 
7 Item 4.  
 
8 Item 4.  
 
9 Item 3.  
 
10 Item 2-4.  
 
4 
 
debts are listed in one or more credit reports obtained in March 2013, May 2014, and 
March 2015.11 
 
The 2014 and 2015 credit reports list the judgment as filed in March 2014. They 
do not report the judgment as satisfied. Applicant did not submit any documentary 
evidence showing the judgment was satisfied or that any of the other debts have been 
paid.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
11 Items 2, 4-7.  
 
12 Items 2, 6, 7.  
 
 
5 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 Applicant has three alcohol-related incidents. AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) are 
applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s most recent alcohol-related incident was in December 2012. 
Applicant attended alcohol counseling at his doctor’s request, but he did not complete it 
because he did not believe he had an alcohol problem. It is Applicant’s burden to 
establish any mitigating conditions. He did not do so. There are no mitigating conditions 
sufficiently applicable to dispel security concerns about Applicant’s alcohol use.   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
7 
 
Applicant intentionally provided false information about his mental health 
treatment on his SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable.   
Applicant’s alcohol-related incidents and criminal conduct reflect questionable 
judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. They also created 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) are 
applicable. 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant did not correct the false SF 86 until he was confronted with the 
information during his third interview. His various statements are inconsistent and not 
worthy of belief. He is either still on probation or recently released from probation. He 
does not believe he has an alcohol problem despite the alcohol-related incidents. There 
are no applicable mitigating conditions. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
8 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable or unwilling to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to his wife losing her job, which is a 
circumstance that was beyond his control. He stated that his wages were garnished to 
pay the judgment, but he did not submit any documentary evidence showing the 
judgment was satisfied or that any of the other debts have been paid. The Appeal Board 
has held that “it is reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present 
documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts.” See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 
2006)). 
 
There is insufficient evidence in the written record for a determination that 
Applicant’s financial problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable 
to find that he acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith 
effort to pay his debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b) is 
partially applicable. None of the other mitigating conditions are applicable. I find that 
financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E, F, and G in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct, financial considerations, and alcohol consumption 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.q:   Against Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:   Against Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 3, Guideline G:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
   
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
