 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 1 )  ISCR Case No. 14-06788 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s foreign family contacts create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, coercion, and an unacceptable 
security risk. Applicant’s mitigating information is insufficient to fully overcome the 
foreign influence security concerns. She surrendered her Ukrainian passport and 
mitigated the foreign preference concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF), issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence) and Guideline C (foreign preference).2 
                                            
1 Applicant’s first name was spelled wrong in the SOR.  
 
2 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 11, 2015, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 2, 2015. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 15, 
2015, scheduling a hearing for January 15, 2016.  
 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. Applicant testified and offered seven 
exhibits (AE 1 through 7). The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. GE 1 and 
2 and AE 1 through 7 were admitted without objections. GE 3 is a request for me to take 
administrative notice of facts concerning the government of Ukraine. GE 3 was marked 
and attached to the record, but not admitted into evidence. Applicant did not object, and 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning the government of Ukraine as outlined in 
the administrative notice request. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 
28, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant did not admit or deny any of the SOR factual allegations. However, in 
her answer to the SOR she stated that she was willing to surrender her Ukrainian 
passport (valid until 2017) (SOR ¶ 1.a). She also indicated that her parents and one 
brother are citizens and residents of Ukraine (SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b and 2.c).  
 
Applicant also stated that her mother (64) was a U.S. permanent resident and 
divided her time living between Ukraine and the United States. Her younger brother is a 
resident of the Czech Republic, working for a U.S.-based corporation. (AE 6) The other 
brother is a citizen and resident of Ukraine. Applicant’s mother applied for U.S. 
permanent residency status for both her sons, which is pending. According to Applicant, 
her brothers plan to move to the United States as soon as they receive their green 
cards.  
 
Applicant’s SOR and hearing admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, and having 
observed Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional findings 
of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a large federal contractor. She was born, 
raised, and educated in Ukraine to Ukrainian parents. Applicant’s parents and one 
brother are citizens and residents of Ukraine. She received a bachelor’s degree from a 
Ukrainian university in 1999. Applicant stated her father paid for her education until she 
started working full time. She has contacts with her Ukrainian family and friends living in 
Ukraine through email and the Internet approximately twice a year. She visits with them 
when she travels to Ukraine.  
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in April 2001, and married a U.S. 
citizen that same month. Between 2005 and 2007, she attended post-graduate studies 
in a U.S. university and received a master’s degree in 2007. She became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in 2008, and was issued a U.S passport shortly thereafter. Applicant has 
been working for her current employer, a federal contractor, since 2008. She divorced 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
her husband in April 2009, and she has no children. She submitted her first security 
clearance application (SCA) in April 2010. 
 
Applicant disclosed in her 2010 SCA that she was in possession of a valid 
Ukrainian passport issued to her in 2007, with an expiration date of June 2017. She also 
disclosed the following trips to foreign countries: China - 15 days in 2010; United 
Kingdom – 10 days in 2011, 7 days in 2009; Kosovo - 15 days in 2009 and 21 days in 
2008; Spain - 8 days in 2009; France - 14 days in 2008-2009, 14 days in 2007, and 10 
days in 2002-2003; Macedonia – 1 day in 2009, and 2 days in 2008; Morocco - 15 days 
in 2008; Russia - 7 days in June 2007, 5 days in April 2007, and 2 days in 2003; 
Ukraine – over a week in January 2015; 8 days in 2012; 7 days in 2007, 15 days in 
August 2006, 14 days in August 2005, 21 days in August 2004, and 7 days in 2003; 
Egypt - 14 days in 2006-2007; Canada - 6 days in 2004; Netherlands - 7 days in 2003; 
and Belgium - 5 days in 2003.  
  
In February 2012, Applicant provided a sworn statement to a government 
background investigator. She stated that after receiving her U.S. passport in 2008, she 
used it to travel abroad and stopped using her Ukrainian passport. Applicant believes 
she was never a dual citizen of the United States and Ukraine. She believes she 
forfeited her Ukrainian citizenship when she became a U.S. citizen, but she is not sure. 
Applicant testified that she does not have any financial or property interests in Ukraine 
or any other foreign country. Applicant’s assets in the United States include her salary, 
a $200,000 401(k) retirement account, and a $300,000 IRA. (Tr. 46) 
 
Applicant stated in 2012 that she was not willing to renounce her Ukrainian 
citizenship or to surrender her Ukrainian passport. She was afraid that as a U.S. citizen 
she could be denied entrance to Ukraine and would not be able to visit her parents. She 
also believed that if she renounced her Ukrainian citizenship she would not be able to 
apply for Ukrainian citizenship again in the future. Applicant also did not want to pay for 
the Ukrainian visa required for a U.S. citizen to stay in the Ukraine. She wanted to keep 
her Ukrainian passport for her travel convenience.  
 
Applicant stated that if a conflict arose between the United States and Ukraine, 
she was not sure where her loyalty would lie as it would depend on the nature of the 
conflict. She could not say that she would be completely loyal to the United States. If 
her parents were threatened, Applicant would follow security protocol and find a legal 
way to assist them. When Applicant retires, she would probably move to Italy and not 
retire in the United States or move back to Ukraine. She would move to Italy for the 
weather and not because of any allegiance to Italy. (AE 2; Tr. 49) 
 
In her February 2012 statement, Applicant indicated that her father was 61 years 
old, and worked for a railway construction company. He does not want to come to the 
United States because he makes good money and does not want to move. Applicant’s 
mother is 64 years old, and she is a U.S. permanent resident alien. (AE 3) Applicant’s 
older brother is 35 years old. He was a social worker for the government and currently 
works as a nurse at a state-run clinic. Her younger brother is 25 years old and a 
student. Applicant’s mother submitted a U.S. immigrant petition for relatives for both 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
siblings in January 2011. Applicant’s mother and younger brother visited Applicant in 
the United States in 2007. Her mother also travelled to the United States in 2010. 
 
On August 11, 2015 (after receipt of the SOR), Applicant submitted a statement 
to the DOD CAF indicating that her situation had changed and that she was now willing 
to surrender her Ukrainian passport with the hope that it would alleviate the security 
concerns it raised. On January 8, 2016, she surrendered her Ukrainian passport to her 
facility security officer. (AE 1) When asked at her hearing why she kept her Ukrainian 
passport, Applicant indicated that she felt it was part of her identity. (Tr. 29) 
 
As part of her “changed situation,” Applicant stated that both her parents were 
now retired and in their 60s. Applicant’s mother was a chemical engineer and worked 
for a government railroad. Applicant claimed her mother retired in her late 40s and 
receives a small government pension. Applicant’s mother resides with Applicant three to 
six months out of the year. Her father does not travel to the United States for health 
reasons. He also retired as a railroad engineer, and receives a government pension. 
When he was young, Applicant’s father served in the then Soviet Union military forces. 
(Tr. 38) Applicant provides approximately $300 a month in financial support for her 
parents. (Tr. 39) Applicant has Internet or phone contact with her parents several times 
a week. (Tr. 35)  
 
Applicant’s younger brother is working for an American company in the Czech 
Republic. Her older brother works in the agriculture industry for a small farm in Ukraine. 
She claimed her family supports western values of democracy and liberty. Applicant 
believes that because her mother and siblings intend to reside in the United States 
sometime in the future that should mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts: Ukraine is a republic with a 
semi-presidential political system composed of three branches of government: a 
unicameral legislature, and executive, and judicial divisions. At the end of February 
2014, the Ukrainian parliament approved a new government which caused Russia to 
respond by seizing Ukraine's Crimean peninsula. Russian President Vladimir Putin 
signed a "treaty" with Crimean leaders formally incorporating Crimea into Russia. 
 
Unrests occurred during March 2014 involving eastern and southern Ukraine. 
Thousands of pro-Russian protestors demonstrated in the area. Some favor union with 
Russia and others seek more autonomy from the national government. Russia has been 
accused of orchestrating attacks by the separatists. On May 25, 2014, an election took 
place resulting in the election of Petro Poroshenko as President, signaling a strong 
democratic mandate for change in Ukraine.  
 
According to the U.S. Department of State, the most significant human rights 
developments in the Ukraine in 2014 were the more than 100 civilian deaths and 
numerous injuries resulting from the government's forced dispersion of protesters; the 
displacement of more than 18,000 Crimeans and numerous human rights abuses that 
resulted from the Russian occupation of Crimea; and the thousands of deaths and 
injuries that resulted from the Russian-backed separatists violent occupation of territory 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
in Eastern Ukraine. Other problems reported during 2014 included abuse of persons in 
custody; harsh conditions in prisons and detention facilities; a corrupt judicial system; 
societal violence against women and abuse of children; societal discrimination against 
and harassment of ethnic minorities; and trafficking in persons. The government 
generally failed to take adequate steps to prosecute or punish most officials who 
committed abuse, resulting in a climate of impunity.  
 
The new Ukrainian president attempted to establish a peace plan to restore order 
to the portions of Ukraine that have been seized by armed separatists. He offered 
amnesty to separatists who lay down their arms, political dialogue, broad 
decentralization of power to Ukraine's regions and localities, and he attempted to 
institute a unilateral cease fire, however, Russian-backed separatists did not respect the 
cease fire. There is no evidence that Russia's support for the separatists has ceased, 
but rather, it appears Russia has continued to supply heavy weapons, other military 
equipment and financing to separatists and has allowed militants to enter Ukraine.  
 
Ukraine's security remains under threat and fierce fighting continues to rage in 
parts of eastern Ukraine. Heavy weapons, material and support continue to flow across 
the Russian border, and thousands of Russian troops have been deployed on Ukraine's 
eastern border. Additionally, the Crimean peninsula remains under occupation. 
 
Due to ongoing clashes between separatists and Ukrainian forces, the 
Department of State has warned U.S. citizens to defer travel to eastern regions of 
Ukraine. The separatist groups have threatened, detained, or kidnapped persons, 
including U.S. citizens. The Department of State has also warned U.S. citizens to defer 
travel to the Crimean Peninsula, where Russian forces occupy the area in support of the 
attempted annexation. There are also reports of abuses against the local population by 
de facto authorities, particularly against those seen as challenging their authority on the 
peninsula.  
 
  Russia is one of the most aggressive countries conducting espionage against the 
United States, focusing on obtaining proprietary information and advance weapons 
technologies beneficial to Russia’s military modernization and economic development. 
Russia is one of the most capable and persistent intelligence threats and aggressive 
practitioner of economic espionage against the United States. Russia’s intelligence 
services as well as private companies and other entities frequently seek to exploit 
Russian citizens or persons with family ties to Russia who can use their insider access 
to corporate networks to steal secrets. They also have offered financial inducements to 
U.S. government officials and citizens to encourage them to compromise classified 
information. Russia’s attempts to collect U.S. technological and economic information 
represent a growing and persistent threat to U.S. security. 
 
Policies 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying AG ¶ 7 in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information 
 
  Applicant’s parents and siblings are citizens and residents of Ukraine. Her 
mother is a U.S. permanent resident and spends three to six months of the year in the 
United States and the remainder of the year in Ukraine. Both of her siblings are citizens 
of Ukraine, but her younger brother is currently living in another foreign country. Both of 
her siblings’ applications for U.S. permanent residency are pending. Her other brother is 
a resident of Ukraine. 
 
  The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone may 
be sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in 
the compromise of classified information.3  
 
Applicant has frequent contacts and a close relationship of affection and 
obligation with her parents, siblings, and friends in Ukraine. These contacts create a risk 
of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because there is always the possibility that 
Ukrainian agents or individuals operating in Ukraine may exploit the opportunity to 
obtain sensitive or classified information about the United States. Applicant’s relatives in 
Ukraine create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both directly or through 
her family members in Ukraine. 
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising potentially disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential 
application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in Ukraine. She left Ukraine in 2001 to 
marry in the United States. She has lived in the United States for close to 15 years, and 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008. She has been working for a government 
contractor since 2008. Applicant divorced her U.S. spouse in 2009, and she has no 
children. She has a substantial financial interest in a 401(k) retirement plan, and on her 
employment position. She owns no property and disclosed no other financial interests in 
the United States.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by her relationships with her family members living 
in Ukraine. Although there is no evidence that Ukrainian government agents, or other 
entities, have approached or threatened Applicant or her family living in Ukraine, she is 
nevertheless potentially vulnerable to threats, coercion, inducement, and manipulation 
made against her or her family members living in Ukraine. As a good daughter and 
sibling, Applicant has a strong sense of obligation and loyalty to her parents and 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
siblings. She stated that she would do anything legal to assist them if they were 
threatened. 
 
Considering Ukraine’s government, its relationship and circumstances with 
Russia (and Russia’s ongoing pervasive espionage practices against the United 
States), and with the United States, Applicant is not able to fully meet her burden of 
showing there is “little likelihood that [her relationships with her relatives who are 
Ukrainian citizens and living in Ukraine] could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.” AG ¶¶ 8(d) through (f) have limited applicability and do not mitigate the 
foreign influence concerns. 
 
Applicant has lived 15 years in the United States; however, her evidence is 
insufficient to establish deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United 
States. Applicant intends to retire in Italy (not in the United States or Ukraine) because 
of weather concerns. Applicant stated she does not want to renounce her Ukrainian 
citizenship. In 2012, she refused to surrender her Ukrainian passport. In 2015, she 
averred that her situation had changed and surrendered her Ukrainian passport to her 
FSO. However, there is little evidence of changed circumstances other than her receipt 
of the SOR. 
 
The risks of coercion, persuasion, or duress are significant because of Ukraine’s 
unstable circumstances, political unrest, and Russia’s military and political support for 
Ukrainian separatists. Apparently, her father and one brother had jobs related to the 
government, and although her mother splits her time between Ukraine and the United 
States, she still spends significant periods in Ukraine and depends on Applicant’s father 
for support.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 AG ¶ 9 explains the concerns about foreign preference stating: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 AG ¶ 10 indicates four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
 (1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
 (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
 (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
 (4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
 (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
 (6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;  
 
 (7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
Applicant entered the United States in 2001 to get married, and has been living in 
the United States since then. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008. After 
becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant stopped using her Ukrainian passport and used her 
U.S. passport exclusively. In 2012, Applicant refused to surrender her Ukrainian 
passport for her travel convenience. There is no evidence that she used her Ukrainian 
passport, in preference of her U.S. passport, to travel abroad after she was issued the 
U.S. passport. Applicant does not intend to renounce her Ukrainian citizenship. She 
surrendered her Ukrainian passport to her FSO in January 2015.  
 
 Foreign preference disqualifying condition AG ¶ 10(a) is supported by the 
evidence. If this condition is not mitigated it would disqualify Applicant from eligibility to 
hold a security clearance. 
 
 AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns for foreign 
preference:  
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
 AG ¶ 11(e) is applicable. Applicant surrendered her Ukrainian passport in 2015. 
She mitigated the security concerns alleged under Guideline C. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person 
analysis. I considered that Applicant has lived in the United States 15 years. She has 
worked for a government contractor since 2008, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in 2008. Applicant has strong affection and a sense of obligation to her parents and 
siblings. Her father and one brother are residents and citizens of Ukraine. Her mother is 
a U.S. permanent resident that spends three to six months a year in the United States 
and the remainder of the year in Ukraine. Her younger brother is a Ukrainian citizen 
living in the Czech Republic. Both brothers are pending the approval of their U.S. 
permanent residency. Applicant has substantial 401(k) retirement accounts in the 
United States. She presented no other evidence of financial or property interests in the 
United States. 
 
Applicant’s foreign family contacts create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and an unacceptable 
security risk. Considering Ukraine’s government, its relationship and circumstances with 
Russia, and with the United States, Applicant’s mitigating information taken together is 
insufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B.  
 
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has not carried 
her burden of persuasion and the foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - c:      Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
