 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02318 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 15, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. DOD CAF acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 2, 2015, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on November 9, 2015. The evidence 
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-10 (Items 1 and 2 are pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant who received it on 
December 11, 2015. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She timely submitted Applicant exhibits 
(AE) A-I and she did not object to any Government exhibits. Items 3-10 and AE A-I are 
all admitted into the record. The case was assigned to me on March 22, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted ¶¶ 1.c-1.e, and 1.i. She denied 
¶¶ 1.a-1.b, 1.f-1.h. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful 
review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. She is divorced and has one child. She has worked for 
a federal contractor since July 2011. She was unemployed from February 2007 to 
February 2008 and from July 2004 to March 2005. She has high school diploma. She 
has never served in the military.1  
  
 The SOR lists seven delinquent debts totaling approximately $7,527, which 
includes a state tax lien in the amount of $1,910 and a state tax debt for tax year 2011 
in the amount of $1,793. The SOR also alleges Applicant failed to file her 2012 state 
and federal income tax returns. Applicant stated the reason for her financial difficulties 
was because she was hospitalized for a severe medical condition for two weeks in 
October 2012 and was home recuperating from her condition until March 2013. During 
her recovery period she used all of her accumulated sick leave, vacation leave, and 
short-term disability entitlements. After these benefits were exhausted her family was 
required to rely solely on her husband’s income, which was insufficient to pay their 
obligations.2  
 
 The debts are supported by credit reports from October 2015 and November 
2013, state judgment and lien filings, and by Applicant’s admissions. The status of the 
debts is as follows:3 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b (failure to file state and federal income tax returns for 2012): 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file her federal and state income tax returns for tax year 
2012. She told a defense investigator during her November 2013 interview that she 
would file both returns within the next month. She submitted documentary evidence 
showing that she filed both her federal and state 2012 tax return in April 2014. The 
same evidence indicates that she owed tax liability to both the state and the IRS for that 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 2, 6-7, 10-11. 
 
3 Items 2, 6-7, 10-11. 
 
 
3 
 
 
year. There is no evidence showing payment of either the federal or state tax liability for 
2012.4 She experienced her medical condition before her 2012 taxes returns were due 
in 2013. She did not offer an explanation for why she failed to file until April 2014.5 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.d (state tax lien and state tax debt for 2011: $1,910; $1,793): 
 
 Applicant admitted to both the state tax lien (filed in April 2013) and the state tax 
liability for tax year 2011. Additionally, documentary evidence showed another state tax 
lien was filed in January 2015.6 There is no documentary evidence of payment. She 
provided a statement from a collection company showing that on February 1, 2016, her 
balance for her 2013 state tax debt was $816. She did not show proof of payment of 
that amount. These debts are unresolved.7 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.f (medical collection account and consumer collection account 
$219; $304): 
 
 Applicant provided documentary evidence that both debts have been paid. SOR 
¶ 1.e is a medical debt that was paid in October 2015. SOR ¶ 1.f is a consumer debt 
that was paid in May 2015. Both debts are resolved.8 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g-1.h: 
 
 Applicant denied both of these debts, claiming they had been paid. She provided 
documentation showing the collection agency for SOR ¶ 1.h closed the account, but 
that correspondence also stated that the debt was returned to the original creditor. She 
failed to offer documentary evidence showing payment for either debt. These debts are 
unresolved.9 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
4 Since the nonpayment of taxes for 2012 was not specifically alleged in the SOR, I will not consider this 
evidence as disqualifying conduct. I will consider the evidence for determining the applicability of any 
mitigating circumstances and when I weigh the whole-person factors.  
 
5 Items 2, 11; AE A-B. 
 
6 Since this 2015 tax lien was not specifically alleged in the SOR, I will not consider this evidence as 
disqualifying conduct. I will consider the evidence for determining the applicability of any mitigating 
circumstances and when I weigh the whole-person factors.  
 
7 Items 2, 6, 7, 10-11; AE H. 
 
8 Items 6-7; AE E-F. 
 
9 Items 7; AE G. 
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i: 
 
 Applicant admitted this debt. She claimed that a payment plan would be made. 
She failed to produce evidence of any payment plan or proof of payment. This debt is 
unresolved.10 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about her current financial status or a 
budget. However, she provided proof that she timely filed her 2013 federal and state tax 
returns in April 2014. There is no evidence that she sought financial counseling.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
10 Items 2, 11. 
 
11 Items 2, 11; AE C-D. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file Federal, state . . . income tax returns as required . . . . 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. She also failed 
to file her federal and state income tax returns for 2012 until April 2014. I find all the 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debts which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved, except for SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.f, 
which were paid. She did not provide sufficient evidence to show that financial problems 
are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s medical condition, which 
caused her to use all her job benefits and ultimately lose her job, were circumstances 
beyond her control. She did not present sufficient evidence to show responsible action 
to address the debts. To date, only two debts have been paid and she filed her 2012 tax 
returns a year late. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant presented no evidence 
of financial counseling. She presented evidence that she filed her 2012 federal and 
state tax returns, but no evidence to show payment for her 2012 federal tax debt or 
2011 state tax debt or toward the 2013 state tax lien. These tax issues have not been 
resolved. Except for SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.f, the remaining debts are unresolved. I find AG ¶ 
20(d) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f, but not to the remaining allegations. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply. She also failed to document any dispute of the alleged debts. AG ¶ 
20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not shown a track 
record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.f:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
