 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05805 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 24, 2015, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on October 19, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 9, 2015, setting the 
hearing for December 8, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. I 
 
2 
 
marked Department Counsel’s discovery letter, which included an exhibit list as hearing 
exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through H, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow Applicant 
to submit additional evidence. He timely submitted AE I through N, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 29, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old and has worked for a government contractor since 2001 
or 2002. He has a high school diploma and has taken some college courses. He is twice 
divorced and has two minor children from his second marriage. He is current on his 
$1,200 monthly child support payments. He served in the Navy for four years and was 
honorably discharged in the pay grade of E-5. He has held a security clearance since 
becoming a contractor employee and has never had a security incident.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant has 16 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$166,882. The debts were listed on credit reports from April 2013 and September 2014. 
Applicant admitted some of the allegations and denied others. Those admissions will be 
treated as findings of fact.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties resulted when he divorced his second wife in 
2012. Applicant’s ex-wife was awarded possession of the family residence and was 
responsible for making the monthly payments. Applicant remained liable on the debt 
because the financing was obtained using a VA loan that he obtained. He was unaware 
that the loan was delinquent until informed by the security clearance process. Many of 
the consumer debts fell into the same pattern. His ex-wife was responsible for making 
the payments, but did not make them. He was unaware of the delinquencies and only 
became aware when informed by the defense investigator. Once informed of these 
debts, Applicant took action to remedy the situation. The status of the debts is as 
follows:3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a mortgage account ($143,716): 
 
 Applicant arranged for a loan modification agreement executed in August 2015 
by both he and his ex-wife. Applicant also made provisions where he will be notified if 
his ex-wife fails to make the required monthly payments. This debt is being resolved.4  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 23-26; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 28-30; Answer; GE 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 26-27, 42, 48; Answer; GE 2; AE A-B. 
 
4 Tr. at 28-32; AE A.  
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b consumer debt ($7,551): 
 
 Applicant paid this account in November 2015. This debt is resolved.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c consumer debt ($5,876): 
 
 Applicant paid this account in February 2016. This debt is resolved.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d consumer debt ($1,213): 
 
 Applicant paid this account in February 2016. This debt is resolved.7 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.m consumer debt (same underlying debt) ($1,207): 
 
 Applicant paid this account in February 2016. This debt is resolved.8 
  
 SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.o consumer debt (same underlying debt $999): 
 
 Applicant set up a payment plan in December 2014 and continued making those 
payments until the debt was paid in February 2016. The debt is listed on one credit 
report with the original creditor and is listed on the later credit report with the collection 
agency. The date of last activity and date of assignment match on both credit report 
listings. I conclude that both allegations arise from the same debt. This debt is 
resolved.9 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.g-1.j medical debts ($232, $220, $210, $130): 
 
 Applicant documented payment of two of these medical debts (1.g and 1.i), but 
indicated he was unable to locate the debt holder for the remaining two accounts (1.h 
and 1.j). He indicated he used internet resources to try to track down the creditors, 
without success. He will continue his efforts. These debts are being resolved.10 
  
  
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 32; AE B. 
 
6 Tr. at 34; AE I. 
 
7 Tr. at 36; AE M. 
 
8 Tr. at 37; AE M. 
 
9 Tr. at 37-38; GE 2, 4; AE C, L.  
 
10 Tr. at 39-42; AE E-F.  
 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k consumer debt ($2,850): 
 
 Applicant presented documentation showing this account was paid in December 
2012. The evidence shows the account number on the payment letter matches the 
account number on credit report (GE 2). This debt is resolved.11 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.l consumer debt ($798): 
 
 Applicant set up a payment plan in February 2015 and made two payments to 
settle this debt. This debt is resolved.12 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.n consumer debt ($21): 
 
 Applicant paid this account in February 2016. This debt is resolved.13 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.p consumer debt ($40): 
 
 Applicant paid this account in December 2015. This debt is resolved.14 
 
 Applicant did not seek financial counseling. He testified that he has paid off his 
car and motorcycle, that he has saved approximately $30,000 in the past year, and his 
401(k) retirement account is worth approximately $100,000. He is current on all his 
taxes.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 436; GE 2; AE N.  
 
12 Tr. at 43; AE G.  
 
13 Tr. at 44; AE M. 
 
14 Tr. at 45; AE H. 
 
15 Tr. at 46-49, 55. 
 
 
5 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
6 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had multiple delinquent debts that he failed to pay over an extended 
period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise both disqualifying conditions stated in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant are recent. He secured a mortgage 
modification for his mortgage debt and has paid all the delinquent debts for which he 
could track down. Since he has made a concerted effort to repair his financial position, it 
is reasonable to conclude that these types of debts will not recur, nor do they cast doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received credit counseling. He made a good-faith 
effort to resolve the debts by either paying them or attempting to track down the current 
creditors. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies and ¶ 20(d) fully applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military and federal contractor service. I found Applicant 
to be honest and candid about the circumstances that led to his debts. He took action to 
resolve his debts. I find it unlikely that Applicant will find himself in a similar future 
situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.p:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
