 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06431 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: H. Michael Drake, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on March 5, 2015, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on October 19, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 9, 2015, setting the 
hearing for December 7, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
2 
 
Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through H, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit 
additional evidence. He submitted AE I through L, which were admitted without 
objection. Hearing exhibits (HE) I through IV are included in the record. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 29, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old and has worked for a government contractor since 2002 
as an engineer. He also owns a consulting business that he has operated for 
approximately 20 years. He holds an associate’s degree. He is married and has five 
adult children, two of which live at home.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant had a charged-off consumer account in the amount 
of $32,655 (SOR ¶ 1.a); a past-due account in the amount of $341 (SOR ¶ 1.b); a 
delinquent medical debt in the amount of $367 (SOR ¶ 1.c); and a collection account in 
the amount of $7,581 (SOR ¶ 1.d). The debts were listed on credit reports from May 
2013 and September 2014. Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, but denied the remaining 
allegations.2  
 
 Several factors affected Applicant’s finances, including providing financial 
support for his mother-in-law from 2007 to 2014 when she passed away, supporting his 
son while he attended college, and a decline in income from his consulting business for 
about the past ten years. The family relied heavily on the secondary income from his 
consulting business.3 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: Collection debt for $32,655. 
 
 In 2001, Applicant owned a home and proceeded to market it for sale because 
he wanted to move his family to a new location with a bigger home. He purchased a 
home at the new location. Because he was then unsure if he could sell his existing 
residence at about the same time he would close on the new residence, he secured a 
bridge-loan to use in the event he needed to make his monthly payments on his “old” 
residence while also making payments on his recently purchased residence. The timing 
of the sale of the former residence and the purchase of the new worked out so that he 
did not need to use the bridge-loan. He was told by the bridge-loan lender that the loan 
would be cancelled with no further action on his part. Several years later he was notified 
by the bridge-loan lender that he owed a $250 maintenance fee on the loan as it had 
not been cancelled. Applicant paid the fee and decided to take advantage of this loan to 
make some home improvements. Applicant did not realize that the original ten-year 
term for the loan began in 2001, when he first secured it and not several years later 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 33-34, 36; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 34-36; GE 2-4. 
 
3 Tr. at 34-38. 
 
 
3 
 
when he actually began using the loan proceeds. In 2011, the loan had fully matured 
and was pronounced due by the lender. Because it had never been secured by any real 
property, and thus was unsecured, the lender refused to renew or extend the loan term. 
When Applicant could not make the balloon payment, the debt was turned over to a 
collection service. Once turned over, the original lender refused to communicate with 
Applicant. Applicant dealt with four different collection services from 2011 to 2015 in 
attempts to work out payment arrangements. In June 2015, Applicant proposed a $400 
monthly payment plan. The original lender had reacquired the loan, but wanted the loan 
paid immediately. When payment was not forthcoming, the lender charged off the loan 
and Applicant received a Form 1099-C (cancellation of debt). Applicant continued to 
resolve this debt by refinancing his current residence and using funds from this 
refinancing to tender full payment on this debt to the lender in February 2016. This debt 
is resolved.4 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d: Past-due debt for $341 and collection debt for $7,581. 
 
 Applicant provided documentary evidence showing that these debts are from the 
same underlying transaction. This loan was secured in 2001 as a “Home Saver 
Advance” to assist Applicant in making his mortgage payments. He has made irregular 
payment on this debt over the years and it has been assigned to subsequent lenders. 
The most recent statement shows the loan balance decreased from $7,581 to $5,230. 
Applicant also indicated this loan would be paid when funds from his home refinancing 
were available. These debts are being resolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: Medical debt for $367. 
 
Applicant presented documentary evidence showing this account was paid in full 
in February 2016. This debt is resolved.6  
 
Character Evidence. 
 
Applicant’s current financial status is good. His annual income is approximately 
$198,000. His neighbor, a former FBI special agent, testified that Applicant is 
trustworthy and dependable. He has known Applicant for 15 years and knows of no 
reason why he should not be trusted with classified information.7 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 38-44, 49-50, 53; Ans.; AE B-C, J-L.  
 
5 Tr. at 56, 63; Ans.; GE 2; AE E, J.  
 
6 Tr. at 57; AE I.  
 
7 Tr. at 22-23, 25, 26, 37. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had four delinquent debts that he failed to pay for an extended period. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c).  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant are recent. All the debts have been 
resolved or are being resolved through the refinancing of his residence. Since the 
 
6 
 
delinquent debts arose as a result of the financial hardship caused by a downturn in his 
consulting business and having to provide financial support for his mother-in-law who 
passed away, they are unlikely to recur. These circumstances do not cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
Applicant’s debts became delinquent when he suffered a downturn in his 
consulting business and he provided financial support for his mother-in-law. These were 
conditions beyond his control and he acted responsibly by attempting to work with the 
creditors and collection companies to resolve these debts. Ultimately, he refinanced his 
residence, which provided the funds to pay his remaining obligations. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies.  
 
 All debts are resolved or are being resolved through Applicant’s good-faith 
efforts. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant became indebted and how it 
affected his financial status. I found Applicant to be honest and candid about the 
circumstances that led to his debts. I find it unlikely that Applicant will find himself in a 
similar situation in the future.  
 
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
