1
                                                             
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-04650
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
May 12, 2016
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on February 12, 2014. (Government Exhibit 1.) On December 8, 2014, the
Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guidelines M (Use of Information Technology Systems) and E
(Personal Conduct) concerning Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 22, 2014 (Answer), and
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared
to proceed on August 23, 2015. This case was assigned to me on September 1, 2015.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on
September 15, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 20, 2015. The
Government offered Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which were admitted without
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and called two additional witnesses.
2
Applicant asked that the record remain open until November 13, 2015, for the receipt of
documents. On October 28, 2015, Applicant submitted Applicant Exhibit A which was
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October
29, 2015. The record closed on November 13, 2015. Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 28 and single. He has a master’s degree in electronic engineering, is
employed by a defense contractor in the computer security field, and seeks to retain a
security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems)
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E, Personal Conduct)
The Government alleges under Guideline M that Applicant engaged in conduct
that is in noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations pertaining to
information technology systems. The Government further alleges under Guideline E at
allegation 2.a that Applicant’s conduct under Guideline M shows questionable judgment,
dishonesty, or an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. Applicant admitted
allegation 1.a, with explanation. He denied allegations 1.b, and 2.a.
1.a. It is alleged in this subparagraph that Applicant was involved in knowingly
and improperly being involved in a computer security incident in August 2013. The
evidence shows that Applicant was acting under the direction of one of his instructors in
college.
Applicant received his master’s degree in 2013, with an emphasis on computer
security. During that year he was working for one of his instructors, who has a private
computer security business. In the summer of 2013, the instructor was contacted by a
government organization for his help concerning a serious computer security incident.
The instructor asked Applicant to assist in the investigation by looking at a particular
computer function. During his investigation, which was extensive and highly technical,
Applicant reached a point where he was uncertain of the legal implications of his
continued work, so he stopped and contacted the instructor for advice on how to
proceed. (Tr. 26-37, 39.)
Applicant’s instructor provided a letter concerning this incident. The instructor
confirmed that Applicant was working for him on the computer security incident, and
confirmed Applicant’s statements concerning the actions he took. The instructor then
described what happened next, “He [Applicant] had stopped before proceeding too [far]
into that [investigation of the computer function] and asked me how to proceed.
Additional research may have required more aggressive probing that would potentially
3
require law enforcement approval. I sought such approval and at the time it was not
desired.” (Applicant Exhibit A at 3.) 
1.b. The second incident alleged in the SOR is that Applicant knowingly engaged
in a computer security violation by bringing a thumb drive from home and using it on his
employer’s computer system. Such conduct is alleged to be against company policy.
Applicant admitted the action, but stated that his conduct was not inappropriate,
given his position in the company and the company’s own rules. (Tr. 21-26.) The
evidence supports his statements. 
Applicant is employed as a “Network Engineer” by the company involved in this
allegation. He provided documentation proving that fact. (Applicant Exhibit A at 4.) He
also provided the company’s “Information Systems: software policy.” In general, the
policy provides a list of approved software and hardware that is allowed on the company
systems. An employee is encouraged to contact the help desk so that hardware or
software can be evaluated and possibly approved. However, the policy also says the
following:
It is expected that our engineering staff will at times obtain, load, and
execute software from sources outside [the company’s] IS department. It
is also expected that employees obtaining software in this manner will be
sufficiently diligent and ensure that their actions do not negatively impact
our computing environment from a security, availability, or interoperability
aspect.
It is also expected that our engineering staff will at times obtain hardware,
install it and use it. Again diligence is required on their part to ensure that
those actions do not negatively impact our computing environment.
(Applicant Exhibit A at 5-7.) (Emphasis supplied.)
Specifically, Applicant was facing a time crunch on a particular project at work.
He stated:
I needed those files [for the project] quickly, and so I decided that since I
had seen other people using personal devices that it would permissible, in
this case, in the interest of efficiency, as long as I took appropriate
precautions.
So I bought a sealed thumb drive from a reputable dealer, I did not use it
on any home systems. It is a personal device owned by me, but at the
time I plugged it in to [sic] work systems it had never been plugged into
any of my home systems. (Tr. 22.)
Applicant’s supervisor at the time of the incident testified and confirmed
Applicant’s version of this event, and also stated that Applicant had told him of the
incident at the time it occurred. He also stated, “I informed him [Applicant] that
4
engineers were not subject to the policy of moving files based off of thumb drives and
personal devices.” (Tr. 42-47.)
Mitigation
Concerning Applicant’s work performance his former supervisor testified,
“[Applicant] is one of our more stellar employees. I know that when his review came up I
gave him high praise. I got him a promotion, I got him a raise. He’s been a huge asset
to the team and I haven’t seen any negative feedback as far as his character or his
performance.” (Tr. 43.)
Applicant’s current supervisor also testified. The supervisor stated that Applicant
is very ethical in how he proceeds with his work. (Tr. 47-50.)
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
5
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Use of Information Technology
Systems is set out in AG & 39:      
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations pertaining
to information technology systems may raise security concerns about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks and
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication,
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of
information.
Turning first to allegation 1.a. The guideline notes several conditions that could
possibly raise security concerns concerning Applicant’s conduct. Under AG & 40(a),
“illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or component
thereof@ is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 40(c), “use of any information
technology system to gain unauthorized access to another system or to a
compartmented area within the same system@ may raise security concerns. However,
they do not apply to Applicant’s conduct. The evidence shows that Applicant was
authorized by his college instructor to take the actions he took, as set forth at length in
the evidence. This was in furtherance of the instructor helping a government entity
investigate a computer security incident. When Applicant became concerned that there
might be legal ramifications to his conduct, he stopped and appropriately approached
his instructor for advice and guidance. This allegation is found for Applicant.
6
Turning next to allegation 1.b. Applicant admitted using a personal thumb drive
on his work computer. Applicant is an engineer at his company, and as shown above is
exempt from corporate policy that prohibits the introduction of outside hardware or
software without permission. Accordingly, his conduct does not come under the
strictures of AG ¶ 40(f), “introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware,
software, or media to or from any information technology system without authorization,
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines and regulations.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Allegation 1.b is also found for Applicant.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from use of information technology systems. As stated, I find that
Applicant’s conduct is not cognizable under any of the disqualifying conditions.
Assuming for the sake of argument that his conduct is cognizable, the evidence shows
that all of the mitigating conditions under this guideline apply to Applicant as well. Under
AG ¶ 41(a), disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “so much time has elapsed
since the behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment.@ In addition, AG ¶ 41(b) states that disqualifying conditions may be
mitigated where “the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s password or
computer when no other timely alternative was readily available.” Finally, AG ¶ 41(c)
states the disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the conduct was
unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct
the situation and by notification of supervisor.”  
Since I find for Applicant under Paragraph 1 because his conduct was not
cognizable under the disqualifying conditions, I need not discuss his conduct under
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. His actions did not involve questionable judgment, lack
of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations; nor did
they raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, or ability to protect classified
information. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge must consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
7
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The discussion under
Guidelines M and E, above, applies here as well. Applicant provided evidence showing
that his conduct in both situations was appropriate and authorized. He also provided
evidence showing he is quite knowledgeable about his security responsibilities and able
to fulfill them. (Tr. 37-40.) Under AG ¶ 2(a)(2), I have considered the facts of Applicant’s
conduct. I find that there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns allegedly arising from his use of
information technology systems and personal conduct. Accordingly, the evidence
supports granting his request for a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline M: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
