 
1 
                                      
 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ADP Case No. 15-00527 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns regarding financial 
considerations and personal conduct. Eligibility to occupy a public trust position is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 5, 2012, Applicant applied for a public trust position and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On August 24, 2015, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended and modified (Regulation); DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged trustworthiness concerns 
                                                          
1
 Item 3 (e-QIP, dated June 5, 2012). 
 
2 
                                      
 
under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or 
continue a position of public trust for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
occupying a public trust position to support a contract with the Department of Defense.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR for there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a statement, notarized October 1, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.2 A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was 
mailed to Applicant on December 2, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a 
period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished 
a copy of the Directive, as well as the Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant 
received the FORM on December 21, 2015. The response was due on January 20, 
2016. Applicant did not submit any information within the time period established. The 
case was assigned to me on March 31, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted two of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.h.).3 He failed to use the 
term “admit” or “deny” with respect to the allegations pertaining to personal conduct, 
and denied all of the remaining allegations. Applicant’s admissions and explanations are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been with 
his current employer, serving as a claims processor, since July 2012.4 Applicant 
graduated from high school in June 1989.5 He is still enrolled in online college training in 
an unspecified discipline and has not received a degree.6 He enlisted in the U.S. Air 
Force in June 1989, remained on active duty until September 1991, and was discharged 
with a General Discharge Under Honorable Conditions for an inability to adapt.7 He was 
never granted a security clearance.8 Applicant was married in January 2000 and 
                                                          
2
 Item 2 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated October 1, 2015). 
 
3
 Item 2, supra note 2, at 1. 
 
4
 Item 4 (Personal Subject Interview, dated August 15, 2012), at 8.  
 
5
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
6
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 10. 
 
7
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 15.  
 
8
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 30. 
 
3 
                                      
 
divorced in February 2001. He married his current wife in July 2011.9 He reported 
having no children.10 
 
Financial Considerations
11
 
 
It is unclear when Applicant first experienced the enduring financial difficulties 
with which he is currently faced, although he identified several incidents that initially led 
to some temporary financial difficulties. In December 1999, he was involved in an 
automobile accident for which he was charged with, and convicted of, driving under the 
influence (DUI). As a result of that incident, he purportedly sustained a traumatic brain 
injury and a leg injury. His right leg was amputated and he spent 54 days in the 
hospital.12  He also went through an unspecified number of years in physical therapy. 
He also claimed that the injuries eventually resulted in gall bladder surgery in about 
2010, although he did not explain how the incident resulted in that subsequent surgery. 
He reported that he was on unspecified disability from 1999 until March 2001. Applicant 
did not specify what the impact of the above incident and resulting circumstances was 
on his finances aside from stating that he was “barely able to make his monthly 
payments.”13  
 
 In July or August 2004, Applicant was involved in another automobile accident. 
He subsequently acknowledged that it was possible he was drinking prior to the 
accident.14 As a result of that incident, he purportedly sustained a crushed hip.15 He 
reported that he was on Social Security ($600 per month) from August 2004 until April 
2007. While he did not specify what the impact of the 2004 incident and resulting 
circumstances was on his finances, he did claim that he had difficulties meeting his 
financial obligations.16  
 
A third factor arose in August 2011, when Applicant was laid off, and he remained 
unemployed until July 2012. He indicated that he struggled financially because he was 
receiving only a small amount of unemployment compensation.
17
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
9
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 18-19. 
 
10
 Item 4, supra note 4, at 9.  
 
11
 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits: Item 2, supra note 2; Item 4, supra note 4; Item 5 (Personal Subject Interview, dated October 11, 
2012); Item 6 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated June 19, 2012; Item 7 (Equifax 
Credit Report, dated January 2, 2015. Additional information can be found in the exhibits furnished and individually 
identified. 
 
12
 Item 8 (Court Record, dated January 19, 2000); Item 4, supra note 4, at 1; Item 5, supra note 11, at 1.  
 
13
 Item 4, supra note 4, at 2. 
 
14
 Item 5, supra note 11, at 2.  
 
15
 Item 5, supra note 11, at 1.  
 
16
 Item 4, supra note 4, at 1.  
 
17
 Item 4, supra note 4, at 1. 
 
4 
                                      
 
Applicant’s finances deteriorated to the point where his accounts were not timely 
addressed by him, supposedly not because of a disinterest on his part, but rather because 
he had insufficient funds to make monthly payments. Accounts became delinquent and 
were placed for collection or charged off. A review of Applicant’s June 2012 credit report 
reveals several accounts for which Applicant made no payments since the 2005 – 2007 
time period, well before he was laid off in August 2011. When he was initially interviewed by 
an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in August 2012, 
Applicant acknowledged a general awareness of his delinquent accounts, but admitted he 
had not been in contact with his creditors for a few years. Nevertheless, since he had 
obtained his position in July 2012, he contended he had some repayment plans in place 
and was already making monthly payments to several of his creditors. He was also hopeful 
to be able to begin making payments to some of his other creditors within the next six 
months. He disputed some of the accounts discussed.
18
  
 
The SOR identified 17 purportedly continuing delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $46,153 that had been placed for collection or charged off, as reflected 
by the two credit reports. Those accounts are: a student loan with the U.S. Department 
of Education (DOE) with a high credit of $14,776 and a remaining and past-due balance 
of $21,968 (SOR ¶ 1.a.) that Applicant initially (in 2012) contended he was making 
monthly payments of $313 by automated draft, and subsequently (2015) stated he was 
awaiting a negotiated repayment arrangement;19 an overpayment by the Social Security 
Administration (SSA) with a remaining and past-due balance of $9,015 (SOR ¶ 1.b.) 
that Applicant contended he repaid by having his income tax refunds garnished and 
applied to the balance, and contended the account was no longer being reported in his 
October 2015 credit report;20 and an automobile loan with a high credit of $17,499 (SOR 
¶ 1.h.) that Applicant failed to make monthly payments for four months following his 
second accident, resulting in the repossession of the vehicle and $4,725 being charged 
off.21  
 
 
In addition to the above referenced delinquent accounts, there are a number of 
accounts that Applicant initially (in 2012) either denied knowledge of, or responsibility 
for, or acknowledged responsibility for, with a promise to start payments within six months, 
but now disputes and denies responsibility for, because the accounts are no longer reported 
in his October 2015 credit report. Those accounts are: a telephone account that 
Applicant’s stepson used without Applicant’s knowledge leaving a remaining balance of 
                                                          
 
18
 Item 4, supra note 4.  
 
19
 Applicant failed to submit documentation to support his contentions that any repayment arrangement had 
been made or that he had made any payments to the creditor. 
 
20
 Applicant failed to submit documentation to support his contention that a garnishment has taken place, or 
that payments had been applied to his outstanding debt. In addition, he failed to submit a copy of the October 2015 
credit report.  
 
21
 In August 2012, Applicant stated he intended to contact the creditor to negotiate a settlement for a lesser 
amount and start making payments within the next six months. He failed to submit any documentation to reflect any 
such settlement or payment efforts. Furthermore, Applicant seems encouraged that the account is scheduled to be 
removed for unspecified reasons from his credit reports in June 2016.  
 
 
5 
                                      
 
$1,222 (SOR ¶ 1.c.) that was sold to a debt purchaser; a cellular telephone account that 
Applicant’s wife and stepchildren used leaving a remaining balance of $773 (SOR ¶ 
1.d.) that was sold to a debt purchaser (SOR ¶ 1.k.); another cellular telephone account 
that Applicant’s stepson overused leaving a remaining balance of $568 (SOR ¶ 1.e.) 
that was sold to a debt purchaser; medical accounts with remaining balances of $341 
(SOR ¶ 1.f.), $1,677 (SOR ¶ 1.i.), $734 (SOR ¶ 1.l.), $389 (SOR ¶ 1.m.), and $30 (SOR 
¶ 1.q.); a utility account with a remaining balance of $79 (SOR ¶ 1.g.); a telephone 
account with a remaining balance of $3,522 (SOR ¶ 1.j.); an Internet or cable television 
account with a remaining balance of $207 (SOR ¶ 1.n.); an electric utility account with a 
remaining balance of $81 (SOR ¶ 1.o.); and a telephone account with a remaining 
balance of $49 (SOR ¶ 1.p.) that was purchased by a debt purchaser. Applicant now 
denies responsibility for the above debts, and he claims they no longer appear in his 
October 2015 credit report. Although he has been fully employed since July 2012, there 
is no evidence that Applicant has taken any steps to resolve his debts since he was 
interviewed in August 2012 – nearly three years ago. He failed to submit either that 
October 2015 credit report or documentation that might indicate any efforts by him to 
contact the creditors or enter into any settlement negotiations, or reflecting any 
payments made. In the absence of such documentation, it appears that he has simply 
washed his hands of any financial responsibility towards any of the SOR-related 
delinquent debts. 
 
It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because he did not 
submit a personal financial statement to indicate his net monthly income, his monthly 
household or debt expenses, or whether he has any funds remaining at the end of each 
month for discretionary use or savings. He offered no evidence to indicate that his 
financial problems are now under control. There is no evidence to indicate that 
Applicant ever received financial counseling. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 On June 5, 2012, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he responded to 
questions pertaining to his police record. One of the questions in § 22 asked if he had 
“EVER been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs.”22 Applicant answered 
“no” to the question. He certified that the response was “true, complete, and correct” to 
the best of his knowledge and belief, but the response to that question was, in fact, 
incorrect, for at that time Applicant had been involved in at least one incident involving 
alcohol: a December 1999 DUI (SOR ¶ 2.a.(2)). The SOR also alleged that Applicant 
falsified his response by failing to report one other alcohol-related incident: the July 
2004 accident which was alleged as a DUI and open container in motor vehicle (SOR ¶ 
2.a.(1)).  
 
 During Applicant’s OPM interview, he denied any recollection of a 1996 incident 
involving an alleged charge of open container in motor vehicle, claiming that his 
traumatic brain injury from 1999 caused him to experience long-term memory loss.23 In 
                                                          
22
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 28. 
 
23
 Item 5, supra note 11, at 1. 
 
6 
                                      
 
his Answer to the SOR, he ignored the allegation. Other than the “confrontation” by the 
OPM investigator with unidentified source information, the record contains no evidence 
of the purported charge such as an incident report, traffic summons, or court record. 
Furthermore, there is no such allegation in the SOR. 
 
 With respect to the 1999 incident, during the OPM interview, Applicant 
acknowledged the incident, but offered no admission as to any charge. In his Answer to 
the SOR, he denied that he was arrested for DUI, and claimed he did not appear in 
court for any such charge.24 The evidence refutes Applicant’s position in that the court 
record reflects a finding of guilty following a bench trial for DUI.25 
 
 The 2004 incident is more challenging for the SOR alleged that Applicant was 
arrested and charged with both DUI and open container of beer or wine in motor 
vehicle. There is no admission or documentary evidence such as an incident report, 
traffic summons, or court record to support the two-charge (DUI and open container) 
allegation. During his OPM interview, while Applicant agreed to the possibility that he 
was drinking prior to the accident, he stated he had no recollection of being charged 
with any offenses or ever going to court, and he stated that he was fairly certain he 
never appeared in court or paid any fines.26 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied 
being arrested for DUI, and he denied appearing in court. He acknowledged he paid a 
ticket, but the infraction on the ticket was not revealed.27 
 
 When Applicant completed his e-QIP, he also responded to questions pertaining 
to his financial record. Several of those questions in § 26 asked if he was currently 
delinquent on any Federal debt; in the past seven years, if he had bills or debts turned 
over to a collection agency; and if he had any account or credit card suspended, 
charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed, including those for which he was 
the sole debtor, a cosigner, or a guarantor.28 Applicant answered “no” to those 
questions. He certified that the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best 
of his knowledge and belief, but the responses to those questions were, in fact, false, 
for at that time Applicant had several accounts that fell within the stated parameters.  
 
 Applicant denied intending to falsify his responses or mislead anyone. He 
explained that most of the accounts were placed for collection well beyond the seven 
year period to which the questions referred. In fact, they are still in a delinquent status. 
Furthermore, a review of his June 2012 credit report reveals that a number of 
Applicant’s delinquent debts were placed for collection as recently as 2011 and 2012, 
well within the seven-year period. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
24
 Item 2, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
25
 Item 8, supra note 12. 
 
26
 Item 5, supra note 11, at 1. 
 
27
 Item 2, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
28
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 31-32. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”29 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive 
positions.”30 “The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is 
that, based on all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security.”31 Department of Defense contractor 
personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any 
final unfavorable access determination may be made.32  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a public trust 
position. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”33 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
                                                          
29
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
30
 Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
31
 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
32
 Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
33
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.34  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.  
Furthermore, security clearance determinations, and by inference, public trust 
determinations, should err, if they must, on the side of denials.35 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. 
Under AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” 
may raise trustworthiness concerns. Applicant has had a long-standing problem with his 
finances. There are 17 purportedly continuing delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$46,153 that had been placed for collection or charged off. A vehicle was repossessed. 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the 
                                                          
34
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
35
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where 
“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving 
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 
20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”36 In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply 
if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt 
which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply. 
The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties make it 
difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” Applicant 
claimed that he was previously hospitalized for a traumatic brain injury, the amputation 
of a leg, a crushed hip, and gall bladder surgery. He failed to submit any documentation 
to support his contentions that he sustained a traumatic brain injury or suffered from a 
long-term memory loss which might explain his failure to recall his delinquent accounts. 
He said that he was barely able to make his monthly payments during those earlier 
periods. In addition, he reported a period of unemployment during which supposedly he 
struggled financially. Accounts became delinquent because he had insufficient funds to 
make payments. However, in July 2012, Applicant secured his current position, and 
since that time, he has not demonstrated any positive actions to contact his creditors, 
engage in settlement negotiations, arrange repayment plans, or make payments. His 
verbal descriptions of his purported actions are unsupported by any documentation. 
Furthermore, a significant number of his debts were incurred before his period of 
financial struggles. The mere reference to such matters, without specific elaboration as 
to how they impacted his finances and the inability to maintain his monthly payments is 
insufficient to support the presence of those conditions. 
  
                                                          
36
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Applicant offered no explanation as to why he took no action to resolve his 
delinquent accounts after he obtained his current position in July 2012. Applicant 
offered no evidence of a good-faith effort to resolve any of his debts, even the smallest 
of them ($30 or $49) and essentially ignored them to this date. He indicated an initial 
intention to pay some of the accounts and dispute others, and contended he was 
making payments on some of the accounts. But, as noted above, he failed to submit 
any documentation to support any of his stated intentions or actions. Likewise, he did 
not submit documentation regarding possible debt consolidation, disputes, or any 
continuing contacts with his creditors. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant 
ever received financial counseling. It is unclear if he has funds remaining at the end of 
each month for discretionary use or savings. There is no evidence to reflect that 
Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Applicant has not acted responsibly by 
failing to address his delinquent accounts and by making little, if any, efforts of working 
with his creditors.37 Applicant’s actions under the circumstances cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.38 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set 
out in AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. 
Under AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is a 
 
Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant failed to acknowledge his delinquent student loan debts to the DOE or 
his overpayment from SSA, as well as his many other delinquent debts. He also failed 
                                                          
37
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
38
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
to acknowledge his alcohol-related charge from 1999. As to those delinquent debts and 
the 1999 DUI, AG ¶ 16(a) has been established. However, as to the 2004 alleged 
arrest, AG ¶ 16(a) has not been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from personal conduct, but none of them apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.39   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He has been 
with his current employer since July 2012. There is no evidence of misuse of 
information technology systems or mishandling protected information.  
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant allowed a number of his accounts to become delinquent. They were placed for 
collection or charged off. A vehicle was repossessed. He claimed to have approached 
some of his creditors to enter into some type of settlement negotiations or repayment 
agreements. He contended he had actually made payments on some accounts, but he 
offered no documentation to support any of his contentions. Despite his initial promises 
to resolve his delinquent accounts, Applicant has essentially taken no probative positive 
actions to do so. Instead, he is waiting for one of those accounts to be removed from his 
credit report in June 2016, and claims others do not appear in a December 2015 credit 
report which he failed to furnish to support his claim.  
 
                                                          
39
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
He denied material facts in his e-QIP pertaining to his financial record and his 
police record, and continues to deny various essential facts relative thereto. Applicant’s 
actions under the circumstances cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. Considering the relative absence of confirmed debt resolution and 
elimination efforts, as well as evidence of his current financial status, Applicant’s 
financial issues are likely to remain. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:40 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an essentially negative track record of debt 
reduction and elimination efforts, generally ignoring his debts, but promising to take 
some corrective actions, maybe, unless those accounts disappear from his credit report.  
Overall, the evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a public trust position. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
has failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial 
considerations and his personal conduct. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.j.:  Against Applicant 
                                                          
40
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
  Subparagraph 1.k.:    Duplicate of 1.d. 
Subparagraphs 1.l. through 1.q.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b.:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility to 
occupy a public trust position to support a contract with the Department of Defense. 
Eligibility is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
