 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 15-00396 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James P. Fleisher, Esq.  
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant began accumulating delinquent debts in 2004, as a consequence of 
marital issues. He has resolved eight of the ten alleged debts and will resolve the 
remaining two if found to be his responsibility. He mitigated the financial security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On December 21, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for re-investigation. On October 3, 2015, the 
Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On November 15, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing. On February 12, 2015, the Department of Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On February 16, 2016, DOHA issued 
a hearing notice, setting the case for March 2, 2016. At the hearing, Department 
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence. Applicant testified 
and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through O into evidence. All exhibits were 
admitted without objections. The record remained open until March 25, 2016, to give 
Applicant time to submit additional exhibits. Applicant timely requested that the deadline 
for submitting additional documents be extended. Department Counsel had no objection 
to said request. On March 23, 2016, I entered an order extending the closure of the 
record to April 25, 2016.  Applicant timely submitted additional exhibits marked as AE P 
through S and they were admitted into the record without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 14, 2016.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations contained in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, and 
denied those in SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.j. His admissions are accepted as factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old and divorced from his wife since 2007. They were 
married in 1988 and have six children, ages 25, 24, 22, 19, 14, and 13. The three 
younger children reside with Applicant and are supported by him. He has a bachelor’s 
degree and credits toward a master’s degree. He has worked for his current employer 
for the past 10 years and held a security clearance during those years. (Tr. 21-24.) 
  
 Applicant stated that his financial problems began in 2004 when his former wife 
began using drugs, and subsequently left their home in 2005. Applicant then became 
solely responsible for managing the house and finances, and caring for their six 
children. (Tr. 25.) He subsequently filed for divorce, which was finalized in November 
2007. He received custody of the children, and his wife was ordered to pay $50 per 
month per child. She owes him about $5,000. (Tr. 30.) 
 
 Applicant served in the Army from 1992 to 1995.  He transferred to the Air Force 
and in November 2005 he was honorably discharged. He decided not to further pursue 
a military career in order to have more consistent time to care for his children. He 
subsequently was unemployed until June 2006, when he obtained his current job. While 
in the service, he held a Top Secret clearance and was eligible for access to sensitive 
compartmented information (SCI). (Tr. 27-28.)  
  
 After the divorce in 2007, Applicant began learning the extent of his personal and 
marital delinquent debts. At that time he was unable to address many of them because 
he did not earn enough money to pay current expenses, support his children, and pay 
 
 
3 
 
 
the outstanding bills. In 2011 he borrowed money from his pension plan to help manage 
his financial obligations. (Tr. 29- 31.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from January 2013, June 2015, and March 
2016, the SOR alleged 10 delinquent debts totaling $30,394, which accumulated 
between 2005 and 2009. Included in those debts were six unpaid medical bills, a 
judgment, and three charged-off accounts. (GE 2, GE 3, and GE 4.) Recently, he 
contacted a credit counseling company to help him identify the two larger debts alleged 
in the SOR, which total $26,759. (Tr. 51.) The status of the SOR debts is as follows:   
 
1. (SOR 1.a) The homeowners’ association judgment for $1,289 was satisfied and 
released in February 2016. (Tr. 32-33; AE G.) 
 
2. (SOR 1.b) The $108 medical debt was paid in November 2015. (Tr. 33; AE I.) 
 
3. (SOR 1.c) The $33 medical debt is paid. (Tr. 33; AE M.) 
 
4. (SOR 1.d) The $54 medical debt was paid in November 2015. (Tr. 33; AE I.) 
 
5. (SOR 1.e) Applicant stated that he paid the $1,467 automobile loan in 2011. It is 
resolved. (Tr. 34, 58; AE M.) 
 
6. (SOR 1.f) Applicant testified that he had difficulty locating the creditor for the 
delinquent $13,178 loan, which was assumed in 2004. He said that the original 
creditor sold the debt. He recently spoke to the current creditor about the debt, 
but was unable to learn the balance or how to resolve it. In early 2016, 
Applicant’s new credit counselor became involved in resolving the debt and 
requested a payment history of the debt from the new creditor, in order to resolve 
it. Applicant intends to resolve it. (Tr. 36, 56; AE N, AE O.)    
 
7. (SOR 1.g) Applicant testified that he has been unable to locate the original 
creditor for this $13,581 debt. He did a Google search for the SOR-listed creditor 
and found the name of a bank. He called that bank several times and it has no 
record of the debt or his account. He has not received any information from any 
company pertinent to this debt for at least five years or more. (Tr. 38-39.) 
Recently, his credit counselor contacted the creditor and to date has not found 
any additional information about the debt. Applicant testified that he would make 
arrangements to pay this debt if the creditor is located. (Tr. 47, 57; AE P.) 
 
8. (SOR 1.h) The $562 medical debt was paid in March 2016. (Tr.40; AE R.) 
 
9. (SOR 1.i) The $72 medical debt was paid in February 2016. (Tr.40; AE H.) 
 
10.  (SOR 1.j) Applicant cannot locate the creditor for this $50 medical debt after 
reviewing all credit reports. It is resolved. (Tr.41.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s net monthly income is $5,646, and does not include any money from 
his former wife for child support. His expenses are about $5,277 and include monthly 
payments of $250 on two credit cards, which have a combined balance of $3,100. He 
has about $350 remaining at the end of the month. (AE C.) 
 
 In January 2013 Applicant discussed the SOR debts with a government 
investigator. He told the investigator that he would begin resolving the debts. However, 
he said that he did not start paying them until later because he was paying other debts, 
and could not locate some of creditors based on the limited information he had. He said 
that he has timely filed all state and Federal income tax returns. He recently sought 
assistance with a credit counseling firm. (Tr. 61-62.) 
 
 Applicant submitted his performance evaluations for 2012 to 2013, 2013 to 2014, 
and 2014 to 2015. All of them consistently rate him as “fully satisfactory” or “exceeds 
expectations” in the various categories. (AE J, AE K, and AE L.) He submitted a letter 
from his supervisor for the past four years. The supervisor wrote that Applicant has 
never received any “write up during the government’s annual security inspection.” (AE 
N.) He stated that he trusts Applicant and has “consistently found him to be a 
dependable and reliable person.” (AE N.) Another supervisor, who has worked with 
Applicant, stated that Applicant has “produced some of the best work our company has 
been able to offer our government customers.” (AE O.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
 
 
5 
 
 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides: 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s history of being unable to satisfy financial obligations accrued 
between 2004 and 2009, and continued until recently. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
both disqualifications, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts arose under circumstances related to the last couple 
years of marriage to his former wife. Such problems are unlikely to recur given his 
divorce in 2007 and the subsequent steps he has taken to slowly resolve his financial 
problems. His reliability and trustworthiness in managing delinquent debts does not 
remain a concern. The evidence supports the application of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant provided evidence that the financial problems alleged in the SOR arose 
while married to his former wife and in the early years after his divorce, when he 
became solely responsible for his children’s care. Those facts were the result of 
circumstances beyond his control. However, he did not provide sufficient proof of the 
steps he attempted to resolve the debts while they were accumulating. AG ¶ 20(b) has 
partial application. 
 
 Quite recently, Applicant sought the assistance of a credit counseling company to 
help resolve two old debts. At this time, he has addressed eight of the ten alleged debts, 
and intends to address the larger debts as soon as he has more information. There is 
 
 
7 
 
 
sufficient evidence to conclude that his finances are coming under control, as a 
consequence of his good-faith efforts to resolve debts. Thus, the evidence establishes 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment, based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent 46-
year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has worked since 2006. He 
honorably served in the military for 13 years, and held a clearance for all of those years. 
He has gained the support and trust of his supervisors based on his performance over 
the past ten years. His financial difficulties started in 2004 as a consequence of marital 
problems. In 2007 he and his wife divorced, and he was awarded custody of his six 
children. He has received minimal financial assistance from his former wife over the 
years. At this time, three of the children no longer reside with him, having reached their 
majority. The evidence demonstrates that he has resolved six medical debts, a 
judgment, and car loan. He recently located the creditor for an old loan for $13,178, 
which he stated he would resolve. The listed creditor for the other large delinquent debt 
for $13,581 has no account information for Applicant at this time. Applicant’s budget 
provides some room for managing a repayment plan if necessary. Given his record of 
military service, good job performance evaluations, role as a single parent, and the 
amount of debt which is not definitively resolved at this time, there is nothing in the 
record that persuades me to conclude that Applicant is a security risk based on unpaid 
debts. While testifying, he was credible and forthright. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without doubts as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
 
 
8 
 
 
clearance. Applicant met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.j:        For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
