 
1 
  
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 15-01318 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling 
$133,524. He failed to provide sufficient information about his finances and demonstrate 
progress resolving his SOR debts. Financial considerations security concerns are not 
mitigated. Access to classified information is denied.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On August 29, 2012, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 2) On September 
4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued Applicant an SOR pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865,  Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
which became effective on September 1, 2006. The SOR set forth security concerns 
arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
On November 20, 2015, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he 
requested a decision without a hearing. On December 21, 2015, Department Counsel 
completed the File of Relevant Material (FORM). On January 4, 2016, Applicant 
received the FORM. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. On May 2, 2016, the case 
was assigned to me. The Government’s case consisted of seven exhibits. (Items 1-7)  
 
2 
  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g 
and 1.i through 1.k. (Item 1) He denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h. He also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings 
of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old planner scheduler currently employed by the same 
defense contractor since October 2011.2 In 1981, he received a high school diploma. In 
1982, he received an associate’s degree, and in 1994, he received a bachelor’s degree. 
He has never served in the military. In 1982, he married, and in 1984, he divorced. In 
1985, he married his spouse. In 1987, his son was born, and in 1990 and 1993, his 
daughters were born.   
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, 
November 7, 2012 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview 
(PSI), SF 86, and SOR response. (Items 1-7) His SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts 
totaling $133,524, and their status is as follows: ¶ 1.a is a charged-off bank debt for 
$34,403; ¶ 1.b is bank-collection debt for $26,292; ¶ 1.c is a charged-off bank debt for 
$18,328; ¶ 1.d is a charged-off bank debt for $12,330; ¶ 1.e is a charged-off bank debt 
for $6,286; ¶ 1.f is a charged-off bank debt for $5,825; ¶ 1.g is a charged-off bank debt 
for $2,491; ¶ 1.h is a medical-collection debt for $523; ¶ 1.i is a judgment filed in 2011 
for $8,026; ¶ 1.j is a judgment filed in 2011 for $3,410; and ¶ 1.k is a judgment filed in 
2010 for $15,610. (Item 1)   
 
 Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g and 1.i through 1.k., and 
explained he used the funds borrowed to sustain his business.3 He was not aware of 
the medical debt for $523 in SOR ¶ 1.h, and he said he needed to investigate the debt.  
 
In 2005, Applicant left his corporate employment, where he held a secret 
clearance for 19 years and had excellent credit. He and his spouse started a business. 
The business borrowed $100,000 from the Small Business Administration (SBA). After 
the first three years, the business began to sustain losses due to the business 
downturn. In 2008, the SOR bank debts became delinquent, and in 2010 and 2011, his 
suppliers obtained the three SOR judgments in SOR ¶¶ 1.i through 1.k against 
Applicant and his spouse’s corporation.  
 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s August 
29, 2012 Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 2)  
 
3The source for the information in this paragraph and the next paragraph is Applicant’s SOR 
response. (Item 1) 
 
3 
  
 
Applicant was unemployed from January 2011 to October 2011.4 In 2011, 
Applicant repaid his SBA loan. (Item 1) Two loans totaling $178,000, his home loan,  
vehicle loans, and credit obtained since 2010 are current. (Item 1) In 2012, Applicant 
said he was going to contact an attorney to discuss filing for bankruptcy.     
 
The documentation relating to the three judgments in SOR ¶¶ 1.i through 1.k 
indicate the judgments were against the corporation employing Applicant and not 
against Applicant personally. Thus, the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.i through 1.k are not 
established.    
 
There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. There is no 
evidence that he violated security rules, abused alcohol, or used illegal drugs. His taxes 
are current. He disclosed six of the delinquent SOR debts on his August 29, 2012 SF 
86. (Item 2) 
 
The file lacks supporting documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to 
pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise resolved seven of the delinquent accounts 
alleged in the SOR. There is no evidence of Applicant’s income, and he did not provide 
a budget or personal financial statement. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for his financial 
problems and other mitigating information. The FORM noted that Applicant had 30 days 
from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting forth 
objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not 
file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will be assigned to 
an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in 
this FORM. (FORM at 3) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
                                            
4Unless stated otherwise the information in this section is from November 7, 2012 Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI). (Item 3) 
 
 
4 
  
 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
5 
  
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SF 86, OPM PSI, and SOR response. Applicant’s 
SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling $133,524. The medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.h for 
$523 is not established because Applicant did not recognize it. The three judgments in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.i for $8,026, 1.j for $3,410, and 1.k for $15,610 were obtained by suppliers 
against Applicant’s corporate employer. The judgment documentation does not show 
that Applicant was personally liable for these three corporate debts.5 The debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.h through 1.k are mitigated, leaving seven unresolved delinquent SOR debts 
totaling $105,955. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;6 and 
                                            
5In ISCR Case No. 14-01231 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2015), the Appeal Board noted that the 
circumstances underlying business debts can “impugn an applicant’s good judgment.” Here, there is 
insufficient information about the business to show Applicant’s culpability or lack of judgment in the 
accrual of the judgments. 
 
6The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
 
6 
  
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant’s stated efforts to resolve his delinquent debt do not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to seven of his SOR debts; however, he 
presented some important mitigating information. The business downturn damaged 
Applicant and his spouse’s corporate business. He was unemployed from January 2011 
to October 2011. The recession and unemployment are circumstances beyond his 
control that adversely affected his finances. He did not provide enough details about 
what he did to address his seven unresolved SOR debts after he became employed in 
2011, and the degree of impact of these circumstances beyond his control to establish 
full mitigation. He did not describe receipt of financial counseling.    
 
I have credited Applicant with mitigating the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 1.k, 
leaving seven unresolved delinquent SOR debts totaling $105,955. Applicant did not 
provide sufficient documentation relating to these seven SOR debts: (1) proof of 
payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter 
from the creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) 
correspondence to or from any creditors to establish maintenance of contact with 
                                                                                                                                            
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).  
 
 
7 
  
 
creditors;7 (3) credible debt disputes indicating he did not believe he was responsible for 
the debts and why he held such a belief; (4) attempts to negotiate payment plans, such 
as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve these 
debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution of his debts. 
 
Applicant told an OPM investigator that several of the seven remaining SOR 
debts were duplications of each other; however, he did not provide any proof supporting 
his assertion that they were duplications of each other. He also said several large non-
SOR debts were paid or maintained in current status. Without a budget and more 
complete financial information, it is not possible to assess whether or not he has been 
doing all he was capable of doing to pay his debts since becoming employed in 2011. 
He failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) for the seven unresolved SOR debts 
because he did not provide documented proof to substantiate the existence, basis, or 
the result of any debt disputes. 
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
progress resolving more of his SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance that his 
financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. 
Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish that financial considerations security 
concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
                                            
7“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
  
 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old planner scheduler currently employed by the same 
defense contractor since October 2011. In 1994, he received a bachelor’s degree. 
Unemployment and the business downturn are circumstances beyond his control that 
adversely affected his finances. There is no evidence of abuse of alcohol, security 
violations, or use of illegal drugs.   
 
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant’s SOR 
alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling $133,524. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 1.k are 
mitigated, leaving seven unresolved delinquent SOR debts totaling $105,955. He 
provided insufficient corroborating or substantiating documentary evidence of payments 
to his other SOR creditors, payment plans, or his communications to those creditors. He 
did not provide documentation showing his attempts to resolve any of the seven 
unresolved SOR debts in good faith. His failure to provide more documented evidence 
of progress resolving the seven unresolved SOR debts shows lack of financial 
responsibility and judgment and raises unmitigated questions about Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. 
More information about inability to pay debts, financial history, or documented financial 
progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented 
resolution of his past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his 
obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. I conclude that financial consideration concerns are not mitigated, and it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance 
eligibility at this time. Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
 
  
 
9 
  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h through 1.k:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
