 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 15-01498 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 10, 2012, Applicant applied for a security clearance and 
submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a 
Security Clearance Application.1 On some unspecified date before September 8, 2015, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued her a set of interrogatories. 
She responded to the interrogatories on September 8, 2015.2 On September 11, 2015, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
                                                          
1
 Item 3 (e-QIP, dated September 10, 2012). 
 
2
 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated September 8, 2015). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was 
unable to make an affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. On October 19, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to 
have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant on November 
30, 2015, and she was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt 
of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as 
well as the Guidelines applicable to her case. Applicant received the FORM on 
December 10, 2015. A response was due by January 9, 2016. Applicant did not submit 
any response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, while not using the specific terms “admit” or “deny,” 
Applicant essentially admitted all of the factual allegations pertaining to financial 
considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.). Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and 
upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 63-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been a 
material handler or material specialist with her current employer since July 1995.3 Her 
educational background has not been established as she did not describe it in her e-
QIP and the investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) failed to 
address it during her interview.4 Applicant has never served with the U.S. military.5 It is 
unclear if she was ever granted a security clearance.6 Applicant has never been 
married, but she cohabited with her significant other from November 2001 until June 
2015, when he died.7 She has two children from previous separate relationships: a 
daughter born in 1969 and a son born in 1971.8 
                                                          
3
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
4
 Item 4 (Personal Subject Interview, dated November 7, 2012). 
 
5
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 11.  
 
6
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 26. 
 
7
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 13-14; Item 2 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated October 19, 2015). 
 
8
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 15-16, 19-20; Item 4 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 4, at 1. 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations9 
 
 It is unclear when Applicant first experienced financial difficulties, but in reviewing 
her e-QIP, her credit reports from September 2012,10 and January 2015,11 as well as 
her comments to the OPM investigator, and in her Answer to the SOR,12 it appears that 
she either failed to timely file her federal income tax returns, or pay the necessary 
income taxes, for the tax years 2004 through 2011, or a combination thereof. She 
attributed her income tax failures (to file or to pay) to: poor self-control; helping family 
members who were sick and without health insurance; deaths in the family; and too 
many unspecified problems at the time. With respect to the tax year 2011, she simply 
forgot to file her income tax return.13 In addition to the unpaid income taxes, other 
accounts became delinquent and were placed for collection or charged off. Applicant 
had delinquent credit card accounts and telephone accounts. Nevertheless, in 
November 2012, Applicant embarked on a three-day cruise to the Bahamas.14 
 
In addition to unpaid income taxes for a multi-year period (SOR ¶ 1.g.), the SOR 
identified six purportedly continuing delinquent accounts, totaling approximately 
$11,820, which had been placed for collection or charged off. In addition, there is the 
one failure to file federal income tax returns for the tax year 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.h.). 
Although Applicant contended that she intended to start making payments on her 
accounts, she failed to submit any documentation to support her contentions pertaining 
to her actions or activities to resolve them. There is no documentary evidence that any 
of the accounts were placed in repayment plans or that payments were made for any of 
them. Applicant promised the OPM investigator in November 2012 that she would 
continue paying her creditors “one card at a time,” and that she had called some 
creditors to set up repayment plans.15 To date, approximately three and one-half years 
later, she has failed to submit any documentation to support her contentions. In October 
2015, she again repeated her intentions, but once again, she failed to submit any 
documentary evidence to indicate that she made any payments on any of the delinquent 
accounts, including one account with a moderate balance of $182. 
 
Those debts are described as follows: an unspecified bank account with a past-
due and unpaid balance of $8,634 (SOR ¶ 1.a.); a bank credit card account with a past-
                                                          
 
9
 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits: Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated September 19, 2012); 
Item 6 (Equifax Credit Report, dated January 13, 2015); Item 3, supra note 1, at 26-30; Item 4 (Personal Subject 
Interview), supra note 4, at 3-4; Item 2, supra note 2.  
 
10
 Item 5, supra note 9. 
 
11
 Item 6, supra note 9. 
 
12
 Item 4 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 4. 
 
13
 Item 4 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 4, at 2-4; Item 3, supra note 1, at 27-29. 
 
14
 Item 4 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 4, at 1. 
 
15
 Item 4 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 4, at 3-4. 
 
4 
                                      
 
due and unpaid balance of $911 (SOR ¶ 1.b.); an unspecified account with a past-due 
and unpaid balance of $782 (SOR ¶ 1.c.); a bank credit card account with a past-due 
and unpaid balance of $340 that was charged off (SOR ¶ 1.d.); a telephone account 
with an unpaid balance of $182 (SOR ¶ 1.e.); an unspecified bank account with an 
unpaid balance of $1,241 (SOR ¶ 1.f.); and an unspecified amount of federal income 
taxes for the tax years 2004 through 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.g.). 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant has received financial counseling. Applicant 
failed to furnish a personal financial statement setting forth her net monthly income; her 
monthly household expenses; and her monthly debt payments. In the absence of such 
information, I am unable to determine if she has any monthly remainder available for 
savings or spending. Thus, it is nearly impossible to determine if Applicant’s finances 
are under control or if she is still experiencing financial difficulties. In the absence of any 
documentation to confirm Applicant’s contentions regarding what she has claimed to be 
doing with respect to her creditors and her delinquent accounts, there is a paucity of 
evidence to indicate that her financial problems are now under control. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”16 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”17   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
                                                          
16
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
17
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
5 
                                      
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”18 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.19  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”20 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”21 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
                                                          
18
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
19
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
20
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
21
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. In addition, a “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns as required . . .” may raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19(g). Applicant has 
had a long-standing problem with her finances which existed as far back as 2004 when 
she failed to timely file the first of many years of federal income tax returns. A number of 
accounts subsequently became delinquent and were placed for collection or charged off 
and income taxes remained unpaid. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(g) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”22  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies. The 
nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since about 
                                                          
22
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
2004 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” 
Although Applicant did not attribute any one particular cause to her financial problems, 
she did mention: poor self-control; helping family members who were sick and without 
health insurance; deaths in the family; and too many unspecified problems at the time. 
With respect to the tax year 2011, she simply forgot to file her income tax return. The 
above factors were, to some degree, beyond Applicant’s control, but the impact of them 
individually or collectively, was not specifically discussed. In November 2012, Applicant 
embarked on a three-day cruise to the Bahamas. Other than claiming that she had 
intentions to resolve the delinquent accounts and pay her taxes, or that she would start 
paying some creditors, Applicant failed to demonstrate what actions she has taken to 
address her delinquent debts, and she has offered no documentary evidence of a good-
faith effort to resolve any of them. She essentially continues to ignore her creditors.  
 
There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant received financial counseling. In 
the absence of a personal financial statement, or any current information pertaining to 
her monthly income, expenses, and available funds for discretionary savings or 
spending, it is impossible to determine the current state of her financial affairs. Because 
of her failure to confirm payment of even her smallest delinquent accounts, and her 
failure to furnish documentation regarding any of the accounts, the evidence leads to 
the conclusion that Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. Furthermore, 
there is no documentary evidence that Applicant has, in fact, finally filed her federal 
income tax returns or paid any taxes. Applicant has not acted responsibly by failing to 
address her delinquent accounts while employed and by failing to make limited, if any, 
efforts of working with her creditors.23 Applicant’s actions under the circumstances 
confronting her cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.24 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
                                                          
23
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
24
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.25   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. She has been 
with her current employer since July 1995. She appears to have been a faithful and 
supportive family member to her immediate and extended family members. There is no 
evidence of security violations. 
 
The disqualifying evidence is more substantial. Applicant had declared her 
intentions of bringing her accounts current and repaying them. She also claimed that 
she had filed or would file her delinquent federal income tax returns and would pay any 
unpaid income tax balances. However, to date, even three and one-half years after first 
declaring her intentions to the OPM investigator, she has not. Instead, although she had 
the money and the time to take a cruise to the Bahamas in 2012, Applicant has 
seemingly continued to ignore her responsibilities as to filing income tax returns and 
paying her creditors, including the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Applicant offered no 
evidence as to her reputation for reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Applicant’s long-standing failure over the years to voluntarily repay her creditors, even 
in the smallest amounts, or to arrange even the most reasonable payment plans, 
reflects traits which raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. 
Although she made declarations that some accounts would be resolved, she offered no 
documentary evidence to support her declarations. There are no clear indications that 
Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Considering the absence of confirmed debt resolution and elimination efforts, 
Applicant’s financial issues are likely to remain. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:26 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of ‘“meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
                                                          
25
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
26
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an essentially negative track record of voluntary 
debt reduction and elimination efforts, generally ignoring her delinquent debts, including 
delinquent income taxes, and the timely income tax filing requirements. Overall, the 
evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial considerations. 
See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
