 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )    ISCR Case No. 15-01796 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
September 24, 2012. On September 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 22, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 25, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
 
2 
 
March 4, 2016, and a hearing was scheduled for March 30, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through H, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on April 6, 2016. 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged four delinquent debts, including a federal tax debt totaling 
approximately $18,000 for tax year 2008. The remaining debts alleged total less than 
$600. Applicant denied each SOR allegation and provided a short explanation and 
supporting documents with his Answer. After a careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old and is employed by a government contractor as a 
program manager since 2012. He currently earns approximately $143,000 annually1 
and his spouse earns approximately $3,600 annually.2 He graduated from college in 
1997. He currently holds a security clearance and is requesting that it be renewed. 
Applicant was divorced in 2005, but remarried in 2014.  He has two children under four 
years old.    
 
Applicant’s financial problems that led to his federal tax delinquencies began in 
approximately 2007 when he struggled financially after moving to a high-cost 
Washington D.C. area for a new job opportunity. In order to sell his home, he incurred 
costs of renovation, but the property lost substantial value during the 2008 housing 
crisis. He attempted a short-sale, but was unsuccessful and the mortgage was 
eventually foreclosed. Applicant paid a negotiated deficiency balance owed on the 
mortgage.3 
 
In order to meet his increased costs and credit card debts, Applicant withdrew 
approximately $19,000 from his retirement account without paying the additional tax and 
penalties from the proceeds. Applicant believed his 2008 taxes were filed by his 
accountant, but was eventually notified by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) of his 
failure to file and taxes owed. He did not have the funds to pay the taxes owed. He 
eventually filed his 2008 and 2009 tax returns in 2012, and made arrangements with the 
IRS to pay his delinquent tax debt through a payment plan to forestall garnishment.  
Applicant has been consistently paying his monthly installments pursuant to this plan 
since 2012, and currently owes less than $12,000, including penalties and interest.4 
 
                                                     
1  AE D. 
 
2 Tr. 40. 
 
3 The foreclosure was not alleged in the SOR. 
 
4 AE H. 
 
 
3 
 
The remaining debts alleged in the SOR have been resolved. The debts alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.b and ¶ 1.c are a collection account for a consumer credit account.  
Applicant provided evidence to show the SOR allegations are duplicates and that the 
debt was paid in 2012.5 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is alleged to be a delinquent 
natural gas bill, however Applicant has provided evidence from the creditor to show that 
this account is in good standing, and the debt has been withdrawn from his credit 
bureau reports (CBR) pursuant to his dispute of the item.6 
 
Applicant’s income has increased substantially since 2008 and his spouse now 
contributes to the family income. He is current on all debts and expenses and his 
current CBR shows no new delinquencies.7 He provided a 2014 Letter of Appreciation 
from his government client and a 2013 citation for Employee of the Month.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.”  The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.9  In Department of Navy v. Egan10, the Supreme Court stated that the burden 
of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11 
                                                     
5 AE F and G. 
 
6 AE A. 
 
7 AE A. 
  
8 AE B and C. 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”   It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.12 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
                                                                                                                                                                           
10 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to 
a security clearance). 
 
11 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
12 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
5 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 Applicant failed to file and pay his 2008 and 2009 taxes on time and had one 
other unpaid collection account. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant attributes his past financial difficulties to a period where he was 
overextended due to an out-of-state move for a job opportunity, and a downturn in the 
housing market.  He has since worked steadily to improve his financial condition, paid 
debts, and is well on his way to paying his tax delinquency through an IRS- approved 
payment plan.  He has worked for his current employer since 2012 and his income has 
increased by a significant amount.  He appears to have sufficient income to meet his 
financial obligations, including continuing to pay his tax arrears.  
 
 Applicant has made good-faith efforts to address his debts, including establishing 
and paying his tax obligation through a repayment plan since 2012.  In addition, he 
satisfied his only remaining consumer debt in 2012 and satisfactorily disputed the small 
natural gas provider debt. His recent CBR shows that he is current on all financial 
obligations, and has established a track record of responsible use of credit and timely 
payment of his financial obligations. 
 
 
6 
 
  There is sufficient evidence to determine that Applicant’s financial obligations 
have been or are being resolved. I am persuaded that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances to take action to address his debts once he was financially solvent, and 
is making significant progress on his federal tax obligation. I am convinced that he will 
continue his efforts to stay financially solvent and will address his future financial 
obligations in a responsible manner. Financial concerns are mitigated under AG ¶¶ 
20(a) and 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.”  However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR.  All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’  The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.’)  There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously.  Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
 
7 
 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR.13 
 
 I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings 
of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. I have also 
considered Applicant’s stable work history, positive employment awards, and efforts 
taken to address his debts. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant. 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   For Applicant. 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
                                                     
13 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
