 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03347 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guidelines E, personal conduct, 
H, drug involvement, and J, criminal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 22, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines E, personal conduct, H, drug involvement, and J, 
criminal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 4, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 5, 2016. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 22, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 16, 2016. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until 
March 23, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. He submitted 
exhibits that were marked AE D through G, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The record then closed.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on March 28, 2016.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to accurately reflect the 
evidence. SOR ¶ 3.a is amended, deleting the words “not guilty” and substituting the 
words “no contest.” The motion was granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old. He married in 2013. He has no children. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 2014. He has worked for his present employer, a federal 
contractor, since July 2012.2  
 
 Applicant started college in 2008 at the age of 18 and was awarded a Reserve 
Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC) scholarship. As part of the required paperwork to be 
completed to participate in the program he completed a security clearance application 
(SCA). He started the SCA process while in high school and signed the document in 
October 2008.3 Applicant failed to disclose his prior drug use on the SCA because he 
was worried his parents would find out; he would lose his scholarship; and he would be 
unable to attend college. He was granted a security clearance in May 2009.4 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana with varying frequency from April 2007 to 
September 2011. He experimented with cocaine on two occasions between June 2008 
and October 2010. In 2009, he experimented one time with hallucinogenic mushrooms. 
In March 2010, he experimented one time with ecstasy. He purchased and sold 
                                                          
1 HE II is Department Counsel’s email memorandum. 
 
2 Tr. 23-26. 
 
3 Tr. 50-51; GE 6. 
 
4 Tr. 28-30, 51, 55. 
 
 
3 
 
 
marijuana in small amounts to his friends with varying frequency while in college until 
September 2011.5  
 
 In September 2011, Applicant was arrested at his dorm room at college. He 
admitted he had marijuana in his dorm room. He estimated he had about a quarter of a 
pound of marijuana. He credibly testified that he and his roommate had purchased a 
large amount for their own use throughout the school year. They were not intending to 
sell it. Applicant’s roommate was not arrested because the marijuana was found in 
Applicant’s room in the suite he shared with his roommate. Applicant was starting his 
senior year of college at the time.6  
 
 Applicant was aware that he was not to use illegal drugs as part of his ROTC 
commitment. He explained he was in a college environment, was hanging around the 
wrong people, and made poor decisions. In July 2011, while participating in a ROTC 
summer program, he was given a drug test that he passed. He was not subjected to 
regular random drug tests. Applicant explained that his illegal behavior continued until 
he was caught in September 2011.7 
 
 Applicant was charged with felony possession of cannabis; misdemeanor 
possession of drug paraphernalia; felony possession of cannabis with the intent to sell, 
manufacture; and felony possession of cannabis with intent to sell.8 In February 2012, 
the state did not go forward on the intent to sell charges and Applicant pled no contest 
to the possession of drug paraphernalia and possession of cannabis charge. As part of 
a pretrial agreement, he participated in a pretrial diversion program.9 
 
 In June 2012, the Army notified Applicant of its intent to revoke his security 
clearance. Applicant credibly testified that after he completed the SCA in 2008 as part of 
the ROTC requirements, he was never told that he was granted a security clearance. 
He stated that he knew the use of illegal drugs was a concern of the government, and it 
was wrong. At the time, he did not know what the potential ramifications were for his 
failure to disclose his drug use on his SCA or of its importance to his future. After his 
arrest, he changed his behavior and rearranged his priorities.10  
  
 The pretrial diversion program required Applicant to attend a county drug 
program. Applicant was required to submit to weekly drug testing; attend weekly group 
meetings; participate twice a week in Narcotics Anonymous; abstain from illegal drug 
                                                          
5 Tr. 52-54. 
 
6 Tr. 30-35. 
 
7 Tr. 27, 36, 50-52, 54. 
 
8 GE 2, 3. 
 
9 Tr. 37-39. 
 
10 GE 4, 7. 
 
4 
 
 
use for one year; report monthly in person to his probation officer; and pay $100 a 
month to participate in the program. Applicant credibly testified that he complied with all 
of the requirements and never missed a meeting. He was also working during this time. 
He completed the program in December 2012. The correctional probation senior 
supervisor provided a letter to Applicant upon completion of the program. It noted he 
had fully complied with the pretrial agreement and the charges against Applicant were 
dismissed in December 2012.11  
 
 After Applicant’s arrest, he was suspended from college for two years, resigned 
from ROTC and lost his scholarship, which he is required to repay. His actions put 
immense stress on his family and his girlfriend. He subsequently decided to visit his 
high school and tell students his experience with illegal substances. Applicant told his 
story in front of 200 students. He told them about the bad decisions he made and gave 
advice on what to look out for when the students go to college. Applicant’s lecture was 
not a requirement of the pretrial diversion program. Applicant stated that he is not 
making excuses for his conduct and takes responsibility for the poor decisions he made, 
but it was important to him to share his experience in order for others to not make the 
same mistakes.12  
 
 After Applicant completed the pretrial diversion program, he realized he needed 
to get his life back on track. Before he was hired in July 2012, he told his employer 
about his criminal conduct. In 2013, he married his girlfriend, who had been with him 
since his arrest. In January 2014, he resumed attending college and graduated in 
December 2014. He worked while attending college. He was promoted by his employer 
and was awarded a certificate of achievement from a command that is a client of his 
employer. In 2015, he was certified as a program management professional. Applicant 
completed the certification requirements in two years, a course that normally takes three 
to five years. He received an “exceptional” rating from his employer on his performance 
assessment report.13 He and his wife purchased their first house in 2016. He has gone 
back to attending church with his wife and is now focused on a “moral compass” that 
helps define his life.14 
 
 Applicant has been repaying his scholarship since 2012. He has an automatic 
payment of $274 deducted from his account each month. The total balance owed as of 
March 2016 is $20,486.15 
 
 Applicant completed an SCA in April 2014. In it he disclosed his arrest and drug 
involvement as described above. During his July 2014 background interview with a 
                                                          
11 Tr. 40-46 62-65; AE E. 
 
12 Tr. 67-68; Answer to SOR. 
 
13 AE A. 
 
14 Tr. 27, 36, 46-49; AE C, D. 
 
15 Tr. 26, 56-57; AE D. 
 
5 
 
 
government investigator, Applicant disclosed his arrest and drug involvement as 
described above. 
 
 Applicant no longer associates with anyone who uses illegal drugs. His last use 
of an illegal drug was before his 2011 arrest. His employer has a zero drug tolerance 
policy and random drug testing. To date he has not been required to participate in the 
testing. Applicant provided a written statement acknowledging any future use, 
possession, distribution or drug involvement will result in termination of a security 
clearance if one is granted. He indicated his intention to abstain from future use of any 
illegal drug use. He described himself during his college years as an immature young 
man who made poor decisions, and he is not that man anymore. He has taken 
responsibility for his actions and diligently worked hard to improve his life. He admitted 
he did not understand the seriousness or ramifications his drug use would have on his 
future. He is committed to his job and loves his country.16 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
                                                          
16 Tr. 58-62, 70; AE F. 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under criminal conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 In 2011, Applicant was arrested and charged with felony possession of cannabis, 
misdemeanor possession of drug paraphernalia, and felony possession of cannabis 
with the intent to sell, manufacture. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and the following two are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
 
7 
 
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant entered a plea of no contest to the possession of drug paraphernalia 
and felony possession of cannabis charges. As part of a pretrial agreement he 
completed a pretrial diversion program. In December 2012 the charges against 
Applicant were dismissed. He does not have any further legal requirements concerning 
these charges.  
 
 Applicant provided substantial evidence of successful rehabilitation. He has not 
used any illegal drug since his arrest in September 2011. He has been employed since 
July 2012 and has been promoted. He received an exceptional evaluation. He 
completed a program manager certification program and has graduated from college. 
He is repaying his scholarship debt. He received a certificate of appreciation from a 
client for whom he provided work. He is married, and he and his wife recently 
purchased a home. He shared his story with high school students about associating 
with the wrong crowd and making poor decisions. I find a sufficient amount of time has 
passed since Applicant’s criminal conduct. Although, going to college is not a unique 
circumstance, I considered Applicant’s age, immaturity, and peer pressure influences 
that were present during this time and find they are unlikely to recur and do not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Both mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions for drug involvement under AG ¶ 
25 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) Any drug abuse; 
 
 (c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
 (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant used various illegal drugs from approximately 2007 to September 
2011. During the same time period, he sold marijuana to his friends and possessed 
 
8 
 
 
drug paraphernalia. He was granted a security clearance in approximately May 2009. 
The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
The same analysis under the criminal conduct guideline applies to the drug 
involvement guideline. In addition, Applicant completed a pretrial diversion program, 
which included total abstinence of illegal drug use, participation in Narcotics 
Anonymous, and weekly group meetings. He credibly testified that he has changed his 
life as discussed above. He has not used any illegal drugs since September 2011. He 
no longer associates with drug-using associates. He submitted a signed statement of 
intent not to use drugs in the future with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation. Based on the successful rehabilitation evidence, I believe Applicant has 
moved past his youthful indiscretions and is committed to making good decisions, 
excelling at work, and being a devout husband. I find future involvement with illegal 
drugs is unlikely to recur. I have considered that Applicant was using illegal drugs while 
holding a security clearance, a serious violation; however, I am convinced that while he 
was in college he did not appreciate the gravity of his conduct and its implication 
regarding a security clearance. I believe he understands the seriousness of his conduct, 
and has a mature appreciation for the trust one is given when holding a security 
clearance. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
9 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following one potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsifications of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant intentionally failed to disclose his illegal drug use and possession of an 
illegal substance on his 2008 SCA. The above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following three mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused the untrustworthy, unreliable, or 
other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
In 2008, as a college freshman, Applicant completed an SCA as part of his ROTC 
paperwork. He was unaware that he was granted a security clearance at a later date, 
but took full responsibility for his conduct in failing to disclose his drug involvement on 
his SCA while participating in ROTC. He was afraid he would lose his scholarship and 
his parents would learn of his drug use. Applicant’s conduct was not minor. However, I 
have considered he was 18 years old at the time and did not have an appreciation for 
the seriousness or ramifications of his conduct. It does not excuse his conduct, but he 
has matured considerably. He did not make excuses for his actions, but acknowledged 
he was making poor decisions and took full responsibility for his conduct. The analysis 
above of Applicant’s rehabilitation is also applicable under this guideline. I believe the 
behavior he exhibited in the past is unlikely to recur. Applicant understands the 
importance of disclosure and did so on his 2014 SCA and during his background 
interview. He has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate exploitation and 
manipulation by addressing students at his former high school about his mistakes. He 
disclosed his criminal past to his employer when he was hired. He is also repaying his 
scholarship. I believe Applicant has matured from an irresponsible college student to a 
mature man, who is married, has a good job, and understands his responsibilities. 
 
10 
 
 
Although being dishonest on a SCA is a serious issue, I believe in this case he is 
deserving of a second chance. The above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E, H, and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 26 years old. While in college he used and possessed numerous 
illegal drugs over several years. He had a ROTC scholarship at the time and was 
required to apply for a security clearance. The evidence supports a finding that 
Applicant’s criminal conduct and drug involvement is in his past. The more serious 
concern was his failure to disclose this conduct on a 2008 SCA. I am convinced that this 
failure was an aberration by an immature college student. Applicant has changed the 
course of his life and is obviously on the right path. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the personal conduct, drug involvement and criminal conduct guidelines.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 
11 
 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
