1
                                                             
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-00652
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Chris Monge, Esquire
May 5, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on May 12, 2014.  On August 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 31, 2015.  He answered
the SOR in writing through counsel on September 14, 2015, and requested a hearing
before an Administrative Judge.  The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
received the request soon thereafter, and I received the case assignment on November
10, 2015.  This hearing was originally scheduled for December 21, 2015.  However, I
granted Applicant’s request for a delay until January 28, 2016, in order for his counsel to
be available.  DOHA issued an amended notice of hearing on December 10, 2015, and I
2
convened the hearing as scheduled on January 28, 2016.  The Government offered
Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 6, which were received without objection.  Applicant testified
on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AppXs) 1 through 5, which were received
without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on February 3,
2016.  I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until February 29, 2016, to
submit additional matters.  On February 24, 2016, he submitted Post-Hearing Exhibits
(PHXs) 1 through 3, which were received without objection.  The record closed on
February 29, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in
Subparagraphs 1.a., 1.c.~1.f, 1.i. and 1.j. of the SOR, with explanations.  He denied the
factual allegations in Subparagraphs 1.b., 1.g. and 1.h. of the SOR.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
Applicant is a 50-year old retired U.S. Air Force First Sergeant, who has held a
security clearance since the age of 18.  (TR at page 20 line 7 to page 22 line 19, at
page 39 line 22 to page 42 line 22 and GX 1 at page 5.)  As a contractor, he has been
employed since May of 2005 as a “logistics engineer.”  (GX 1 at page 10.)  “Around the
end of 2012,” his current spouse lost her employment; and with it, about “$100K” in
income.  (TR at page 22 line 20 to page 24 line 24, and at page 26 line 9 to page 27 line
9.)  This significant loss of income has caused Applicant’s current financial difficulties.
(Id.)
1.a. and 1.f.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor A for two past-due
debts totaling about $21,759.  (TR at page 25 line 1 to page 26 line 8, and at page 27
line 10 to page 29 line 21.)  Since September of 2015, he has been making monthly
payments of $200 to Creditor A pursuant to a payment plan.  (Id.)  This is evidenced by
Applicant’s bank records.  (AppXs 1 and 2.)  I find that Applicant is making a good-faith
effort to address these debts.
1.b.  Applicant initially denied a past-due debt to Creditor B, as the result of a
judgment against his former spouse, in the amount of about $9,805.  (TR at page 30
line 2 to page 31 line 9, and at page 43 line 13 to page 44 line 4.)  Since being informed
of his community property liability vis-a-vis his former spouse’s debts, incurred during
their marriage, he has begun making monthly payments of $50 towards this judgment.
This is evidenced by his bank records.  (PHX 3.)  I find that Applicant is making a good-
faith effort to address this debt.
1.c.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor C for about $335.  (TR at
page 33 line 12 to page 34 line 20, and at page 35 line 18 to page 36 line 7.)  He states
he has settled this debt for $201.13, and also avers that he has paid this it.  (Id.)  He
3
has also submitted documentation in this regard.  (AppX 5).  I find that Applicant has
made a good-faith effort to address this debt.
1.d. and 1.i.  These are one and the same past-due debt to Successor Creditor D
in the amount of about $2,977.  (TR at page 36 line 8 to page 37 line 15.)  Since June of
2015, more than two months prior to the issuance of the SOR, Applicant has been
making monthly payments of $150 towards this admitted past-due debt.  (Id, and AppX
4.)  This is evidenced by correspondence from the Successor Creditor showing a
remaining balance of $1,750 as of January 4, 2016.  (AppX 4.)  I find that Applicant is
making a good-faith effort to address this debt.
1.e. and 1.j.  These are also one and the same past-due debt to Successor
Creditor D in the amount of about $2,358.  (TR at page 36 line 8 to page 37 line 15.)
Since April of 2015, more than three months prior to the issuance of the SOR, Applicant
has been making monthly payments of $75 towards this admitted past-due debt.  (Id,
and AppX 3.)  This is evidenced by correspondence from the Successor Creditor
showing a remaining balance of $1,682 as of December 28, 2015.  (AppX 3.)  I find that
Applicant is making a good-faith effort to address this debt.
1.g.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor G for about $280.  (TR at
page 38 line 2 to page 39 line 1.)  He has paid this debt as evidenced by documentation
from Creditor G.  (PHX 2).  I find that Applicant has addressed this debt.
1.h.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor H for about $54.  (TR at
page 39 lines 2~15.)  He has formally disputed this debt as evidenced by
correspondence to the three major credit reporting services.  (PHX 1).  I find that
Applicant is making a good-faith effort to address this debt by disputing it.
1.i. and 1.j. have already been discussed, above.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraphs 19(a) and 19(c) an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and “a
5
history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns.  Applicant has
had substantial past-due indebtedness.  However, I find a countervailing Mitigating
Condition that is applicable here.  Under Subparagraph 20 (b), it may also be mitigating
where “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment . . . ), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.”  Applicant’s spouse lost her job, resulting in a substatial loss
of income, but he has now addressed all of the alleged past-due debt.  Financial
Considerations is found for Applicant.
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept.
The administrative judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  The record evidence leaves me without
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
For this reason, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from
his Financial Considerations, under the whole-person concept.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
6
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
_________________
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
