 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-01186 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. He 
failed to supply any supporting documentation reflecting what steps, if any, he has taken 
to address his past-due debts and take control of his finances. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his circumstances raised security concerns 
under the financial considerations guideline.1 On October 12, 2015, Applicant answered 
the SOR and requested a determination based on the administrative (written) record.  
 
 On December 18, 2015, Department Counsel prepared her written case, a file of 
relevant material (FORM), and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the Applicant’s 
security clearance application (SCA), several credit reports, public court records, and 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
the summary of Applicant’s background interview. These evidentiary exhibits were pre-
marked as Items 5 – 13 and admitted into the record without objection.2  
 
 Department Counsel specifically noted in the FORM that Applicant had failed to 
supply any documentation to corroborate his past assertions that he had addressed 
some of the SOR debts or to substantiate the basis of his dispute of some of the debts. 
Department Counsel went on to note that “[t]o date, there is no evidence of any efforts 
to pay or otherwise resolve these delinquencies [referring to the SOR debts].”3 Applicant 
was advised in the FORM, and in a cover letter accompanying the FORM, that he had 
30 days from his receipt of the FORM to submit a response and any documentation in 
support of his case.4 Applicant received the FORM on January 6, 2016, but did not 
submit a response or any documents in support of his case.5  
 
 On April 12, 2016, I was assigned Applicant’s case. On my own motion, I opened 
the record to provide Applicant a last opportunity to submit a response and any 
favorable documentation.6 Applicant did not submit any documentation, and the record 
closed on April 29, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his late thirties and is employed as a network engineer by a 
federal contractor. He is also attending college part time. He was first granted a security 
clearance in 2007. He separated from his wife in 2008 and, as of November 2012, had 
filed for divorce. He has four children.  
 
 Applicant served in the U.S. military from 2000 to 2011, receiving an honorable 
discharge. After leaving the military, Applicant was unemployed for 11 months before 
being hired by his current employer in September 2012. He submitted an SCA in 
connection with his job and listed three delinquent accounts in response to relevant 
questions regarding his financial record. He claimed to have addressed the three 
delinquent debts. A subsequent credit check revealed numerous other delinquent 
accounts. During his November 2012 background interview, Applicant stated that his 
financial problems were due to a combination of circumstances beyond his control, 
namely, the separation from his wife and unemployment after leaving the military. He 
told the background investigator that his plan was to satisfy his minor debts, which he 
described as debts in amounts of $1,000 or less, within a year and make payment 
arrangements with the creditors holding debts in higher amounts to eventually satisfy all 
his delinquencies.  
                                                          
2 Items 1 – 4 are the pleadings and miscellaneous administrative documents.  
 
3 FORM at 5.  
 
4 FORM at 3; Appellate Exhibit (Ax.) I (cover letter). 
 
5 Ax. II (acknowledgment of receipt). 
 
6 See Ax. III. 
 
3 
 
 
The SOR lists 26 delinquent debts in collection, charged off, or reduced to 
judgment. The 26 debts total over $60,000. The debts range in amounts of $50 for a 
collection account (1.z) to a 2012 judgment for over $17,000 (1.b). Applicant admits in 
his Answer the debts listed at 1.a – 1.g, 1.i – 1.k, 1.u, 1.w, 1.y, and 1.z; which together 
total over $30,000.  
 
Applicant stated in his SCA and during his background interview that he satisfied 
the $6,200 judgment referenced in SOR 1.o. Public court records indicate that the 
judgment, which is from 2008, remains unsatisfied.7 Applicant also claimed during his 
background interview that he was making $200 monthly payments to satisfy the 
$17,000 judgment referenced in SOR 1.b. Applicant previously stated that the judgment 
is for a car loan that he cosigned with his wife and, when she did not make the monthly 
payments, the car was repossessed.8 He provided no documentation to substantiate his 
past statements regarding the $17,000 judgment. 
 
Applicant did not provide documentation to substantiate the basis of his dispute 
of any of the SOR debts, such as a divorce decree or property settlement indicating that 
his wife is responsible for the $17,000 judgment. He also did not submit any 
documentation to corroborate his prior statements that he has addressed some of the 
SOR debts. The record is silent as to whether Applicant has received any financial 
counseling, and he provided no information regarding his current finances. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
                                                          
7 Compare, Item 5 at 39 and Item 13 at 2-3, with, Item 12. 
 
8 Compare, Item 5 at 41-42 and Item 13 at 3, with, Item 2 (admits debt in Answer) and Item 6 at 2 (credit 
report reflects judgment). 
 
4 
 
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The record evidence reflects that Applicant has a history of not meeting his 
financial obligations and, at a minimum, has been unable to pay his debts. This record 
evidence raises the financial considerations security concern and establishes the 
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
 Applicant bears the burden of mitigating the security concerns raised by the 
evidence. The financial considerations guideline lists a number of conditions that could 
mitigate the concern. The following mitigating conditions are most relevant: 
  
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s initial financial problems were attributable to marital separation and 
unemployment after leaving the military. Although it is generally well recognized that it 
can take time to address and resolve financial issues, Applicant has been employed full 
time with his current employer for over three years and provided no documentation to 
reflect what steps, if any, he has taken to address his past-due debts. He also did not 
provide any documentation to substantiate the basis of his dispute of the $17,000 
judgement referenced in SOR 1.b or any of the other SOR debts. The SOR debts are 
reflected on at least one of the credit reports and/or other evidence admitted into the 
record.9 Based on the administrative record, none of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to this nation’s secrets.10 Applicant failed to meet his burden. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case 14-03910 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 24, 2015) (“([I]t is well settled [in DOHA proceedings] that 
adverse information from a credit report can normally meet the substantial evidence standard and the 
government’s obligations under ¶ E3.1.14 of the Directive [to prove controverted] allegations. At that 
point, the burden shifts to Applicant to establish either that she is not responsible for the debt or that 
matters in mitigation apply.”). 
 
10 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
6 
 
 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).11 I hereby incorporate my comments under Guideline F. I 
gave due consideration to all the favorable and extenuating factors in this case, 
including Applicant’s military service and that he has held a security clearance in the 
past. However, after weighing the favorable and unfavorable evidence, Applicant’s 
financial situation continues to raise a security concern. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with doubts about his present eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.z:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
11 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
