 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 15-02890 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on December 26, 2012. On 
October 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her application, citing 
security concerns under Guideline B. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR and timely requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 3, 2016. A notice of 
hearing was issued on April 8, 2016, scheduling the hearing for April 26, 2016.  
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant testified, and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through U, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on May 4, 2016. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about India. The request and supporting documents are attached to the record as HX I. 
Applicant did not object to the documents. (Tr. 12) I allowed the documents into the 
record and took administrative notice as requested by Department Counsel. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in the SOR 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and offered explanations. She provided additional 
information to support her case.   
 
 Applicant was born in India. She is 45 years old. She received her undergraduate   
degree in India. She came to the United States in 1996.  She received her master’s 
degree in 2006. (AX J) For about ten years she has worked with federal agencies for 
defense contractors, and has been with her current employer for about three years. (GX 
1) She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2007. (GX 1) In 2007, she surrendered her 
Indian passport and renounced her Indian citizenship. (AX I) This is her first request for 
a security clearance, but she has held positions of trust. (Tr. 32) 
 
Applicant is married and has two children. She and her husband were married in 
1994. He is a naturalized U.S. citizen.  Applicant’s two daughters are U.S. citizens. They 
were born in the United States. Applicant has a visa card under the Overseas Citizens 
of India Program or the Person of Indian Origin Program (PIO). (AX T)   
 
 Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of India. He is 92 years old and is 
confined to his home due to his age and health.  He lives alone. Applicant’s mother died 
in 2007. Applicant contacts him twice per month to check on his health or wish him a 
Happy Birthday. She does not support him financially. He does not have any connection 
with the Indian government. He has been retired for about 35 years. (Tr. 18)  
 
 Applicant has three brothers who are citizens and residents of India. Her oldest 
brother is 68 and is retired. She speaks to him about three times a year. The 
conversations are short and they talk about their families. His children live in the United 
States. Her second brother is 56 and works for a private company in India. She speaks 
to him once or twice a year at holidays. The conversations are short, rarely lasting more 
than 15 minutes. The third brother is 53 and works in a technology division providing 
software services to the Indian government. However, he is a civilian and is not directed 
by the government. (Tr. 21) She speaks to him once or twice a year. None of her 
brothers are familiar with Applicant’s job. Initially, when completing her 2012 security 
clearance application, she communicated with her brothers on a monthly basis. 
 
3 
 
 
However, that has changed, and their contact has been substantially reduced. She does 
not send nor receive any type of monetary support from her brothers. 
 
Applicant has two sisters who are citizens and residents of India.  She states 
they are now 66 and 62, respectively. They are housewives and work at home. They do 
not understand computers. (Tr. 21) Applicant speaks to them every four months for 
special occasions. They speak about their family members. Applicant does not support 
them financially. They do not know the nature of Applicant’s work and have no 
connections to the Indian government. She now speaks to them less frequently since 
her mother’s death. (Tr. 22) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens are citizens and residents 
of India. They are 75 and 80 years old, respectively. She talks to them once every three 
or four months. Her husband talks to them more frequently. (Tr. 22) They talk about 
family health issues. Applicant’s in-laws are retired. She does not support them 
financially. Her mother-in-law does not speak English. They are not savvy with 
technology and do not know the nature of Applicant’s work. (Tr. 23) 
 
Applicant’s nephew is a citizen and resident of India. He is the son of a sister. He 
is just a few years younger than she is. She and her daughter see him when they visit 
India. She speaks to him about two or three times a year. They converse about their 
children and school activities. (Tr. 23) He has no connection to the Indian government. 
She does not provide him with any monetary support. Applicant has never expressed to 
him anything related to her work. (Tr. 24) 
 
Applicant has a bank account in India with approximately $5,000. She opened 
the account in 2007 or 2008. The account was used for local currency when she and 
her husband travelled to India. (Tr. 24) Applicant had no idea that it could be an issue. 
Once she received the SOR, she told the bank she wanted to close the account. She 
was informed that she has to be there physically to do so. It is a joint account with her 
husband and will be closed the next time she or her husband goes to India. (Tr. 25) (AX 
Q) 
 
Applicant owns a property in India which is valued at about $6,000.  When her 
mother died, she was gifted this property from her mother. The land does not generate 
any income. Applicant has no emotional attachment to the land and she has no 
intention of using it in the future. The land in India is an insignificant part of holdings, 
given her assets in the United States. The process of selling land in India is time 
consuming and bureaucratic.   Applicant has to go personally to India to give a power of 
attorney to her brothers or sisters. She has not yet disposed of it due to her time 
constraints in the United States with work.  Also, at the time she did not understand the 
significance of a possible security concern. (Tr. 27) She intends to make the necessary 
arrangements to sell the property when she is next in India.  Applicant’s net worth in the 
United States is significantly greater as described below. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant submitted seven letters of recommendation from employers, friends, 
colleagues, and neighbors. She is described as highly professional and trustworthy. She 
demonstrates the highest character. She has great knowledge and experience and 
produces high quality work. Applicant is involved with school and community activities. 
She is kind and courteous. A former employer, who has known her for nine years, 
describes Applicant as a person who has worked on sensitive projects and sensitive 
information. She is respectful of privacy, rules and restrictions. She possesses a great 
deal of integrity. (AX AA) 
 
Applicant has received numerous awards, certificates, and letters of recognition 
over the years. (AX D, AX F)  Her performance evaluations reveal she is a recognized 
leader with the software department. She has a stellar reputation with clients. (AX D) 
She received a Certificate of Community Service from a charitable foundation for 2013 
for the many services she has provided to the community. (AX H) 
 
As to the Indian Identification Card issued in 2007, Applicant believed it was a 
long term visa. It allowed her to travel to India easier. She used it in 2013 when her 
father became ill. She cancelled her Indian passport in 2007 after achieving her U.S. 
citizenship. She does not have dual citizenship. She always uses her U.S. passport 
when traveling. (AX R)  
 
The SOR alleged a security concern because Applicant admits that she has an 
PIO card. She was credible explaining that the card is nothing more than a visitor visa 
with no expiration date and no limitations on how frequently she can travel to India. 
Given her father’s current health condition, and the number of times Applicant has had 
to visit India when her mother was ill before dying, the regular tourist visa would not 
have been a suitable option as it does not permit frequent visits to India. The identity 
card is a copy of her Indian visa that is stamped on her U.S. passport. Applicant travels 
on her U.S. passport and she surrendered her Indian passport in 2007.   
 
  Applicant and her husband own a home in the United States. (AX M) Her net 
worth is approximately $1.2 million. (AX N), AX O) They have savings and retirement 
accounts in the United States. (AX K, AX L) This is in stark contrast to the bank account 
and land in India. 
 
  Applicant explained at the hearing that she came to the United States in 1996 to 
work and complete her education. As soon as she and her husband were eligible, they 
became U.S. citizens and embraced their U.S. citizenship. They started a family and 
have two adult daughters. Applicant is proud of her career in the United States. She has 
received recommendations from her employers and her clients over the years. She is a 
dedicated, hardworking American. She plans to live the rest of her life in the United 
States, and raise and educate her children in the United States. She has roots in the 
United States both professionally and personally. Her husband and children are with her 
in the United States. She feels blessed to be in the United States and has been a 
productive part of the society. She has never had any legal difficulties. She is fiscally 
responsible. She values integrity, honesty, and courage. She has been a good daughter 
 
5 
 
 
to her parents, a good mother to her daughters, a good wife to her husband and a good 
neighbor in her community. She knows that her family in India also love the United 
States and would not cause anything that would harm the interests of the United States. 
Applicant has worked her adult life in the United States and has deep and long-term 
relationships.  She has provided service to the U.S. Government through her work with 
government contractors. Applicant was credible when she explained that, in the unlikely 
situation that there would be pressure on her or her family, she would immediately 
contact her facility security officer.  She noted that she has had extensive training in 
security measures. 
 
Administrative Notice  
 
 India is a multiparty, federal, parliamentary democracy, with a bicameral 
parliament and a population of approximately 1.1 billion. Its political history since it 
gained independence from Great Britain in 1947 has included several armed conflicts 
with Pakistan, assassinations of two prime ministers, sporadic outbreaks of religious 
riots, and violent attacks by several separatist and terrorist groups in different parts of 
the country. There is a continuing threat from terrorism throughout the country, including 
attacks on targets where U.S. citizens or Westerners are known to congregate or visit.  
 
 India’s size, population, and strategic location give it a prominent voice in 
international affairs. India has always been an active member of the United Nations. 
Starting this year, it is a non-permanent member of the Security Council, and it seeks a 
permanent seat on the Security Council. 
The United States and India have differences over India’s nuclear weapons 
programs, the pace of India’s economic reforms, and India’s bilateral strategic 
partnership with Iran. Nevertheless, the United States recognizes that India is important 
to U.S. strategic interests. The strategic partnership between the United States and 
India is based on shared values such as democracy, pluralism, and the rule of law. 
Since 2002, the United States and India have held a series of substantive combined 
exercises involving all military services.  
The United States is India’s largest foreign investment partner. Since December 
2006, direct civilian nuclear commerce with India has been permitted. The two countries 
have a common interest in the free flow of commerce and resources, including through 
the vital sea lanes of the Indian Ocean. 
The United States and India share a common interest in fighting terrorism and in 
creating a strategically stable Asia. They are seeking to foster bilateral relations by 
establishing working groups to address (1) strategic cooperation; (2) energy and climate 
change; (3) education and development; (4) economics, trade, and agriculture; and (5) 
science and technology, health, and innovation.  
 
 In the past, India had long-standing military supply relationships with the Soviet 
Union, and Russia remains India’s largest supplier of military systems and spare parts. 
India is one of many countries engaged in economic intelligence collection and 
 
6 
 
 
industrial espionage directed at the United States. The United States has longstanding 
economic issues with India regarding protection of intellectual property rights and trade 
in dual-use technology. There have been numerous incidents of international 
businesses illegally exporting, or attempting to export restricted, dual-use technology 
from the United States to India. 
 
 The Indian Government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but there are 
serious problems involving abuses by police and security forces. Corruption in the 
police force is pervasive, and police officers often act with impunity. Abuses by police 
and security forces have occurred primarily in criminal investigations and efforts to 
suppress separatist and terrorist groups. There is no evidence that India uses torture or 
abuse against its citizens to extract economic intelligence.  
 
     Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Four disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case.  First, 
a disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). Second, a disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
 
8 
 
 
person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 7(b). Third, a security 
concern may be raised if an applicant is “sharing living quarters with a person or 
persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(d). Fourth, a security 
concern may be raised if “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a 
foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶  7(e).  
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 Applicant has lived and worked in the United States since 1996. She is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant’s husband and children reside in the United States. 
Her daughters are U.S. citizens and her husband is a U.S. citizen. 
 
Applicant’s father, three brothers, two sisters, a nephew, mother-in-law and a 
father-in-law are citizens and residents of India.  A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption 
that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of 
the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection to family members who are citizen-
residents of India. Her contact with her father, brothers, sisters, nephew, and in-laws 
ranges from monthly to yearly. Applicant has not rebutted this presumption.  
 
After considering the totality of Applicant’s family ties to India as well as each 
individual tie, I conclude that Applicant’s family ties are sufficient to raise a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Applicant 
traveled to India to see her mother and father. She saw them when they visited the 
 
9 
 
 
United States. Based on all these circumstances, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and 
(d) are raised.  Because of Applicant’s foreign national bank account in India and her 
property, I conclude that AG ¶ 7(e) is relevant. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). India engages in economic and industrial espionage, and it has 
been involved in incidents involving illegal importation of restricted, dual-use technology 
from the United States. Applicant’s father, brothers, sisters, nephew, and mother-in-law, 
and father-in-law are citizens and residents of India. For these reasons, I conclude that 
AG ¶ 8(a) is not fully established.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant’s ties to the United States weigh in her favor when evaluating the question of 
exploitation or potential conflicts of interest based on ties to India. She has worked with 
government contractors for many years. She chose to become a U.S. citizen, even 
though it resulted in her loss of her Indian citizenship. She and her husband have 
personal assets, including a home, in the United States worth more than $1.2 million. 
Applicant and her husband surrendered their Indian passports and use their U.S. 
passports. I conclude that Applicant would resolve any conflict between the interests of 
the United States and her family in India in favor of the United States. Thus, I conclude 
that AG ¶ 8(b) is established.  
 
 The bank account Applicant maintains in India has a balance of $5,000. She 
uses it for local currency when she travels to India. She intends to close the bank 
account and has begun the process. Her Indian property is valued at $6,000, which is 
substantially less than the value of her U.S. assets. She inherited the property and has 
no emotional ties to it. Her U.S. funds are substantial and they far outweigh her financial 
interest in India. It is unlikely that the above matters could be used effectively to 
manipulate her. AG 8(f) applies. 
 
Whole-Person 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
10 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen who has lived in the United States since 
1996. She and her husband reside in the United States with their two daughters who 
are U.S. citizens. Her husband is a U.S. citizen. Applicant was articulate, candid, 
sincere, and credible at the hearing. She and her husband still have cultural, family, and 
emotional attachments to India, but they see the United States as the home for their 
family. Applicant has been successful in the defense contracting business for many 
years.  Her current employer recommends her for her professionalism and integrity.  
 
 Applicant chose to leave her home and emigrate from India in search of career 
opportunities. She wanted to provide for her family in the United States. She has 
worked hard in the information technology field and has received praise for her work 
ethic and accomplishments. Applicant purchased a home and has significant assets in 
the United States.  
 
 Applicant’s foreign contacts represented a security concern because of the 
potential for conflicts of interest and exploitation. However, Applicant’s family has no 
connections with the Indian government. Her land and bank account are in India are 
outweighed by her substantial U.S. financial interests. She is also beginning a process 
to rid herself of those assets. 
 
 India is a partner of the United States in the global war on terrorism. While 
terrorism and some domestic unrest exist within some areas of India, none of it appears 
to threaten the enclave in which Applicant’s family and property are located. There is no 
evidence that any of the individuals at issue are involved with, or under scrutiny, by 
interests antithetical to the United States. Applicant returned to India to visit her ill 
mother. 
 
 Regarding Applicant’s life in the United States, she is an American citizen, with a 
stable family, social, and professional life. Her life is focused here. She is admired by 
her peers. She and her husband intend to continue their lives in the United States. 
There is no evidence indicating that she may be manipulated or induced to help a 
 
11 
 
 
foreign power or interest. She credibly stated she would report any attempts to influence 
her to her security officer. In light of these facts and the country at issue, I find that 
Applicant successfully mitigated foreign influence concerns.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude she 
has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:     For Applicant 
 
  
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
