 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-00006 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 15, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On June 26, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F and E.  The SOR 
detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be granted or denied. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On July 16, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On September 1, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On September 14, 2015, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On September 22, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for October 6, 2015. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
GE 12, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and did 
not offer any exhibits. On October 15, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
I held the record open until October 23, 2015 to afford the Applicant an opportunity to 
submit additional evidence, and he did not submit any evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.c – 1.g, 2.a – 2.f; and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.h 
– 1.p, and 2.g – 2.i. After a thorough review of the record, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is 42 years old, unemployed, and has a pending application to work as 
a customer service representative for a defense contractor. He seeks a security 
clearance as a condition of employment. Applicant was most recently employed as an 
“order filler” at a large box store chain and was unable to work after he had a knee 
replacement in December 2015. (Tr. 21-23; GE 1) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1991. He was awarded a certificate 
in medical billing and coding from a career college in December 2013. (Tr. 23-24; GE 1) 
Applicant served in the U.S. Navy from June 1991 to September 2009, and was 
discharged with an other than honorable (OTH) discharge as an aviation ordinance 
airman (pay grade E-3) (Tr. 24-26, 31; GE 1) 
 
Applicant married in August 2010 and divorced in January 2013. He has a nine-
year-old son, who lives with his mother -- an active duty Navy Chief Logistics Specialist 
(pay grade E-7), currently stationed overseas. Applicant does not pay child support to 
his son’s mother. (Tr. 27-34; GE 1) 
 
Financial Considerations   
 
Security concerns were identified under this Guideline following applicant’s 
submission of his April 2014 SF-86. Specifically, Applicant’s SOR alleges 16 separate 
debts totaling $38,661. These debts range from an $86 cell phone collection account to 
a $13,768 charged-off account for a repossessed automobile. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.p; GE 10 
– GE 12) 
 
During cross-examination, Department Counsel discussed each debt with 
Applicant. Applicant provided a variety of responses regarding debt status to include 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
that he did not recognize the debt, that the debt was not valid, that the debts were 
incurred by an unauthorized person or persons, or that he did not have enough money 
to pay the debt. Currently, Applicant’s sole source of income is a monthly Veteran’s 
Administration disability of $1,856. Applicant did not submit any documentation during 
his hearing or post-hearing that he had made any payments, settlements, attempts to 
contact creditors, attempts to dispute debts, or otherwise resolve any debts alleged. 
(GE 10- GE 12; Tr. 64-80)  
 
During Applicant’s July 2014 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject 
Interview (OPM PSI), Applicant discussed his indebtedness with the OPM agent. During 
that interview, Applicant claimed that he “did not know any information” about the 
majority of these debts. However, he stated that he planned “to follow up with these 
accounts and pay them if needed.” (GE 2; Tr. 66) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Security concerns were identified under this Guideline following applicant’s 
submission of his April 2014 SF-86. The conduct alleged included six separate criminal 
acts or allegations of criminal acts and three separate falsifications of his April 2014 SF-
86.  
 
The criminal acts or allegations of criminal acts consist of:  
 
(1) In July 1997, Applicant was charged with assault and battery on a family 
member. The charges were later dismissed. (SOR ¶ 2.a; GE 4, GE 7); (2) In May 2000, 
Applicant was charged with rape, a felony, and referred to an Article 32 Investigation. 
The rape charge was “dropped.” Following the Article 32 Investigation, Applicant was 
ultimately awarded non-judicial punishment and found guilty of false official statement 
and adultery. (SOR ¶ 2.b; GE 4, GE 5, GE 7);    
 
(3) In August 2002, Applicant was charged with assault and battery on a family 
member. The charge was nolle prosequi. (SOR ¶ 2.c; GE 4); (4) In March 2007, 
Applicant was charged with assault on a family member. He was convicted of this 
offense. (SOR ¶ 2.d; GE 4, GE 8); (5) In January 2008, Applicant was charged with 
simple assault. He was given a deferred finding disposition. (SOR ¶ 2.e; GE 4, GE 9);   
and  
 
(6) In June 2009, at a court-martial, Applicant was convicted of disrespect toward 
a superior commissioned officer, committing assault, communicating a threat, and 
provoking speech and gestures. Applicant testified that these charges stem from a 
verbal altercation with a woman he encountered when he dropped off his son at the 
child development center. The woman, Applicant claimed, was in civilian clothes and 
unknown to him, and started “raising her voice” at him and he “went in protective mode, 
because of [his] son.” He was sentenced to 89 days confinement and to be reduced 
from pay grade E-6 to E-3. After Applicant served his sentence, he was referred to an 
administrative board for misconduct and was separated from the naval service with an 
other than honorable discharge. (SOR ¶ 2.f; Tr. 31-32, 34-52; GE 6) 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The three falsification allegations stemming from Applicant’s April 2014 SF-86 
are: 
 
 (1) when Applicant was asked whether he had ever been charged with a felony, 
he answered “no.” Applicant claimed that he was told by a Naval Criminal Investigative 
Service agent that his 2000 rape charge, later dismissed, was a “class 6 misdemeanor,” 
and that he believed he answered the question truthfully. (SOR ¶ 2.g; Tr. 53-54; GE 1);    
 
(2) when Applicant was asked whether he had ever had a security clearance 
denied, he answered “no.” In May 2004, the Department of the Navy Central 
Adjudication Facility (DON CAF) issued Applicant a final denial of security clearance 
letter, which Applicant acknowledged. The security concerns forming the basis for 
denying Applicant his security clearance at that time was sexual behavior, personal 
conduct, financial considerations, and criminal conduct. He claimed that he answered 
the question correctly on his SF-86 and is not sure what happened, but opined that his 
answer may have defaulted back to a “no” answer. (SOR ¶ 2.h; Tr. 54-56; GE 1, GE 7);    
 
(3) when Applicant was asked in the past seven years whether he had defaulted 
on any type of loan, had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency, had any 
account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed, 
or whether he had ever been 120 delinquent on any debt not previously entered, he 
answered “no” failing to disclose the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.p. Applicant claimed 
that he was familiar with the security clearance application process, and he would not 
have knowingly denied having a debt that he did have. He opined that the on-line 
program “does have errors” and that his answer may have defaulted back to a “no” 
answer.  (SOR ¶ 2.i; Tr. 56-64; GE 1)  
 
Applicant signed the certification section of his SF-86 stating that his statements 
were true, complete, and correct.  (GE 1) It is also noted that among the reasons DON 
CAF denied Applicant’s security clearance in May 2004 was for falsifying his security 
clearance application by failing to list any unpaid judgments or any 180 or 90 days 
delinquent accounts, and for failing to list his rape charge. (GE 7)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant did not submit any character evidence during the hearing or post-
hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”   
 
In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The evidence establishes the validity of the allegations and 
the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about 
the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there is 
more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. Therefore, 
his debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)).  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant receives partial credit because he has been unable 
to work since knee replacement in December 2015. However, Applicant is precluded 
from receiving full credit under this mitigating condition because many of these debts 
originated before his knee replacement and the apparent lack of progress in resolving or 
attempting to resolve his remaining unmitigated debts, discussed supra.1 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable because there is no record evidence that Applicant 
sought financial counseling. Despite having been provided with an opportunity to do so, 
Applicant did not provide documentation that any of his debts are under control. AG ¶ 
20(d) is not applicable because there Applicant submitted no documentation that any of 
his debts were resolved or were in the process of getting resolved.2 AG ¶ 20(e) is not 
applicable.  
                                            
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
 
2
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 With that said, a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts.3 
Rather the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness consistent with the security guidelines in the Directive. In evaluating 
Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has established the following standard: 
 
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has 
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant 
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating 
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR.4 
 
Applicant failed to submit sufficient evidence to supplement the record with 
relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, articulate his position, and 
mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer evidence of financial 
counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to address identified 
delinquent debt. Considering the record evidence as a whole,5 financial considerations 
security concerns remain. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
                                            
3
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
4
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotation marks omitted). 
 
5
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 16 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
  
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information.  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(c), and 
16(d), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions. 
 
  AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s 12-year span of criminal 
behavior raises a significant security concern about his judgment and willingness to 
follow rules and regulations. Also of concern is his failure to list required information 
pertaining to his finances, past criminal behavior, and security clearance history. His 
explanations for failing to list such information are not credible especially in light of his 
previously having been denied a security clearance in May 2004 for similar behavior. 
Applicant was a mature adult and experienced with the security clearance process at 
the time he completed his security clearance application. His past behavior and failure 
to list required information on his security clearance application brings into question his 
ability to exercise good judgment so much so that he cannot be trusted to make sound 
decisions, and thus should not be trusted to safeguard classified information.  
 
One additional comment is worthy of note. Applicant’s loyalty and patriotism are 
not at issue in these proceedings. Section 7 of the Executive Order 10865 specifically 
provides that industrial security decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
Security clearance decisions cover many characteristics of an applicant other than 
loyalty and patriotism. Nothing in this decision should be considered to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied decision as to 
an Applicant’s loyalty or patriotism. 
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guidelines F and E are incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further 
comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s years of Navy service, except for that portion of his service that led to 
his OTH discharge, weigh in his favor. There is no evidence to suggest that he is not 
currently a law-abiding citizen. However, given the security concerns raised and 
Applicant’s inability to provide sufficient mitigating evidence leaves me with doubts 
regarding his security worthiness. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I 
conclude he has not mitigated the financial considerations or personal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.i:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
