 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00356 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 8, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On August 1, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and referred his case to 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
On September 18, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated November 30, 2015, was provided to him by letter 
dated November 30, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on December 9, 2015. He was 
afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit additional information within the 30-
day period. On March 31, 2015, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.k. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 
1.e, 1.h, 1.i, and 1.j. He neither admitted nor denied SOR ¶ 1.l placing a question mark 
by the allegation, which I consider to be a constructive denial.   
 
Background Information1 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old welder employed by a defense contractor since 
January 2001. He seeks to retain his security clearance as a requirement for his current 
employment. (Items 2, 3)  
 
Applicant was awarded a General Educational Development diploma in 1982. 
There is no record of higher education. Applicant married in 1987 and has three adult 
children. He did not serve in the armed forces. (Items 2, 3) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR lists 12 allegations, consisting of a vehicle repossession and 11 
delinquent debts totaling $19,717. The delinquencies are primarily comprised of credit 
card and consumer debt. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.l; Item 3) Applicant did not provide an 
explanation of any event or events that may have caused his financial difficulties. 
 
In Applicant’s SOR answer, he admitted five allegations, claimed one allegation 
is a duplicate of an allegation he admitted, and denied the remaining six allegations. In 
support of his denial of SOR ¶ 1.a, a charged-off vehicle loan for $10,501, Applicant 
provided pay stubs purporting to indicate that this debt was satisfied through wage 
garnishment. However, his limited documentation fails to show that the garnishment 
was related to his delinquent loan or that the debt was satisfied.  
 
Applicant also denied several allegations claiming that he does not recognize the 
accounts. However, he failed to show that he made any attempts to clear up these 
                                                          
1
 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was 
the most current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
delinquent debts on his credit reports despite being aware of them since his July 2014 
Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview. In sum, Applicant has not 
provided any documentary evidence that any of the debts specified in the SOR have 
been resolved. This remains the case even after receiving Department Counsel’s 
FORM that identified problem areas, and Applicant was given an opportunity to submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. There is no evidence of financial 
counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”   
 
In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented not 
only in his credit reports, but also in the additional evidence contained in the FORM. 
The evidence establishes the validity of the allegations and the disqualifying conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.   
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,2 financial considerations security 
concerns remain. If favorable evidence exists, Applicant did not provide it. None of the 
five financial considerations mitigating conditions above are applicable or partially 
applicable to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the SOR allegations. The available 
information shows that Applicant has taken little or no affirmative action to resolve the 
financial shortcomings identified in his FORM. 
  
With that said, a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts.3 Rather 
the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness 
consistent with the security guidelines in the Directive. In evaluating Guideline F cases, 
the Appeal Board has established the following standard: 
 
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has 
                                                          
2
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
3
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant 
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating 
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR.4 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on an 
explanation lacking sufficient detail to fully establish mitigation, financial considerations 
security concerns remain. 
 
After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating 
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,5 I conclude Applicant did not present 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the Guideline F security concern. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:   Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
4
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotation marks omitted). 
 
5
 AG ¶ 2(a) (1)-(9). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
 
 
