  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-01763
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Adrienne M. Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial problems. His
request for a security clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On September 11, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to renew eligibility for a security clearance required for
his employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not
determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to continue
to receive a security clearance.  1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 At Department Counsel’s request, I have included, as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1, a copy of the December 2,3
2015 letter that forwarded Gx. 1- 5 to Applicant, in accordance with Directive Section E3.1.13.
2
On September 21, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guidelines  for2
financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer)
and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on January 8, 2016, and I
convened the requested hearing on February 9, 2015. The parties appeared as
scheduled. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 5.  Applicant3
testified and presented Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A and B. I received a transcript of the
hearing (Tr.) on February 19, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that, as of the date of the SOR,
Applicant owed $31,025 for ten past-due or delinquent debts (SOR 1.a - 1.j). In
response to the SOR, Applicant denied SOR 1.a - 1.c and 1.h. He admitted the
remaining allegations. Applicant also provided explanatory comments with each
response. In addition to the facts established through Applicant’s admissions, I make
the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 36 years old and works as a mechanic and laborer for a defense
contractor, a job for which he was hired by a different company in February 2001.
Applicant has held a security clearance in connection with his work since 2001. He has
a good reputation in the workplace and has been assigned to different work sites
around the country in connection with his employer’s contract with DOD. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2;
Tr. 4, 38 - 40, 55 - 56)
In 2005 and 2012, Applicant lost income as a result of work slow downs. DOD
customer demand for services did not require a full work week and Applicant could not
earn as much as he might when 40-hour work weeks and even overtime are the norm.
Applicant currently has steady work and it appears that will be the case for at least the
next two years. (Answer; Gx. 2; Tr. 55 - 56)
Until recently, Applicant was not as attentive to his personal finances as he
should have been. When work slowed and he lost income, he found himself
overextended with debts he could not pay. The debt at SOR 1.a was for a civil judgment
in favor of a landlord who evicted Applicant in 2005 for failing to pay his rent. Applicant
satisfied that debt in 2012. (Answer; Gx. 3; Ax. A; Ax. B; Tr. 29 - 31)
In 2012, Applicant required surgery that, for the most part, his medical insurance
covered. The debts alleged at SOR 1.d , 1.e, 1.g and 1.j are for past-due medical bills.
Aside from SOR 1.j, the amounts listed represent his co-pays or other expenses not
3
covered by his medical insurance. In October 2015, Applicant paid the SOR 1.d, 1.e
and 1.g debts, that were held by the same collection agency. The SOR 1.j medical debt
for $693 was for treatment of his knee. After resubmitting the claim to his medical
insurer, Applicant found that he owed only $43. He paid that bill in October 2015.
(Answer; Gx. 2; Ax. B; Tr. 33 - 34, 36 - 37, 47 - 48)
The debt at SOR 1.f was a collection account for a retail credit card. Applicant
averred that he paid the debt in full “over 10 years ago.” The debt at SOR 1.i is for a
delinquent utility bill from his residence in another state until 2012. Applicant also
claimed he has paid that debt, albeit, more recently. Neither debt appears on the most
recent credit reports obtained by the Government. (Answer; Gx. 2 - 5; Ax. A; Tr. 34 - 36,
40 - 41)
In 2005, Applicant’s car was repossessed when Applicant experienced a work
slowdown and loss of income that hindered his ability to make his loan payments. The
$6,529 debt alleged at SOR 1.b is for the remainder after resale of that car. Applicant
has not been contacted about repaying that debt, and he has been unsuccessful in
contacting a creditor who currently holds that debt. Since losing that car, Applicant has
financed the purchase of two cars. Despite having poor credit until recently, he paid off
the first car without difficulty. He bought the used car he currently owns in January 2015
for $31,000. He has not missed any payments and has paid ahead on the loan so that
he now owes less than $19,000. (Answer; Gx. 2 - 5; Tr. 41 - 45)
The two debts alleged at SOR 1.b and 1.h originated with the same creditor.
Applicant denied these allegations and believes they represent only one account – a
delinquent personal loan Applicant obtained in 2003. Applicant stated in his subject
interview in December 2012 that he did not recognize the accounts and was disputing
them with the credit reporting agencies. The debts appear in the oldest of the credit
reports obtained during Applicant’s background investigation but are absent from more
recent reports. He has not paid or otherwise resolved these accounts. (Answer; Gx. 2 -
5; Ax. A; Tr. 31 - 32, 34 - 35, 49 - 51)
Applicant acknowledged that he did not pay close attention to his credit or
personal finances until receiving the SOR. However, his current finances are sound. He
pays his taxes on time, he has no new delinquencies or missed payments since 2012,
and he has a substantial positive cash flow each month after expenses. (Gx. 4; Gx. 5;
Ax. A; Tr. 53 - 56, 61, 67)
Policies
 See Directive, 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).7
4
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.7
5
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support the SOR allegations under this
guideline. The facts established reasonably raise a security concern about Applicant’s
finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, this record supports application of the disqualifying conditions
at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations). Applicant incurred numerous debts during periods of
reduced income and, in part, through poor management of his personal finances. The
debts alleged at SOR 1.b, 1.c, and 1.h remain unresolved.
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s three
largest debts are not resolved. AG ¶ 20(b) applies because much of Applicant’s debt
arose when he lost income due to unforeseen reductions in hours at work. He also
established that he has acted to the best of his abilities to resolve his past-due debts.
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply because Applicant’s current finances are sound, he has
good monthly cash flow, he has not incurred new debts in the past three years, and his
6
work situation is more stable than before. Applicant has also acted to resolve his debts
as they have arisen. On balance, Applicant is likely to continue to resolve his
outstanding debts. Applicant has mitigated the security concerns about his finances.
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a reliable worker who has acted responsibly to resolve his
debts and improve the way he manages his finances. A fair and commonsense
assessment of the record evidence as a whole shows that the doubts about Applicant’s
suitability for access to classified information are resolved.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
                                       
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
