1
                                                             
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-00038
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esquire
May 2, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on July 21, 2014.  On August 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
C and F for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 17, 2015.  He
answered the SOR in writing (Answer) through counsel on November 2, 2015, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge.  The Answer included (AppXs) A
through L, which were subsequently admitted into evidence at the hearing without
objection.  The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request
soon thereafter, and I received the case assignment on January 5, 2016.  DOHA issued
2
a notice of hearing on January 20, 2016, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on
February 9, 2016.  The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 4, which were
received without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf.  DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing (TR) on February 17, 2016.  I granted Applicant’s request to
keep the record open until February 23, 2016, to submit additional matters.  Nothing
further was submitted.  The record closed on February 23, 2016.  Based upon a review
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the factual allegations in the
Subparagraphs of the SOR.  He also provided additional information to support his
request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Applicant is a 55 year old employee of a federal contractor.  (TR at page 15 line
24 to page 16 line 12.)  He was born in Jamaica, initially moved to the United States
when he “was two years old,” moved to Canada with his family as a teenager (13 or 14
years old), and returned to the United States in 1997.  (TR at page 19 line 15~25.)  He
became a U.S. citizen in 2007.  (GX 1 at page 7.)
Guideline C - Foreign Preference
1.a.  Applicant denies that he “currently possesses a Canadian passport.”  When
he applied for a “Security Clearance and found out that . . . [he] really shouldn’t have a
foreign passport,” Applicant surrendered his Canadian passport to the “Government
Security Officer” at his employer’s place of business on or about October 16, 2015.  (TR
at page 18 line 10 to page 20 line 21, and at page 38 line 10 to page 39 line 14.)  This is
evidenced by an email from that Government Security Officer.  (AppX A.)
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
Applicant was unemployed from about December of 2010 to about April of 2012.
(Tr at page 17 lines 3~21, and GX 1 at page 13.)  Thereafter, he was underemployed
until his current employment began in June of 2014.  (Tr at page 17 lines 3~21, and GX
1 at pages 11~12.)  Applicant’s former spouse handled their financial matters, to include
the filing of their tax returns; but with their divorce in November of 2013, she no longer
provided this financial oversight.  (TR at page 21 line 5~10, and GX 1 at pages 22~23.)
This caused the alleged financial difficulties.  He currently has a positive monthly cash
flow of about $1,109.  (AppX I.)
2.a.  Applicant denies that he failed to file his “Federal and state tax returns” for
tax year 2012.  When informed of this possibility by the Government, he confronted his
former spouse as to the allegation.  (TR at page 28 line 15 to page 31 line 25, and at 32
lines 13~19.)  When she admitted to him their delinquency, he filed their 2012 income
3
tax returns in August of 2015, a few days prior to the issuance of the SOR.  (TR at page
39 line 19 to page 40 line 13.)  This is evidenced by those tax returns.  (AppX B.)
2.b.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor B for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $862.  He thought his former spouse had paid this debt.  (TR at page
22 at 1 to page 23 line 1.)  When Applicant discovered this was not the case, he paid it
by a “Cashier’s Check” about a month prior to the date he filed his Answer to the SOR.
(Id.)  This is evidenced by that Cashier’s Check.  (AppX C.)
2.c.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor C for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $539.  He paid this debt by a “Cashier’s Check” about a month prior to
the date he filed his Answer to the SOR.  (Tr at page 23 lines 2~7.)  This is evidenced
by that Cashier’s Check.  (AppX D.)
2.d.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor D for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $322.  He believes he paid this debt, and it does not appear on the
Government’s most recent December 2015 credit report.  (TR at page 23 line 8 to page
24 line 13, AppX E, and GX 4.)  I find that Applicant has addressed this debt.
2.e.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor E for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $589.  In October 2015, he formally disputed this debt as not being his
debt, but he has yet to hear from this creditor.  (TR at page 24 line 14 to page 25 line 7,
and AppXs E and F.)  Furthermore, it does not appear on the Government’s most recent
December 2015 credit report.  (GX 4.)  If it turns out that this is a legitimate debt,
Applicant will pay it.  (TR at page 24 line 14 to page 25 line 7.)
2.f.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor F for a past-due, cable TV
debt in the amount of about $344.  In October 2015, he formally disputed this debt as
not being his debt.  He never had this cable TV service, as it was not available in his
residential area.  (TR at page 26 line 8 to page 27 line 9, and AppX E.)
2.g.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor G for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $331.  He paid this debt as evidenced by correspondence from this
creditor.  (TR at page 27 lines 10~20, and AppX G.)
2.h.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor H for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $272.  He paid this debt by a “Cashier’s Check” about a month prior to
the date he filed his Answer to the SOR.  (Tr at page 27 line 21 to page 28 line 14.)
This is evidenced by that Cashier’s Check.  (AppX H.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
4
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
5
Analysis
Guideline C - Foreign Preference
Paragraph 9 of the adjudicative guidelines sets out the security concern relating
to Foreign Preference:
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States.
Subparagraph 10(a)(1) is applicable: “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation
of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a
family member.  This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign
passport.”  Here, the Applicant, a naturalized citizen, possessed a Canadian passport.
This is clearly countered, however, by the mitigating conditions found under
Subparagraph 11(e), the Applicant’s “passport has been . . . surrendered to the
cognizant security authority,” his Government Security Officer.  Foreign Preference is
found for Applicant.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The guideline notes two conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraphs 19(a) and 19(c) an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.” may raise security concerns.  Applicant had
undisputed delinquent debts.  Under Subparagraph 19(g) “failure to file annual Federal,
state . . . income tax returns as required” may also raise security concerns.  Applicant
failed to file his 2012 tax returns in a timely fashion.  However, I find two countervailing
Mitigating Conditions that are applicable here.  Under Subparagraph 20 (b), it may be
mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment. . . divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”  Applicant’s failure to file tax
returns in a timely fashion and his delinquent debts can be attributed to his divorce and
his loss of income during an extended period of unemployment or underemployment.
6
Under Subparagraph 20 (d), it may also be mitigating where “the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”  Applicant has
filed his delinquent income tax returns, and is current with his debts.  Financial
Considerations is found for Applicant.
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept.
The administrative judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Applicant is well respected in the
workplace.  (AppX L.)  The record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  For this reason, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his alleged Foreign
Preference and Financial Considerations, under the whole-person concept.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b. For Applicant
7
Subparagraph 2.c. For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f. For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.g. For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.h. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
