                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                          
           ----------------------------------                  )     ISCR  Case No.  15-00053           
                                                              )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq.  Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns covering foreign preference and foreign
influence. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On July 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why the DOD
could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security
clearance. The DOD CAF recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs)
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 16, 2015, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on October 20, 2015, and was scheduled for hearing on
November 19, 2015. The hearing was convened on that date. At hearing, the
Government's case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1-4). Applicant relied on one witness
(himself) and 18 exhibits (AEs A-R). Three documents (HEs 1-3) were admitted as
hearing exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 4, 2015.  
Department Counsel requested I take official notice of facts covered by identified
source documents. Source documents were identified as follows in the Government’s
Administrative Notice: Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and
Industrial Espionage - 2008, Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive (July
2009); Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial
Espionage-2000, Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive (undated); 2015
Special 301 Report, U.S. Trade Representative (2015); Foreign Spies Stealing U.S.
Economic Secrets in Cyberspace, Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection
and Industrial Espionage, 2009-2011, Office of the National Counterintelligence
Executive (October 2011); and Summary of Major U.S. Espionage, Economic
Espionage, Trade Secret and Embargo-Related Criminal Cases, January 2008 to the
Present (January 2015).
Other source documents identified included the following documents: Press
Release, Six Defendants Indicted in Alleged Conspiracy to Bribe Government Officials
in India to Mine Titanium Minerals, U.S. Department of Justice (April 2014); Press
Release, Former Owner of Defense Contracting Business Pleads Guilty to Illegally
Exporting Military Blue Prints to India Without a License, U.S. Department of Justice
(April 2015); United States-India Peaceful Atomic Energy Cooperation and U.S.
Additional Protocol Implementation, Report of the committee on Foreign Relations, Rep.
109-288 to Accompany S. 3709 (undated); Background Note: India, U.S. Department of
State (April 2012); and Country Information, India, U.S. Department of State (April
2015); C
Additional source documents identified were the following: Country Reports on
Terrorism 2014, Chapter 2-Country Reports, U.S. Department of State (2014); 2008
Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 2-Country Reports, U.S. Department of State
(April 2009); Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2014: India, U.S.
Department of State (2014); Worldwide Caution, U.S. Department of State (July 2015);
and  CRS Report for Congress: India-U.S. Relations: Strategic Issues, Congressional
Research Service (January 2013).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings. Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or
government reports that are well known. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01
(Bender & Co. 2006). After timely receipt of the requested source documents within the
post-hearing time (three days) afforded Department Counsel for keeping the record
open, I took administrative notice of the 14 source documents covered by Department
3
Counsel’s Administrative Notice, addressing the geopolitical situation in India, consistent
with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid. (Tr. 24-26)
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly has (a) a mother and father who are
citizens and residents of India; (b) sisters who are citizens and residents of India; (c) a
father-in-law and mother-in-law who are citizens and residents of India; and (d) a
spouse who maintains a public fund in India that is worth at least $49,000.  Allegedly,
Applicant’s family and business interests in India present heightened security risks to
the United States.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations, with some
qualifications and explanations. He claimed his mother passed away in January 1985,
and his father still resides in India with no plans to come to the United States. He
claimed he has just one sister who is a citizen and resident of India, with his older sister
having become a citizen and resident of the United States. 
Applicant claimed his father-in-law and mother-in-law have lived all of their lives
in India; his father-in-law owns a well-established business, while his mother-in-law is a
homemaker. He claimed his wife sold her provident fund (acquired in 1986) in August
2015. Applicant claimed that he and his wife have lived in the United States with their
two children since 1997 and currently own their own house.  And he claimed that he and
his wife have accumulated their own 401(k) retirement accounts, which hold over
$700,000 in invested funds. Altogether, Applicant claimed to have approximately $1.1
million in net assets and plans to retire with his wife in the United States. Applicant also
claimed he has established college accounts for his children, who plan to attend U.S.
graduate schools.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old senior principal of a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. (Ges 1 and 4; Tr. 51) The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant was born and raised in India (an Indian citizen by birth). He immigrated
to the United States in December 1997. (GE 1; Tr. 81) He met his wife in India and
married her in 1996. (GEs 1 and 4 and AE R; Tr. 50, 81) His wife (born and raised in
India to parents of Indian descent) immigrated to the United States in 1998. (GEs 1 and
2). Both became naturalized U.S. citizens in 2006. (GE 1) Applicant’s two children are
U.S. citizens: one by naturalization (age 17) and the other by birth (age 13).  Neither
holds any dual citizenship with any other country. (GEs 1 and 2 and AE Q; Tr. 52)
4
Applicant earned his high school diploma in India in April 1989. He earned
bachelor’s and master’s degrees in computer technology in 1995 from Indian
universities. (GE 1 and AEs O and R; Tr. 75) He claims no military service in either India
or the United States. (GE 1 and AE R) 
Before immigrating to the United States, Applicant never voted in Indian
elections. (Tr. 85) Since becoming a U.S. citizen in 2006, he has voted in U.S. elections.
(Tr. 80-81) 
Applicant has worked for his present employer since October 2008 and currently
holds a position as a senior principal with his company. (GEs 1 and 4) Previously, he
held manager positions with other firms that did not have contracts with other federal
agencies that required a security clearance. (GEs 1 and 4)
Applicant’s mother, a homemaker with no ties to the Indian government or
military, passed away in January 1985. (GEs 1 and 2 and AE B; Tr. 68, 83) His father is
retired and still resides in India in his own home, with no known plans to come to the
United States. Before his retirement, he was employed as an engineer for a public
works department of an Indian province. (Tr. 73-74) None his father’s projects covered
classified materials that required approvals from the Indian government. (GE 4) His
father never served in the Indian military or sought or held an elected position. He has
no affiliations with the Indian government or military and has never received any threats
or pressure from Indian government or military officials. (GE 4) His father has no
financial interests in India besides his home. (GE 4) Applicant provides little financial
support to his father. (Tr. 74)
Applicant has just one sister who is a citizen and resident of India, and she
resides there with her husband (a practicing dentist) and two daughters. (GEs 1 and 2;
Tr. 57-58, 69) His sister is a fashion designer who provides no services to the Indian
government. (GE 4) She has no affiliations with the Indian government or military. (GE
2) Applicant provides no financial assistance to this sister or her husband. (Tr. 58)
Applicant’s older sister immigrated to the United States in 1987 and became a
citizen and resident of the United States. (GEs 1-2 and 4: Tr. 56)  She and her husband
currently live in the United States, and she works as a business analyst for a U.S.
company. (GE 2; Tr. 56-57)
Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of India
and have lived all of their lives in India. (GEs -2 and 4; Tr. 59) His father-in-law owns a
well-established business; while his mother-in-law is a homemaker. (GE 4; Tr. 60)
Neither of Applicant’s wife’s parents have any affiliations with the Indian government or
military. (GEs  2 and 4; Tr. 59)  
Neither Applicant nor his wife has any business or property interests in India, or
plans to relocate to India. (GEs 2 and 4; Tr. 58) While his wife once maintained a
provident public fund worth around $49,000, she closed the account in March  2015 and
5
gifted the money to her parents. (GE 3 and AE K; Tr. 75) She no longer holds any bank
or investment accounts in India.  (AE K; Tr. 61-62) 
Applicant’s family contacts and  travels to India
Applicant communicates with his father by telephone on a weekly basis and visits
him at least once a year to care for his health issues. (GEs 1-2 and 4; Tr. 53-55) When
he travels for his company, he always get prior approval from his program manager. (Tr.
54). However, he has not, to date, traveled abroad for his company.  (Tr. 64) He also
talks to his wife’s parents weekly and visits them when he visits his father. (GE 2) His
wife, though, has more frequent contacts with her parents. 
Applicant maintains phone and email contact with his younger sister in India once
or twice a month. (GE 2; Tr. 70-71) Neither his younger sister nor any of Applicant’s
relatives residing in India have any knowledge of Applicant’s work-related
responsibilities with his U.S. employer. (Tr. 54, 57, 78) 
Applicant’s U.S. assets
Applicant and his wife have considerable U.S. assets. Included are their home
valued at $645,000, with a carried mortgage of $414,246 and monthly mortgage
payments of $2,948. (AE A; Tr. 65)  He and his wife also hold 401(k) retirement
accounts, which hold over $700,000 in invested funds. (AEs A and E) He has
established college accounts for his two daughters, which collectively total more than
$100,000. (AE A; Tr. 65) Altogether, Applicant holds  approximately $1.1 million in net
assets and plans to retire with his wife in the United States. (AEs E-; Tr. 53) Applicant
earns $200,000 a year from his business. (Tr. 51-52) With annual bonuses and stock
options, he can make as much as $280,000 a year. (Tr. 51) Applicant benefits
financially from his wife, who also earns $200,000 a year from free lance software
consulting. (Tr. 79)
Applicant and his wife are current with their federal and state taxes. (AE J; Tr. 53)
He has no pensions or entitlements from India and no inheritance expectancies from his
father or younger sister. 
Country information on India
Considered the world’s largest democratic republic, India is also a very diverse
country, in population, geography, and climate. (Background Note, India, supra, at 2-4)
India is the world’s second most populous country and the world’s seventh largest
country in area. (Id.) India is a constitutional democracy, whose Constitution defines it
as a “sovereign, socialist, secular democratic republic.” (Background Note: India, supra)
It is a “multiparty, federal, parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament” and it
has an historical reputation for respecting the rights of its citizens. See id. 
Human rights problems continue to persist, though, in India. Most notable are
reported police and security force abuses, disappearances, hazardous prison
6
conditions, arbitrary arrests and detention, and lengthy pretrial detentions. Rape,
domestic violence, dowry-related deaths, honor killings, sexual harassment, and
discrimination against women remain serious problems as well. A cited  basic problem
stems from the lack of clear accountability, which too often has resulted in cited human
rights violations going unpunished. See Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for
2014: India, supra, at 1-2 and Administrative Notice, supra, at 6.
Since gaining its independence from Great Britain in 1947, India has been
involved in wars with Pakistan in 1947, 1965, and 1971, and has had to defend itself
against a 1999 intrusion of Pakistani-backed forces into Indian-held territory that nearly
turned into full-scale war. See Background Note: India, supra, at 3-4.  India survived a
1975 declaration of a state of emergency that carried a suspension of many civil
liberties. (Id. at 3) The country has experienced two assassinations of its leaders: Prime
Minister Indira Ghandi in October 1984 and Prime Minister Rajiv Ghandi in May 1991.
(id)  More recently, India has been confronted with sporadic outbreaks of religious riots
that resulted in numerous deaths and casualties, and violent attacks by separatist
groups in various parts of the country. (Id.) The Indian states of Jammu and Kashmir
remain unstable, and a number of of terrorist groups operate there, particularly along
the line of control separating Indian and Pakistani-controlled Kashmir. (Id.)
India continues to experience terrorist and insurgent activities that may affect
U.S. citizens. See Country Information, India, supra, at 2-8. Anti-Western terrorist
groups are active, and India remains subject to violent terrorist attacks. Terrorist attacks
on multiple locations in Mumbai in 2008, targeting areas frequented by Westerners,
killing 183 people, is a case in point. See  Country Reports on Terrorism 2014, Chapter
2-Country Reports, supra, at 5 and Administrative Notice, supra at 5.
Before its demise in the early 1990s, the Soviet Union was India’s principal and
most reliable trading partner, and an important source of economic and military
assistance. (Background Note: India, supra, at 8-9) U.S. efforts to strengthen its ties
with India have been hampered some by U.S. differences over India’s nuclear weapons
programs, its cooperation with the Iranian military, its lack of a negotiated resolution of
the Kashmir dispute with Pakistan, its long-standing military supply relationships with
the old Soviet Union and Russia, and the pace of India’s efforts to achieve long-planned
economic reforms. (Background Note, India, supra; CRS Report for Congress: India-
U.S. Relations, supra, at 11, 22-23, and 45) Still, the United States and India share a
number of security perspectives, including those on China, Asian balance of power
calculations, terrorism, Afghanistan, maritime issues, and weapons of mass destruction.
(Id., at 43-44)
Important U.S. concerns have been raised, too, over reported cases involving
government-sponsored entities and their illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of
unlicensed, controlled products to India, including: (1) products associated with the
development of ballistic missiles, as well as space-launch vehicles and combat fighter
jets; (2) nuclear testing equipment; (3) microwave amplifiers; (5) illegal mining of
titanium; (6) unlicensed military blueprints; and (6) controlled high-tech testing
equipment that posed potential risks of diversion to a weapons of mass destruction
7
program. See  Summary of Major U.S. Espionage, Economic Espionage, Trade Secret
and Embargo-Related Criminal Cases, January 2008 to the Present, supra, at 89-91;
Administrative Notice, supra, at 3, and the specific cases referenced, supra.   
Dual use equipment that can be used in military and civilian aircraft are of
concern, too. Specifically, dual use equipment to extract engine vibration information;
equipment that can be used to manufacture material that improves the accuracy of
strategic ballistic missiles with nuclear capabilities; animation systems that can be
diverted to weapons of mass destruction technology; nuclear pulse generators to two
Indian entities capable of mounting diversion to the development of weapons of mass
destruction or missiles; and heat treating containers to an Indian entity capable of
mounting diversion to the development of weapons of mass destruction or missiles all
present areas of security concerns for the United States. See  Summary of Major U.S.
Espionage, Economic Espionage, Trade Secret and Embargo-Related Criminal Cases,
January 2008 to the Present, supra, at 89-91; Administrative Notice, supra, at 3, and the
specific cases referenced, supra.   
Other cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of U.S.
restricted dual use technology to India have included unlicensed export equipment used
to manufacture carbon-carbon components with applications in ballistic missiles to the
export of equipment used by a Indian laboratory involved with developing India’s
principal nuclear-capable ballistic missiles; illegal export of pulse non-proliferation
reasons; and unauthorized export of U.S. military list hardware to India. See  Summary
of Major U.S. Espionage, Economic Espionage, Trade Secret and Embargo-Related
Criminal Cases, January 2008 to the Present, supra, at 89-91; Administrative Notice,
supra, at 3, and the specific cases referenced, supra.   
Recommended travel restrictions do exist for U.S. citizens visiting India. The
State Department cautions U.S. citizens to avoid travel in general (with several noted
exceptions) to the state of Jammu & Kashmir.  Extremists have targeted and attempted
attacks on subways and rail systems, aviation, and maritime services. See Country
Information, India, supra, at 2-8; Worldwide Caution, supra, at 1-2; and Administrative
Notice, supra, at 5. 
Endorsements
Applicant has good character references from his business managers with his
current employer. (AE P) They extolled his strong work ethic and contributions to his
company and never found any reason to doubt or question him. (AE P) They credited
Applicant with being an outstanding citizen and proactive member of his community.
Former colleagues similarly characterized Applicant as a trusted advisor and a valued
resource. (AE P) 
Applicant’s performance evaluations for 2012 through 2014 reflect highly valued
service to his company. He was credited meeting or exceeding expectations in all of the
most rating categories. (AE L) Applicant was awarded certificates of completion of
courses in business ethics and special access programs. (AE M)
8
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) cases. These
guidelines take into account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for
the individual applicant, as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, revoked, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ (c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) .
AG ¶ 2(a) is intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial commonsense
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the
context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a
sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
     
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
9
Adjudication under the this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.   See AG ¶ 6
Burd e  n    o  f  P roof
Under the AGs, a decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance
may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the
national interest. Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a
commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate
determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part,
on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515
U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). 
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of Executive Order 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate
burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. 
“[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). And because
all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the national interest, the burden of
persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis  
Applicant is a senior principal for a U.S.-based defense contractor. He immigrated
to the United States in 1997 and is married to a woman of Indian descent who
immigrated to the United States in 1998. Both Applicant and his wife became naturalized
10
U.S. citizens in 2006. While Applicant’s father, youngest sister, and his wife’s parents
are citizen/residents of India, his wife and children and oldest sister reside in the United
States with U.S. citizenship. Trust concerns relate to foreign influence relative to
Applicant’s (a) father, sister, and in-laws having citizenship and residence in India and
(b) his wife’s controlling investment funds in India. 
Applicant’s wife and family have deep roots in India, a country rich in history and
socio/political traditions, constitutional government and institutional respect for human
rights, intermixed with periodic reports of abuses by police and government authorities.
Despite encouraging efforts in the development of strategic partnerships between India
and the U.S. in recent years, there have been cited instances of illegal and damaging
export practices by Indian firms associated with the Indian government to create dual
use diversion risks.  
The Government urges security concerns over risks that Applicant’s father and
sister and his wife’s parents, all citizens and residents of India, might be subject to undue
foreign influence by Indian government authorities to access classified information in
Applicant’s possession or control. Because Applicant’s immediate family members and
in-laws have Indian citizenship by birth and reside in India, they present potential
heightened security risks covered by disqualifying condition  (DC) ¶ 7(a), “contact with a
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is
a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” of the AGs for
foreign influence. The citizenship/residence status of these family members in India pose
some potential concerns for Applicant because of the risks of undue foreign influence
that could potentially impact the privacy interests subject to Applicant’s control. 
Because neither Applicant’s wife nor her family members residing in India have
any identified Indian government or military service affiliation, no consideration of DC  ¶
7(b), “connection to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a
potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information,” or  DC  ¶ 7(d), “sharing living quarters with a
person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” have some
potential application. To be sure, neither Applicant’s father, sister, or in-law’s residing in
India have any history of being subjected to any coercion or influence, or appear to be
vulnerable to the same. Considering all of the circumstances present, no more than
partial application of these disqualifying conditions are warranted. 
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or mandate
particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of foreign
countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another. The AGs take into account the country’s demonstrated relations
with the United States as an important consideration in gauging whether the particular
relatives with citizenship, residency, and foreign assets elsewhere create a heightened
11
security risk. The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign regime involved
do matter. 
While the reports of illegal exporting of potential dual-use technology to India is a
matter of some security concern to the United States, India’s emergent status as a
strategic partner of the United States in controlling the proliferation of nuclear weapons is
an important political development that serves to promote political solidarity and reduce
security risks and concerns between the two nuclear powers.
Based on his case-specific circumstances, MC ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the
persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States,” is available to Applicant. Neither Applicant’s father and sister nor his
wife’s parents residing in India pose heightened security risks that could subject them to
potential pressures and influence from Indian government and military officials. Further,
since his wife has since closed her investment account in India, she no longer holds
foreign assets that could pose a risk of compromise, coercion, or influence.
Another mitigating condition available to Applicant is MC ¶ 8(b): “there is no
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”
Applicant’s demonstrated loyalty and professional commitments to the United States are
well demonstrated and sufficient under these circumstances to neutralize any potential
conflicts that are related to his relationships with his immediate family members and in-
laws. MC ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create risk for foreign influence or
exploitation,” has some applicability, too, based on Applicant’s relatively infrequent
contacts with his wife’s family members residing in India.   
 
One other mitigating condition has some limited application to Applicant’s
situation. MC ¶ 8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with existing agency
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons,
groups, or organizations from a foreign country,” partially applies as well. Both Applicant
and his program manager express confidence in Applicant’s stated commitment to
continue to report any foreign contacts with members of his family to his employer’s
security department. The lack of a developed track record of reporting precludes
Applicant from benefitting any further from this mitigating condition.
Whole-person assessment is available also to minimize Applicant’s exposure to
potential conflicts of interests with his father, sister, and his wife’s parents. Most
importantly, Applicant is not aware of any risks of coercion, pressure, or influence that
any of his immediate family and his wife’s family members might be exposed to. Further,
12
Applicant is aided by the strong support he has received from his company’s managers
and former colleagues. When combined with his own demonstrated commitments to U.S.
values and security interests, conclusions warrant that the potential risk of coercion,
pressure, or influence being brought to bear on him or any member of his family or his
wife’s family is minimal and mitigated. 
Overall, potential security concerns associated with (a) Applicant's father, sister,
and in-laws having citizenship and residence in India and (b) his wife’s having foreign
investment funds in India are sufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive judgments
about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue influence attributable to his familiar
relationships with his father, sister, and in-laws in India. Favorable conclusions warrant
with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline B.
   
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
13
                  
