 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-01657 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began in 2011 and continue to the present. He 
failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial trustworthiness concerns. 
Based upon a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 6, 2014, Applicant submitted a public trust position application (SF 85P). 
On September 11, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudicative Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 14, 2015 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Department of Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to another administrative judge on 
January 21, 2016, and re-assigned it to me on February 2, 2016. DOHA issued a Notice 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
of Hearing on February 12, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 29, 
2016. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into 
evidence. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E into 
evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objections. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on March 10, 2016. The record remained open until March 21, 2016, to 
give Applicant an opportunity to submit other exhibits. That date was extended to April 
5, 2016, per Applicant’s request. He did not subsequently submit additional exhibits. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the 10 allegations contained in SOR. His 
admissions are incorporated into these findings. 
   
Applicant is 26 years old and married for five years. He and his wife have two 
young children. He has earned a few college credits. After completing high school he 
enlisted in the Army in February 2008. He served on active duty until June 2012. He 
was a sergeant, E-5. He deployed to the Middle East for one year and received a 
Combat Action Badge and a Purple Heart Medal while there. He worked as a in military 
police officer. He held a security clearance while serving. He received a general 
discharge under honorable conditions, as a consequence of being charged with driving 
while intoxicated (DWI). (Tr. 15-17, 19-20, 27; GE 1.) 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties began after he left the Army. He was unemployed 
from June 2012 to October 2012, and for a period in 2013 when he worked for a 
temporary agency. He had taken out some loans while in the military and once he left 
the service, he did not have a decent, steady income and was unable to pay those 
loans. His wife stayed home to care for their young children until recently, further 
reducing their income.    
 
In August 2014 Applicant obtained his current position with a federal contractor. 
He said he has received a promotion and customer appreciation awards. (Tr. 18-19.) 
His supervisor is aware of this hearing and the financial issues that underlie it. (Tr. 21.) 
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from July 2014, December 2014, August 
2015, and February 2016, the SOR alleged 10 delinquent debts totaling $21,410, which 
accumulated between 2011 and 2013. (GE 2, 3, 4, 5.) Applicant is resolving the $776 
debt (SOR ¶ 1.e) with three payments of $256. He made the first one on February 29, 
2016, the date of his hearing. None of the other nine debts are paid or being resolved. 
The two largest debts are automobile repossessions: SOR ¶ 1.d for $7,633, delinquent 
since 2011; and SOR ¶ 1.f for $6,667, delinquent since 2013.1 Applicant was making 
payments on one vehicle listed in SOR ¶ 1.f, but stopped because the car needed a 
new transmission and other repairs, and he did not have enough money to make the 
$450 monthly payments or the repairs. It was subsequently repossessed. (Tr. 35.) The 
other debts include two medical debts, three utility bills, and two miscellaneous debts.  
 
                                            
1 The original amount of the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.d was $19,961. The original amount of the debt listed 
in SOR ¶ 1.f was $13,143. (GE 2.) 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant testified that his hourly rate just increased from $18 to $19 because he 
started working a night shift. His net monthly income is now about $2,694, and includes 
a disability payment of $260 from the Veterans Affairs (VA). His monthly expenses are 
$2,351, leaving about $343 remaining. (Tr. 24; AE C.) He recently took a part-time 
spring coaching position with a local high school. He will earn $2,500 for the coaching 
season, which he intends to use to resolve delinquent debts. His wife just started a 
position and earns $12 an hour. (Tr. 22-23.) Her salary is not included in the budget he 
provided, but he estimated it would add an additional $1,600 per month. (Tr. 25-26.) He 
said that he has not had enough money to pay delinquent debts until his wife started 
working a couple weeks ago. (Tr. 31.)  
 
Applicant intends to pay his delinquent debts as money becomes available. (Tr. 
45.) He plans to contact the creditors for the repossessed automobiles and try to 
negotiate a settlement or monthly payments. (Tr. 42, 52.) He presented evidence that 
he paid off a $5,154 student loan in January 2016, after making small monthly 
payments for many months. (GE 5; AE B.) He paid off a military charge card in 2013. 
(Tr. 49.)  
  
Applicant has not participated in financial or credit counseling, but stated that a 
month ago he contacted a debt consolidation company to inquire about their program 
for managing delinquent debts. He decided not to employ the company because at the 
time his wife did not have a job and they could not afford the monthly payments of $232 
for 48 months. (Tr. 51.) While discussing the debts, he acknowledged that he has not 
contacted any of the creditors, including those relating to two medical bills that may be 
covered through his medical insurance.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, II, and III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. DOD contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.) 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to protected information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.2 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant began accumulating delinquent debts in 2011, which he has been 
unable or unwilling to satisfy to date. The evidence raises both of the above 
trustworthiness concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, 
or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Because Applicant’s debts are ongoing, the evidence does not establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). After leaving the Army in June 2012, he experienced some 
periods of unemployment and underemployment, and his wife did not work because of 
their young children. Those may have been circumstances beyond his control. 
However, he did not produce evidence to demonstrate that he attempted to manage the 
debt while it was accumulating, or take other responsible action, which proof is 
necessary to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). There is no evidence that he 
participated in credit or financial counseling or that his financial problems are under 
control at this time. Thus, AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. He provided evidence that on the 
day of the hearing he made the first payment of three on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. 
He established minimal mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) as to that debt. Applicant did not 
dispute any of the alleged debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent 26-
year-old man, who enlisted in the Army in 2008 after graduating from high school. While 
deployed, he served in combat and received the Purple Heart Medal for a combat-
related injury. Subsequent to leaving military service, he encountered significant 
financial difficulties that underlie this investigation. While he has taken the first steps to 
achieve financial stability, including paying some debts not listed on the SOR, he has 
not yet established a reliable track record of responsibly managing his financial issues. 
The SOR was issued in September 2015 and the hearing was held at the end of 
February 2016, about five months later. In the interim, Applicant contacted only one 
creditor, and made a payment to that creditor on the day of the hearing. After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and circumstances in the 
context of the whole-person, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For these reasons, I conclude that 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under the guideline for 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:      For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f through 1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
                                Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied.      
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
