 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01097 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 21, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 6, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
12, 2016, scheduling the hearing for February 2, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. He did not submit any additional documentary evidence. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 9, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since October 2008. He worked for another defense contractor 
from 2000 to October 2008. He seeks to retain a security clearance. He has a 
bachelor’s degree that was awarded in 1995. He is married with two minor children.1 
 
Applicant developed financial problems in about 2007 when his wife lost her job. 
He prioritized his bills, but he still fell behind on a number of accounts. He had multiple 
accounts with the same financial institution (Bank A), including car loans, a credit card, 
a loan, and a home equity line of credit. Bank A is a membership organization that is 
open to certain groups, primarily the military and their families. Applicant maintained his 
mortgage loan and home equity line of credit payments, but two other accounts with 
Bank A became delinquent.2 
 
Applicant worked with Bank A, and started repaying one of the accounts in 
February 2012. The balance was more than $20,000. He made regular monthly 
payments until the account was paid in July 2014. This debt was not alleged in the 
SOR.3 
 
Applicant had a loan through Bank A (SOR ¶ 1.b - $16,780) that became 
delinquent in 2008. Bank A charged off the account. Applicant was not delinquent on his 
home equity line of credit through Bank A (SOR ¶ 1.a - $23,377) when Bank A 
cancelled his membership and charged off the account in October 2012.4 
 
When Applicant completed paying the $20,000 loan through Bank A in July 2014, 
he asked about the two charged-off accounts. Bank A would only accept lump-sum 
payments. Bank A has a lien on his home for the home equity line of credit. It will be 
paid if Applicant sells the home or refinances his mortgage loan. The other delinquent 
account is no longer listed on his credit report because it is past the seven-year 
reporting period. Applicant indicated he remains willing to resolve both accounts if Bank 
A works with him like they did for his other loan. He hopes to pay the debts and 
reestablish his membership. His house has appreciated in value, and he may be able to 
refinance the mortgage loan and pay both accounts.5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 43, 44, 48; GE 1, 3. 
 
2 Tr. at 20-22, 26, 43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4; AE A. 
 
3 Tr. at 28-30, 40; GE 2, 4; AE A. 
 
4 Tr. at 21-29, 37-39, 47; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 20, 25-29, 38-42, 46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4; AE A. 
 
3 
 
Applicant paid the remaining two delinquent utility debts alleged in the SOR 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.c - $83 and 1.d - $376). He paid other debts that were not alleged in the 
SOR. His wife is employed. His current finances are sound. He has not received 
financial counseling.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 31-34, 41, 43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4; AE A. 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he was unable to pay. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant developed financial problems in about 2007 after his wife lost her job. 
When his finances stabilized, he began to pay his past-due debts. He paid the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d, and he paid debts that were not alleged in the SOR. He 
made payment arrangements with Bank A and paid a $20,000 debt over the course of 
two and a half years. Surprisingly, Bank A charged off the home equity line of credit 
even though Applicant was current on that account. Bank A maintains a lien on his 
home and will be paid eventually. Applicant is willing to pay both remaining Bank A 
accounts if it will work with him, as it did on the $20,000 loan. He may be able to resolve 
both debts by refinancing his mortgage loan. Applicant’s current finances are sound.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) are completely applicable; AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) are 
partially applicable. Applicant’s financial issues are mitigated. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
