 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ) 
[Name redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01354 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 14, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 1, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on 
the record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on November 19, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on November 25, 2015. 
He had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM to submit matters in response to the 
FORM. He did not submit matters. On March 1, 2016, the FORM was forwarded to the 
Hearing Office and assigned to me on March 14, 2016. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits the SOR allegation ¶ 1.a and 
denies SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.e. (Item 2)    
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain his security 
clearance. He has worked for his current employer since June 2014. He has an 
associate’s degree. He is single and has no children. (Item 2)   
 
On July 23, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 26, Applicant listed several  
delinquent accounts. (Item 3, section 26) Applicant resolved several of these debts and 
they were not alleged in the SOR. A subsequent background investigation revealed the 
following delinquent accounts which are alleged in the SOR: a $9,308 debt owed to an 
apartment landlord for rent and damages placed for collection in 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 
4 at 6; Item 5 at 1); a $138 medical account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 5 at 
2); a $278 medical judgment filed in June 2008 for a dental bill (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 4 at 4; 
Item 5 at 3); a $493 account that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 4 at 7); and 
a $139 account that was placed for collection. (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 4 at 7).  
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to owing the $9,308 debt (SOR ¶ 1.a) 
for an apartment that he leased with two friends shortly after he turned 18. The debt is 
for unpaid rent and damages to the apartment.  He was willing to make arrangements to 
pay off the debt. A financial counselor advised him against paying the debt because it 
would be deleted from his credit report after seven years. He took the financial 
counselor’s advice. He denied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e because all 
of these debts are paid. Finally, Applicant denied the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c because 
the dental bill did not belong to him. He and his family members had never resided in 
the county where the dental practice was located and where the judgment was entered. 
He disputed the debt and the judgment was removed from his credit report.  Applicant 
provided a copy of a credit report, dated September 25, 2015, which indicates all of his 
accounts are current. (Item 1; Item 2, sections 11 and 26; Item 3)  
 
Applicant resolved several delinquent debts that were not alleged in the SOR. In 
response to section 26 on his security clearance application, he listed a $639 credit card 
debt, but indicated he paid it. The July 2014 credit report indicates he paid this credit 
card account, a $238 debt owed to a bank, and a $146 insurance account. All accounts 
had been placed for collection. Applicant also listed a $230 medical account placed for 
collection on his security clearance application. I conclude Applicant resolved this 
account before the SOR was drafted. It no longer appears on his credit reports. (Item 2, 
Section 26; Item 4 at 7) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
 
3 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
encountered financial problems since about 2008 when he was evicted from an 
apartment he shared with two friends. The apartment assessed $9,308 for unpaid rent 
and damages. He also incurred several minor medical debts and an insurance debt, 
totaling $1,048. Both AG &19(a) and AG &19(c) apply.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control);  
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
AG & 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue). 
 
AG & 20(a) applies because Applicant’s largest debt, the debt owed to an  
apartment complex occurred over eight years ago. Applicant was an immature 18 year 
old when he and two friends leased an apartment together. He also incurred several 
minor debts. Since that time, Applicant has resolved most of his delinquent accounts. 
While not making good on his financial obligation to the apartment complex, he relied on 
the advice given to him by a financial counselor.  Applicant has learned the importance 
of timely meeting his financial obligations while holding a security clearance and that 
any future financial issues will result in potential loss of his security clearance. For this 
reason, I believe it unlikely that Applicant will find himself in similar circumstances in the 
future.  
 
AG & 20(b) partially applies to Applicant’s situation. Applicant’s ultimate eviction 
from the apartment complex was partially caused by one roommate moving out of the 
apartment without giving notice, and one roommate losing his job. Applicant could not 
afford to pay the rent on his own. Circumstances beyond his control contributed to this 
situation. It is likely his former roommates were also liable for the debt owed to the 
apartment complex.  AG & 20(b) is given less weight because Applicant did not take 
steps to pay this debt. Applicant showed good judgment when he resolved his other 
delinquent debts.  
 
6 
 
 
AG & 20(c) applies because Applicant’s financial situation is stabilized and there 
are clear indications Applicant’s financial situation is under control. Applicant states that 
he consulted a free credit counseling service over the telephone.  He took steps to 
resolve his delinquent accounts and has no delinquent accounts on his current credit 
report.  
 
AG & 20(d) applies because Applicant demonstrated that he made a good-faith 
effort to resolve the delinquent accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.e.  While it cannot 
be concluded that Applicant made a good-faith effort with regard to his largest debt, 
SOR ¶ 1.a, he consulted a financial counselor who advised that the best approach for 
him financially would be to concentrate on his other debts and to let the statute of 
limitations pass on the debt. Passively waiting for the statute of limitations to lapse is not 
considered a good-faith effort to resolve one’s debt.  
 
AG & 20(e) applies with respect to the $278 medical judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.c. Applicant disputed this debt, because he had never sought the services of the 
medical provider, a dentist. He listed the debt in response to Section 26 of his security 
clearance application. He explained that he intended to dispute the debt because he 
had never been to this dentist. He had never been to the county where the dentist’s 
practice was located, and none of his family members resided in the county where the 
dentist practiced. Applicant successfully disputed the debt with the credit reporting 
agencies. It is no longer on his most recent credit report.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
         
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant was young 
and immature when he was evicted from the apartment complex in 2008. I considered 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s two roommates were equally responsible for the debt.  More than seven 
years have passed and Applicant has matured and become more financially 
responsible. He resolved his remaining delinquent accounts. He followed the advice of a 
financial counselor and disclosed his intention to let the statute of limitations lapse. 
Ordinarily, I would have denied Applicant, but based on his efforts to resolve his other 
delinquent accounts, considering his age at the time the debt was incurred, that he 
sought financial counseling and followed the counselor’s advice with regards to the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, I conclude Applicant has learned the importance of timely 
resolving his financial obligations. Should Applicant fail to honor his financial obligations 
in a timely manner and incur delinquent debts in the future, it is likely that he will lose his 
security clearance. At the present time, I conclude the security concerns raised under 
financial considerations are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    For Applicant 
  
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
