 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                )  ISCR Case No. 15-03150 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John Randolph MacPherson, Esquire 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has six relatives, including his father and his parents-in-law, who are 
citizens and residents of South Korea. He frequently communicates with his father and 
to a lesser extent with his other relatives, and his spouse frequently communicates with 
her parents, who are citizens and residents of South Korea. Foreign influence concerns 
raised by his and his spouse’s relationships with family in South Korea are mitigated by 
his strong connections to the United States. Access to classified information is granted.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 19, 2014, Applicant signed and submitted a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On October 
30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). 
 
On November 10, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a 
hearing. On March 17, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On March 28, 
2016, the case was assigned to me. On April 12, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for May 2, 2016. 
(HE 1) Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of 
his hearing. (Tr. 15-16) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits, which were 
admitted without objection. (Tr. 12-13; GE 1-2) Applicant offered 30 exhibits, which were 
admitted without objection. (Tr. 22-23; AE 1-30) On May 13, 2016, DOHA received a 
copy of the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning South 
Korea. (Tr. 12-23; Administrative Notice Request, March 17, 2016) Applicant provided 
the Intelligence Threat Handbook (June 2004) because it does not cite South Korea as 
an intelligence threat, and he urged acceptance of the 2004 version in lieu of the 1996 
version of the Intelligence Threat Assessment that Department Counsel provided. (Tr. 
15-16; HE 4) Applicant urged rejection of Intelligence Threat Handbook as an exhibit for 
administrative notice because it was prepared by a contractor (the Interagency OPSEC 
Support Staff, Alexandria, VA: Centre for Counterintelligence and Security Studies), and 
not by the federal government, and he cited ISCR Case No. 14-02454 (A.J. Mendez 
Dec. 7, 2015) in support of his motion to exclude. (Tr. 15-17) Department Counsel had 
no objection to consideration of both versions of the Intelligence Threat Handbook. I 
admitted both versions of the Intelligence Threat Assessment with greater weight being 
given to the more recent version. (Tr. 17) Department Counsel conceded there was no 
evidence that the South Korean Government used coercive methods upon South 
Korean—United States dual citizens to obtain U.S. classified information. (Tr. 22) 
However, the list of indictments and convictions in the administrative notice request 
established that South Koreans had voluntarily and illegally provided U.S. classified and 
sensitive information and equipment to South Korean entities. (Tr. 22) 
 
Applicant offered the Office of National Counterintelligence Executive, Fiscal 
Year 2008 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial 
Espionage (July 23, 2009) as the most recent version of the annual report to Congress 
and a 2015 human rights report concerning South Korea. (Tr. 18-21; HE 6, HE 7) I 
admitted all proffered reports, with greater weight being given to the most recent 
reports. (Tr. 19-20) The parties’ documents provided verification, detail, and context for 
facts relating to South Korea’s relationship with the United States.   
 
There was no objection to me taking administrative notice of two additional 
documents: U.S. Department of State website, Background Note South Korea (Apr. 12, 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
2012) http://www.state.gov/outofdate/bgn/southkorea/200974.htm and U.S. Bilateral 
Relations Fact Sheets, U.S. Relations With South Korea, Fact Sheet (Feb. 5, 2015), 
http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/2800.htm. (Tr. 28-29; HE 9) On May 12, 2016, 
Applicant provided a post-hearing statement emphasizing facts in HE 8. (HE 10) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice). See the South Korea section of the Findings of Fact of 
this decision, infra, for the administratively noticed facts concerning South Korea. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. (HE 3) His admission is accepted 
as a finding of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I 
make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who is seeking a 
security clearance to enhance his employment in sensitive construction projects. (Tr. 
52, GE 1) He has worked for a federal government contractor since June 2014. (GE 1) 
He attended a university in the United States, and he was awarded a masters of 
science degree in project management in 2001. (Tr. 52-53; AE 25) In 1998, he married. 
(Tr. 53) He has worked for various construction companies since 2001. His daughter 
was born in the United States, and she is 11 years old. (GE 1) Applicant immigrated to 
the United States in 2000. (Tr. 52) He and his spouse became U.S. permanent 
residents in 2008, and they became U.S. citizens in 2014. (Tr. 25, 55-56; AE 17-18) He 
votes in U.S. elections. (Tr. 57; AE 30) 
 
 Applicant attended periodic security training and briefings provided by his 
company. (Tr. 60-62; AE 11-16) He paid close attention during training and 
conscientiously took notes.  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant was born in South Korea. (Tr. 52, GE 1) As a South Korean citizen, he 
served in the South Korean Army, and he was part of the South Korean Augmentation 
to the U.S. Army. (Tr. 71) He received a bachelor’s degree in South Korea. (GE 2) The 
SOR alleges, and Applicant admits, that his father, brother, two sisters, father-in-law 
and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of South Korea. His conversations with 
family members are casual and do not involve substantive or sensitive matters 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or locations 
in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information.  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
pertaining to his employment. (Tr. 65-67; AE 20) He frequently communicates with his 
father, and he does not frequently communicate with any other South Korean relatives. 
(Tr. 65, 74; AE 19-20) His spouse frequently contacts her parents. (Tr. 75; AE 19-20) 
 
Applicant surrendered his South Korean passport, and in 2015, he renounced his 
South Korean citizenship. (Tr. 25, 59; AE 28) He visited South Korea in 2000, and  
2011. (Tr. 26, 62-64; AE 21) His relatives in South Korea visited Applicant and his family 
in the United States in 2003, 2005, and 2015. (Tr. 26, 62-64; AE 21) His family living in 
South Korea knows Appellant is involved with construction; however, they are not 
knowledgeable about the sensitivity of the construction projects. (Tr. 64) He does not 
have any financial connections to South Korea. (Tr. 70) He does not receive any 
financial assistance from his family in South Korea. (Tr. 73) None of his family members 
in South Korea work for the South Korean Government. (Tr. 71)   
 
Character Evidence 
 
Eight character witnesses provided statements describing their frequent or close 
contacts with Appellant since June 2014. (Tr. 29-51; AE 2-10) His witnesses were 
colleagues or supervisors from work. (Tr. 29-51; AE 2-10) The general sense of the 
character evidence is that Applicant is an asset to his company, careful, conscientious, 
thorough, diligent, reliable, honest, and trustworthy. (Tr. 29-51; AE 2-10) He is well-
trained in security matters, and he is sincere and serious about protecting security. (Tr. 
47-48; AE 11-16) 
 
There is no derogatory information concerning Applicant’s police records. There 
is no evidence of record showing any U.S. arrests, illegal drug possession or use, or 
alcohol-related incidents.   
 
South Korea 
 
South Korea is a republic with powers shared between the president, the 
legislature, and the courts. Its population is 48,754,657 (July 2011 estimate). South 
Korea is one of the United States’ closest military and diplomatic allies. Over two million 
Koreans have immigrated to the United States. The United States has more troops 
stationed in South Korea than any other foreign country, except for Germany. This 
heavy troop commitment has continued since the North Korea invasion of South Korea 
in 1950.   
 
The State Department Fact Sheet provides in part: 
 
The United States and South Korea share a long history of friendship and 
cooperation based on common values and interests. The two countries 
work together to combat regional and global threats and to strengthen 
their economies. The United States has maintained Army, Air Force, 
Navy, and Marine personnel in South Korea in support of its commitment 
under the U.S.-R.O.K. Mutual Defense Treaty to help South Korea defend 
itself against external aggression. In 2013, the two countries celebrated 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
the 60th anniversary of the U.S.-South Korea alliance. A Combined 
Forces Command coordinates operations between U.S. units and South 
Korean armed forces. The United States and South Korea coordinate 
closely on the North Korean nuclear issue and the denuclearization of the 
Korean Peninsula. As South Korea's economy has developed (Korea 
joined the OECD in 1996), trade and investment ties have become an 
increasingly important aspect of the U.S.-South Korea relationship. 
 
In recent years, the U.S.-South Korea alliance has expanded into a deep, 
comprehensive global partnership, and South Korea’s role as a regional 
and global leader continues to grow. South Korea hosted the 2010 G-20 
Summit, the 2011 Fourth High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness, the 
2012 Nuclear Security Summit, the 2013 Seoul Conference on 
Cyberspace, and the 2014 International Telecommunication Union 
Plenipotentiary Conference. South Korea is a committed member of 
various international nonproliferation regimes, including the Proliferation 
Security Initiative (PSI) and the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear 
Terrorism (GICNT). The United States and South Korea are also 
expanding cooperation on development assistance and aid. 
 
People-to-people ties between the United States and South Korea have 
never been stronger. South Korea, on a per capita basis, sends the 
highest number of students to the United States to study of any 
industrialized country. Educational exchanges include a vibrant Fulbright 
exchange program as well as the Work, English Study, and Travel 
(WEST) program that gives a diverse group of South Korean students the 
opportunity to learn more about the United States. . . . 
 
Bilateral Economic Relations 
 
Over the past several decades, South Korea has achieved a remarkably 
high level of economic growth and is now the United States’ sixth-largest 
goods trading partner with a trillion-dollar economy. Major U.S. firms have 
long been leading investors in South Korea, while South Korea's top firms 
have made significant investments in the United States. There are large-
scale flows of manufactured goods, agricultural products, services, and 
technology between the two countries. The landmark Korea-U.S. Free 
Trade Agreement (KORUS FTA) entered into force on March 15, 2012, 
underscoring the depth of bilateral trade ties. The agreement is expected 
to boost exports by billions of dollars annually for both sides and create 
new export-related jobs in both South Korea and the United States. 
 
South Korea's Membership in International Organizations 
 
South Korea and the United States belong to a number of the same 
international organizations, including the United Nations, G-20, 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Asia-Pacific 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Economic Cooperation forum, Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN) Regional Forum, International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and 
World Trade Organization. South Korea hosts the Green Climate Fund, an 
international organization associated with the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. South Korea also is a Partner for 
Cooperation with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe 
and an observer to the Organization of American States. (HE 10) 
 
The Government’s Administrative Notice request provides as follows: 
 
• South Korea has a history of collecting protected U.S. information. The 
1996 Interagency OPSEC Support Staff, Intelligence Threat Handbook 
notes that South Korea has targeted the United States with intelligence 
gathering programs, and has centered its collection efforts on computer 
systems, aerospace technologies and nuclear technologies, and its 
activities have included stealing information from computerized databases 
maintained by U.S. government agencies.  
 
• The 2000 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage, issued by the National Counterintelligence Center, 
ranks Korea as one of the seven countries most actively engaging in 
foreign economic collection and industrial espionage against the United 
States. The Annual Report released in 2008 indicates that the major 
foreign collectors remain active. . . .  
 
• The U.S. restricts the export of sensitive, dual-use technologies that can 
have civilian uses, as well as military uses, or to build weapons of mass 
destruction. South Korea has been the unauthorized recipient of 
technology controlled under U.S. export control laws, including: material 
that could be used in missile delivery/reentry systems, encryption 
software, optics and prism data, and infrared detectors . . . .  
 
• Industrial espionage remains a high-profile concern relating to South 
Korea and South Korean companies. In 2015, a South Korean industrial 
company pleaded guilty to conspiracy to steal a U.S. company's trade 
secrets involving Kevlar technology, which is used in a wide range of 
commercial applications including body armor and fiber optic cables. In 
July 2014, a South Korean chemical company, agreed to pay a criminal 
penalty of over $2 million to resolve an investigation into the company's 
attempted theft of a U.S. company's trade secrets regarding a meta-
aramid fiber used in protective fabrics, electrical insulation, and lightweight 
structural support for aircraft. Sources have also reported that South 
Korea may have attempted to compromise protected technology of U.S. F-
15 fighters that it purchased. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
• The South Korean government has generally respected the human rights 
of its citizens, however, reported human rights problems include: the 
government's interpretation of national security and other laws limiting 
freedom of expression and restricting access to the internet; official 
corruption; the absence of a comprehensive antidiscrimination law; sexual 
and domestic violence; child prostitution; and trafficking in persons. The 
South Korean National Security Law grants authorities the power to 
detain, arrest, and imprison persons believed to have committed acts 
intended to endanger the “security of the State.” (HE 4) 
 
The most recent counterintelligence reports have not mentioned South Korea as 
one of the major or primary nations of concern pertaining to espionage against the 
United States.  Nevertheless, some South Korean individuals and companies have 
engaged in espionage against the United States.  This criminal activity is not limited to 
South Koreans.  U.S. born citizens have also engaged in espionage against the United 
States. 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
   
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply because of Applicant’s relationship with his 
family, which includes his spouse’s relationship with her parents, who are citizens and 
residents of South Korea.   
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection and 
obligation to his spouse. “[A]s a matter of common sense and human experience, there 
is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the 
immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). 
This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(d). Although Applicant does not have direct ties of 
affection to his in-laws living in South Korea, he has affection for his spouse, and she 
has affection for her family living in South Korea. So an indirect tie remains between 
Applicant and his in-laws living in South Korea. 
 
Indirect influence from Applicant’s in-laws living in South Korea, through 
Applicant’s spouse to Applicant, could result in a security concern. Applicant’s spouse’s 
communications with her family living in South Korea are not fully described in the 
record, and there is insufficient evidence to rebut the evidentiary presumption. Her 
relationships with her family living in South Korea are sufficient to create “a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” Her 
relationships with residents of South Korea create a concern about Applicant’s 
“obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and his desire to help his 
spouse and her relatives who are in South Korea. For example, if entities in South 
Korea wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert pressure on his in-laws 
in South Korea. Applicant would then be subject to indirect coercion through his spouse 
and classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with relatives or in-laws living in South 
Korea is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has such a relationship with even one person living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The relationship 
of South Korea with the United States places a burden of persuasion on Applicant to 
demonstrate that his spouse’s and his own relationships to relatives living in South 
Korea do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed in a position where he 
might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist 
his spouse and family living in South Korea, being particularly mindful of the potential 
threat of coercion by entities in South Korea.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives, terrorists, or other entities 
from South Korea seek or have sought classified or economic information from or 
through Applicant, or his in-laws living in South Korea, it is not possible to rule out such 
a possibility in the future. Applicant and his spouse’s communications and visits with 
family living in South Korea are sufficiently frequent, to demonstrate obligations to them 
and affection for family living in South Korea. Concern for family is a positive character 
trait that increases trustworthiness; however, it also increases the concern about 
potential foreign influence. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence to raise 
the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 
7(d) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating 
conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant had frequent 
communications with his father living in South Korea, and his spouse had frequent 
communications with her parents living in South Korea. The amount of contacts 
between an applicant or the applicant’s spouse and relatives living in a foreign country 
are not the only test for determining whether someone could be coerced through their 
relatives. Because of connections to family living in South Korea, Applicant is not able to 
fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [he and his spouse’s 
relationships with relatives who are residents of South Korea] could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.” Visits to or from family provide additional evidence of 
concern for family and obligation to family welfare.    
 
Applicant has “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He 
has strong family connections to the United States. He, his spouse, and his daughter 
are U.S. citizens. He earned a master’s degree in the United States, has lived in the 
United States 16 years, and had been employed by a U.S. Government contractor since 
June 2014.    
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by relationships with family living in South Korea. 
There is no evidence that terrorists, criminals, the South Korean Government, or those 
conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or family in South 
Korea to coerce Applicant or his family in South Korea for classified or sensitive 
information. While the Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence was present, Applicant would have a heavy 
evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is 
important to be mindful of the United States’ very positive relationship with South Korea, 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
South Korea’s human rights violations, and most of all the 66-year history of close 
military and diplomatic connections between South Korea and the United States.      
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family living in South Korea. Applicant is not required to 
report his contacts with family living in South Korea. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) does not apply. Applicant has some property interests in the United 
States, which include his employment in the United States. However, this mitigating 
condition can only fully mitigate security concerns raised under AG ¶ 7(e), and AG ¶ 
7(e) is not raised in this case. Applicant does not own any property or have any 
investments in South Korea.   
 
In sum, the primary security concern is Applicant’s close relationship with his 
father and his spouse’s relationships with her parents, who are residents and citizens of 
South Korea. Those family members living in South Korea are readily available for 
coercion; however, there is no evidence that the South Korean Government or industrial 
entities have engaged in coercion of South Korea-United States dual citizens. Applicant 
has “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,” which clearly 
outweigh his connections to South Korea, that he “can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Foreign influence concerns are fully 
mitigated under AG ¶ 8(b). Even if foreign influence concerns were not mitigated under 
Guideline B, they would be mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline B, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant has strong connections to the United States. He has lived in the United 
States for the previous 16 years. He, his spouse, and his daughter are U.S. citizens. He 
earned a master’s degree in the United States, and he is employed by a U.S. federal 
contractor. Eight character witnesses provided statements describing Applicant as an 
asset to his company, careful, conscientious, thorough, diligent, reliable, honest, and 
trustworthy. He is well-trained in security matters, and he is sincere and serious about 
protecting security.  
 
Applicant voluntarily returned his South Korean passport. He renounced his 
South Korean citizenship. He limited his visits to South Korea after immigrating to the 
United States to two visits in 2000 and in 2011. He has no financial interests in South 
Korea.   
 
There is no derogatory information concerning Applicant’s police records, any 
U.S. arrests, illegal drug possession or use, or alcohol-related incidents. He is loyal to 
the United States, and he considers the United States to be his home. Applicant’s 
demeanor, sincerity, and honesty at his hearing are important factors militating towards 
approval of his access to classified information. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning South Korea must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in South Korea, as well as the dangers existing in South Korea.2 
For 66 years, South Korea and the United States have been close military and 
diplomatic allies. U.S. military bases in South Korea have provided crucial support for 
decades to the defense of the United States and South Korea. The danger of coercion 
from South Korean entities is relatively low in comparison to some countries, and 
Applicant’s connections to the United States are strong. Foreign influence concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the foreign interest security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    For APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
