1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02404 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). Applicant’s close family ties and 
financial interests in Israel, and his possession of a valid Israeli passport preclude 
eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on November 9, 
2014. On November 24, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guidelines B and C. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 15, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 
2 
 
9, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on March 16, 2016. On March 23, 2016, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for April 13, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. I kept the record 
open until April 27, 2016, to enable Applicant to submit additional evidence. He timely 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which I have admitted without objection.  DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on April 25, 2016. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 On Department Counsel’s motion and without objection, I amended the SOR by 
striking ¶ 2.d. Department Counsel also requested that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts about Israel. Without objection, I approved the request. The relevant facts 
are highlighted in the Findings of Fact section, below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant possesses a valid Israeli passport which he has 
used for travel to Israel since becoming a U.S. citizen. The SOR also alleges that his 
parents and two brothers are citizens and residents of Israel; one brother is in the Israel 
Defense Forces (IDF) inactive reserves; and that Applicant’s wife and four children are 
dual citizens of Israel and the United States. In his Answer, Applicant admitted each of 
these allegations. Applicant’s admissions in his Answer are incorporated in my findings 
of fact.     
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old senior engagement manager employed by a defense 
contractor since 2014. He attended college in Israel and received a bachelor’s degree in 
computer science in 1989. (Tr. 25.)  
 
Applicant was born in Israel. His family moved to another country, where he 
spent his formative years. He returned to Israel and entered the military. He was on 
active duty in the IDF from 1980 until 1984, and remained in the inactive reserves until 
approximately 1992. (Tr. 50.) Applicant and his wife met while serving together in the 
IDF, and married in 1985. They both attended officer’s school and achieved the rank of 
lieutenant. Applicant’s wife was released from the inactive reserves in 1988. (Tr. 50-51.)  
 
Due to Applicant’s employment opportunities, he, his wife, and their children 
moved abroad from Israel and lived in several different countries. However, three out of 
four of the children were born in Israel. (GX 1.) From 1992 until 1995, they lived in the 
United States. In 1995, they returned to Israel with the intention of remaining there. (Tr. 
26.) Their plans changed, and they moved permanently to the United States in 2003. 
(Tr. 26.)  
 
Applicant, his wife, and his children became naturalized U.S. citizens in 2010, but 
remain dual-citizens of Israel. (Tr. 30-31; GX 1.) He considers himself “a person of an 
international background, much more than an Israeli background.” (Tr. 29.) In a few 
3 
 
months, he will have lived in the United States longer than in any other country, 
including Israel. Applicant considers the United States to be their home. (Tr. 30.) He and 
his wife own two houses in the United States. They have checking, savings, money 
market, retirement, and 401(k) accounts in the United States. (Tr. 51-52.) Applicant 
possesses a valid U.S. passport, which he uses for all international travel, except to 
Israel. (GX 1; Tr. 58.) 
 
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Israel. He calls his mother once 
a week, and will sometimes speak with his father during those calls. He describes his 
relationship with his parents as close. (Tr. 48.) His parents visit Applicant and his family 
approximately every nine months, and stay an average of five weeks. (Tr. 56; Tr. 48.)  
 
Applicant does not consider his relationship with either of his brothers to be 
close. (Tr. 45.) However, he does maintain contact with each of them, often through 
group e-mails shared among family members, and saw them both on his last trip to 
Israel in September 2015. (Tr. 45-46.) He and his two brothers will inherit his parents’ 
estate. (Tr. 39.) His wife’s sister is also a citizen and resident of Israel, and Applicant 
has contact with her in person and/or electronically approximately four times a year. 
(GX 1.)  
 
Applicant and his wife currently have approximately $275,000 in a bank account 
in Israel, which came from an inheritance after his wife’s father passed away. They are 
in the process of transferring the balance to an account in the United States. (Tr. 40-42.) 
Applicant maintains two savings accounts in Israel for his two minor children. The 
balance in each of the accounts is approximately $300 to $400. (Tr. 40-41.)  He has a 
pension in Israel valued at approximately $150,000. His wife also has a pension in 
Israel. (Tr. 39-41.)  
 
Applicant possesses a valid Israeli passport that was issued in 2009 and expires 
in 2019. (GX 1.) He stated he is theoretically willing to surrender his Israeli passport, but 
needs to be able to travel to Israel to visit his parents. (Tr. 31-35) He views his Israeli 
passport as “just a travel document.” (Tr. 58.) However, it is his understanding that, 
because he is an Israeli citizen, he is required by Israel to enter and exit Israel using 
only his Israeli passport. (Tr. 57-58.) Applicant traveled to Israel using his current Israeli 
passport twice in 2011 and once in 2015. (GX 1; Tr. 32.) He also possesses a valid 
Israeli identification card. (Tr. 42-43.) 
 
After the hearing, Applicant contacted the Israeli consulate, who advised him not 
to surrender his passport to his facility security officer, and confirmed that Applicant 
could not enter Israel without it. Applicant has decided to retain his foreign passport. 
(AX A.)  
 
Israel and the United States have historically strong bilateral relations which 
include cooperation on defense, and the United States has provided regular military 
support to Israel. However, there is significant documented history of classified 
information and controlled technologies being illegally imported by Israel. Illegal 
4 
 
technology transfers, even to private entities, are of substantial concern because 
government entities have learned to capitalize on private-sector acquisitions, potentially 
for use in weapons and other military applications.  
 
In the past 30 years, there have been at least three cases in which U.S. 
government employees were convicted of disclosing classified information to Israel or of 
conspiring to act as an Israeli agent. Following the conviction of a former intelligence 
analyst and his wife for selling classified documents to the Israeli government, Israel 
granted the couple citizenship and later confirmed that the intelligence analyst was its 
agent. U.S. officials remain concerned about possible Israeli espionage.  
 
All individuals entering or departing Israel are subject to security screening and 
may be denied entry or exit without explanation. U.S. citizen visitors have been 
subjected to prolonged questioning and physical searches and have been denied 
access to consular officers, lawyers, and family members. All electronic items must be 
declared upon entry and some travelers have had their laptop computers and other 
electronic equipment searched. Some travelers have also been required by Israeli 
security officials to grant access to personal e-mail and social media accounts. 
Travelers should have no expectation of privacy on any searched devices or accounts. 
Israeli citizens naturalized in the United States retain their Israeli citizenship and must 
enter and exit Israel using their Israeli passports.   
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
5 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 Under AG ¶ 9, the concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States.” Applicant’s possession and use of his foreign passport raises this 
concern and also establishes the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any 
right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship,” to include “possession of a current 
foreign passport.”  
 
 The foreign influence concern sets forth a number of conditions that could 
mitigate the concern. The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 11(c): exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when 
the individual was a minor; 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 11(d): use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant 
security authority; and  
 
AG ¶ 11(e): the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
  
 I have considered each of the potentially mitigating conditions, and none of them 
applies. Because he cannot travel to Israel without his Israeli passport, Applicant is 
unwilling to surrender it.   
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
   
 Applicant’s close relationship with his parents, ongoing contact with his brothers 
and sister-in-law, and financial interests in Israel, raise the foreign influence security 
concern.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The 
United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified 
information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have 
access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has 
interests inimical to those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. 
Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with 
the United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or 
national security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature 
of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country 
7 
 
is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering 
the nature of the government, an administrative judge must also consider any 
terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 
(App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing  decision  to  grant  clearance  where  
administrative  judge  did  not  consider terrorist activity in area where family members 
resided). 
 
 The record evidence, to include the matters accepted for administrative notice, 
establish the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(e): a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a 
foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, 
which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (e) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The  
“heightened  risk”  required  to  raise  one  of  these  disqualifying  conditions  is  a 
relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal 
risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
Where foreign family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to 
a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case 
No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). [T]here is a rebuttable presumption 
that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family 
members of the person's spouse.  ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 
94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002); see also ISCR Case No. 09-06457 at 4 (App. Bd. 
May 16, 2011). 
 
Applicant’s family ties in Israel, including his brother’s ongoing military obligation, 
and his, his wife’s and his children’s dual citizenships; his financial interests, including 
his and his wife’s pensions; Israel’s history of espionage and the U.S.’s ongoing 
concern about espionage; and, the targeting, searching and detaining of U.S. 
travelers; are sufficient to establish the heightened risk in AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (e), and the 
potential conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b).  
 
8 
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
AG ¶ 8(d): the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government 
business or are approved by the cognizant security authority; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(f): the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
 An applicant with close family members and interests in a foreign country faces a 
high, but not insurmountable hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by such 
foreign ties. Furthermore, an applicant is not required “to sever all ties with a foreign 
country before he or she can be granted access to classified information.” ISCR Case 
No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). However, what factor or combination of 
factors will mitigate security concerns raised by an applicant with family members in a 
foreign country is not easily identifiable or quantifiable. ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 
(App. Bd. June 23, 2014). An administrative judge’s predictive judgment in these types 
of cases must be guided by a commonsense assessment of the evidence and 
consideration of the adjudicative guidelines, as well as the whole-person factors set 
forth in the Directive. A judge’s ultimate determination must also take into account the 
overarching standard in all security clearance cases, namely, that any doubt raised by 
an applicant’s circumstances must be resolved in favor of national security. AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 I have considered all the foreign influence mitigating conditions and, based on 
the record evidence, none apply. Applicant’s close relationship with his parents is 
understandable and commendable. However, it also could create circumstances where 
Applicant could be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his 
parents and those of the United States. He has already chosen to retain his Israeli 
passport at the expense of his security clearance. Applicant’s close ties to his parents 
9 
 
create a conflict of interest under which he could conceivably resolve such conflict in a 
way that would be harmful to the United States.  
 
 However, this adverse finding is “not a comment on Applicant’s patriotism but 
merely an acknowledgment that people may act in unpredictable ways when faced with 
choices that could be important to a loved-one, such as a family member.” ISCR Case 
No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
 Applicant testified credibly that he is in the process of transferring the $275,000 
inheritance proceeds to an account in the United States. However, he remains eligible 
for a pension currently valued at $150,000. He maintains savings accounts in Israel for 
two of children. While the pension and savings accounts may not represent the majority 
of Applicant’s assets, the value is significant and could be a point of vulnerability for 
him. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person 
analysis and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but I have also considered the following: 
 Through his testimony, it is clear that Applicant is a man of integrity and loyalty. 
He testified openly and honestly about his family ties in Israel. His unwillingness to 
surrender his Israeli passport is based solely on the fact that, without it, he would be 
unable to visit his parents. In any other setting, his loyalty to his parents would only be 
viewed as an attribute. However, in the security clearance arena, such strong bonds 
necessarily raise concerns.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines B and 
C, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
10 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his foreign family 
connections and his possession of a foreign passport. Accordingly, I conclude he has 
not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the 
following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence)  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c and 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  
 Subparagraph 1.d:     Withdrawn 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
