                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-04456
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
May 31, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
dated October 14, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  On September 26, 2015, the
Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline H for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry” (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of
Defense after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on October 9, 2015, and elected to
have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to Applicant on or about
January 13, 2016.  Applicant received the FORM on January 15, 2016.  Applicant was
instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of
receipt.  Applicant did not submit a reply to the FORM.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on March 28, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.   
2
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 26 years old and married.  He has a high school diploma and some
college.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Engineering Technician.  He is
applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
Applicant admitted the allegations set forth under this guideline.  (See Applicant’s
Answer to the SOR.)  Applicant began working for his current employer in September
2014.  He has never held a security clearance.
Applicant has a history of illegal drug use that includes, marijuana, cocaine, LSD,
mushrooms, and the stimulant, ecstasy.  Applicant started using marijuana at the young
age of sixteen, in April 2004.  He smoked it socially, at various frequencies, on average
about once every three to four months, until about July 2014.  Applicant stated that his
parents are aware of his marijuana use after they administered a drug test to him and
told him that he tested positive.  The date of the drug test is unknown.  His marijuana
use led him to experiment with other drugs until recently.
From May 2005 to about November 2013, Applicant used cocaine.  He used it
socially, on weekends for about a year, and then two to three times a year for the next
four years.  He also used hallucinogenic drugs including: LSD on one occasion; and
mushrooms on at least one occasion, between April 2008 and August 2010.  He used
these drugs in social settings, and obtained them from a friend.  Between the period
from July 2010 to September 2010, Applicant used the stimulant, ecstacy at least two to
three times.     
In his most recent security clearance application dated October 14, 2014,
Applicant admits to also using hashish, crack cocaine, rock, freebase, amphetamines,
speed and crystal methamphetamine.  He does not provide the frequency of use or
purchase.
Applicant states that he has never felt addicted or dependent on any illegal drug.
He has never sold, grown, or manufactured any illegal controlled substance.  Applicant
states that in his mid-twenties, he realized that using drugs was no longer something he
wanted to be a part of.  He wanted to be reliable and responsible for his spouse.  He
states that he disassociated himself with the people in his life who were a bad influence
on him.  In July 2014, he stopped using illegal drugs, which was about three months
before he applied for his job in the defense industry.  He apologizes for his past actions
and has no intent to ever use illegal drugs again.   
3
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse; and
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18 - 19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
4
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with
the national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified
information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person
is an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole-person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted
to civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in illegal drug abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government met its initial burden of proving that the Applicant
has engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence indicates
poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a
nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the
evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guideline H of
the SOR.  
5
Applicant’s extensive and vast variety of illegal drug use that began when he
was sixteen years old and continued until recently is shocking.  His use of marijuana at
a young age obviously led him on to experiment with more serious drugs over time.
His past conduct clearly demonstrates a lapse in sound judgment and raises serious
questions about his judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  Up until November 2013,
Applicant was still using cocaine, and he last used marijuana in July 2014.  He was still
associating with individuals who used illegal drugs.  This recent use of cocaine and
marijuana continues to call into question his maturity, character, judgment, and ability
to abide by the law.    
This conduct shows extreme immaturity and raises serious security concerns
about his reliability and trustworthiness.  Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement,
Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug abuse; and 25.(c) illegal drug possession,
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or
possession of drug paraphernalia apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are
applicable.     
   
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Only recently has Applicant decided to
stop using illegal drugs.  He is commended for his efforts to turn his life around.  At this
time, however, he has not earned the privilege of holding a security clearance.  He has
only been drug-free for about a year and a half.  With the extensive nature of his drug
use, more time without drug use is required in order to demonstrate the level of
maturity, and responsibility, expected of an employee who works for the defense
industry and has access to classified information.  Applicant’s past illegal conduct is too
extensive, too serious and too recent, and a clear indicator of poor judgment and
unreliability that preclude him from security clearance eligibility at this time.
  
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under
all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may
not properly safeguard classified information.  
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualifications
for access to classified information, it must be determined that the Applicant is, and has
been, sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect
the government’s national interest.  Based upon the conduct outlined here, this
Applicant has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and he does not meet the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information.       
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
6
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
