1
                                                             
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-01885
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Sean Bigley, Esquire
May 24, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on July 22, 2014.  On October 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
G and E for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 29, 2015.  He answered
the SOR in writing through counsel on November 14, 2015, and requested a hearing
before an Administrative Judge.  The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
received the request soon thereafter, and I received the case assignment on January
13, 2016.  As the case had previously been assigned to another Judge, DOHA had
already issued a notice of hearing on January 7, 2016, and I convened the hearing as
2
scheduled on January 29, 2016.  The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 4.
GXs 1 and 2, were received without objection.  GXs 3 and 4 were objected to,
Applicant’s Counsel claiming lack of authentication.  (TR at page 13 line 15 to page 15
line 4.)  That objection was overruled; after Department Counsel represented to the
Court their authenticity.  (Id.)  Applicant testified on his own behalf, as did three
witnesses, and submitted Exhibits (AppXs) A through F, which were received without
objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on February 9, 2016.  I
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until February 29, 2016, to submit
additional matters.  On February 9, 2016, he submitted Exhibit G, which was received
without objection.  The record closed on February 29, 2016.  Based upon a review of
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in
Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b. of the SOR, with explanations.  He denied the factual
allegations in Subparagraph 2.a. of the SOR.  He also provided additional information to
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption & Guideline E - Personal Conduct
Applicant was born in the United States.  (TR at page 61 lines 15~23.)  His
parents moved back to their Carribean island ancestral home; when Applicant “was
three or four years old,” to “take over the family business.”  (Id.)  His family is well
known, and  very wealthy.  (TR at page 61 line 24 to page 62 line 12.)  Applicant moved
back to the United States, at the age of 18, to pursue his higher education, and
eventually obtained a Ph.D.  (TR at page 62 line 24 to page 64 line 5.)
Applicant’s mother was “kidnapped (sic) and held captive . . . from May 22, 2012
through May 26, 2012,” as verified by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).  (TR at
page 64 line 16 to page 73 line 14, and AppX A.)  The FBI asked Applicant to be the
negotiator with the kidnapers, which put much stress on Applicant.  (TR at page 64 line
16 to page 73 line 14.)  He turned to alcohol to relieve his stress.
1.a. and 2.a.  Applicant admits that in January of 2013, he was arrested, in part,
and was judged guilty of, Extreme Driving Under the Influence (DUI) with a Blood
Alcohol Content of (.15~.20).  (TR at page 73 line 15 to page 76 line 9, and at page 86
line 15 to page 87 line 4.)  He was sentenced to nine days in jail with work release,
enrolled in alcohol screening and DUI classes, and fined.  (Id, and GXs 2 and 4.)
1.b. and 2.a.  Applicant admits that in December of 2013, he was arrested, in
part, and pled guilty to, Extreme Driving Under the Influence (DUI) with a Blood Alcohol
Content of (.15~.20).  (TR at page 76 line 10 to page 78 line 6, and at page 87 line 5 to
page 88 line 25.)  He was sentenced to unspecified jail time, enrolled in an alcohol
treatment program, and fined.  (Id, and GXs 2 and 3.)  Applicant successfully completed
3
that treatment program in June of 2014, as evidenced by a completion certificate.
(AppX B.)  In January of 2015, a Clinical Health Psychologist with the State’s “Motor
Vehicle Division” averred: “Based on my evaluation, the condition of the Applicant does
not affect his ability to safely operate a motor vehicle.” (AppX G, emphasis in original.)
Applicant is now more focused on work and on fitness.  (TR at page 78 line 7 to
page 81 line 4.)  In November of 2015, he was evaluated by a “Substance Abuse
Professional,” who determined, in part, the following:
2.  [Applicant] . . . did receive two DUI’s during the course of one year.
That year included his mother’s kidnapping (sic), his father’s stroke,
moving his parents from . . . [a Carribean island] to the United States, and
increasing responsibilities at work . . . - all at the same time.
3.  [Applicant] . . . is remorseful of his excessive drinking on the two
occasions.  As a result of the DUI’s . . . [Applicant] returned to a healthy
lifestyle of physical and mental well-being.
4.  It is my professional opinion that . . . [Applicant] is genuine in his
contrition and his disposition of a healthful lifestyle is sustainable long-
term.
5.  It is my professional opinion that . . . [Applicant] does not present any
risk to national security.  (AppX C at pages 1~2, emphasis in original.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
4
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the Applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline G -Alcohol Consumption
Paragraph 21 of the adjudicative guidelines sets out the security concern relating
to Alcohol Consumption: “Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.”
The adjudicative guidelines set out certain conditions that could raise security
concerns.  Subparagraph 22(a) is applicable and provides that “alcohol-related incidents
away from work, such as driving while under the influence” may be disqualifying.
Applicant had two DUI’s in 2013.  However, I find that this is countered by the mitigation
condition under Subparagraph 23(a).  It provides that where “so much time has passed,
or the behavior . . .  happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment.”  Applicant’s DUI’s occurred more than two years ago, under extremely
unusual circumstances.  Furthermore, it is clear from the testimony of his three
witnesses that Applicant is a changed man since his trauma of 2013.  (TR at page 23
line 17 to page 58 line 24.)  This allegation is found for Applicant.
5
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in Paragraph 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 16(c), “credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person
may not properly safeguard protected information.”  Applicant had two DUI’s in 2013.
Again, I find a countervailing mitigating condition that is applicable here.  Subparagraph
17(c) is applicable where “so much time has passed . . . that it [the behavior] is unlikely
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgement.”  The Applicant’s uncharacteristic conduct occurred more than two years
ago.  This allegation is also found for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.  The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  The Applicant has the unqualified support
of those who know him in the work place.  (TR at page 23 line 17 to page 58 line 24,
and  AppXs D~F.)  The record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  For all these reasons, I
6
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his Alcohol
Consumption and related Personal Conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
