 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00480 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kenneth M. Roberts, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s financial 
problems were caused by a series of events beyond his control, the most significant 
being the decline in the housing market and credit crisis of the late 2000s. Applicant 
sought professional help to resolve his financial problems, which now appear to be 
under control. He also demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent 
accounts. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke his security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On December 29, 
2015, I issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission 
of discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses.2  The parties 
complied with the terms of the order.3 At the hearing, convened on January 14, 2016, I 
admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through BB, without objection.  After the hearing, Applicant submitted AE CC through 
EE, which were also admitted without objection.4 I received the transcript (Tr.) on 
January 22, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 52, has worked for a federal contractor since 1985. He received a 
security clearance that same year. In 1987, his clearance was upgraded.  In November 
2013, Applicant reported to his facility security officer (FSO) that he was in the process 
of executing a short sale on his home to avoid foreclosure. This report resulted in the 
FSO filing an incident report in the Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) and 
forwarding a letter to the Defense Industrial Security Clearance Office (DISCO) in 
December 2013. Applicant completed his most recent security clearance application in 
February 2014. He disclosed unpaid federal taxes related to early withdrawals from his 
401K in 2010 and 2011, the 2013 short sale of his home, delinquent credit card 
accounts, and unpaid utility bills. He also provided an explanation for his financial 
problems in the additional comments section of the security clearance application. The 
resulting investigation confirmed these facts. The SOR alleges that Applicant is 
indebted to six creditors for approximately $30,000. The majority of the debt, $29,000, is 
for two delinquent credit card accounts.5  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began after his divorce in 1999. He assumed the 
marital debt to end the union quickly. Applicant resolved the marital debts and assumed 
primary custody of the couple’s two children until 2003, when his daughter decided to 
live with his ex-wife. After his daughter moved, Applicant fell into a deep depression and 
let some of his financial obligations fall behind. A co-worker confronted Applicant about 
his depression, which prompted him to educate himself about the illness and get 
medical help. Applicant also decided to return his attention to his financial issues. He 
refinanced his home to pay off some debt and fix up the house. The home was worth 
$400,000 and Applicant’s new mortgage, an interest-only loan, was for $204,000. 
Applicant intended to say in the home only until his son graduated from high school, at 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
3 The discovery letter, dated November 30, 2015, is appended to the record as HE II. 
 
4 Correspondence regarding Applicant’s post-hearing submission is appended to the record as HE III. 
 
5 Tr. 24-25; GE 1-6. 
 
3 
 
which time he would sell the home and use the proceeds to pay for his son’s college 
education.6  
 
Shortly after Applicant refinanced the home, the real estate market collapsed and 
the value of his home plummeted, becoming worth less than its $204,000 mortgage. 
Applicant continued to pay the mortgage on the home and his credit card accounts. 
However, the interest rate on his refinanced mortgage began to increase as did the 
interest rates on his credit cards. Soon, Applicant could not afford the minimum 
payments on his accounts. In 2010 and 2011, Applicant withdrew money from his 401K 
to pay down some of his debt. In 2012, he stopped paying his mortgage in effort to 
obtain a mortgage modification. Although he received the loan modification, he still 
could not afford the modified terms of loan. He was able to make only three payments 
before he allowed the loan to become delinquent. Applicant consulted a real estate 
agent about executing a short sale. Applicant completed the short sale of his home in 
2013 and the mortgage company forgave the deficiency balance. He then turned his 
attention to resolving his other delinquent accounts.7  
 
Initially, Applicant considered filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. However, 
after consulting an attorney, Applicant learned that he did not have enough debt to 
qualify for a Chapter 7 petition. He also realized that he could not afford the payments 
required under a Chapter 13 petition, which would have been between $1,200 and 
$1,500 per month. Applicant then consulted another attorney for help negotiating 
settlements on his credit card debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b). Applicant’s attorney 
contacted the creditor holding SOR ¶ 1.a ($18,171) and learned that the creditor 
forgave the debt in 2014. However, Applicant had not received the 1099-C Cancellation 
of Debt form issued by the creditor. Applicant realizes that the debt forgiveness requires 
him to amend his 2014 federal income tax returns. With this disposition, Applicant’s 
attorney advised him that the debt is considered resolved.8  
 
Applicant’s attorney then contacted the creditor holding SOR ¶ 1.b ($10,895) in 
September 2015 and learned that the debt was no longer collectible. Despite this, 
Applicant asked his attorney to negotiate a settlement on the account. The creditor 
agreed to settle for 40% of the outstanding balance. Applicant intended to pay the 
settlement with a withdrawal from his 401K. By law, he could only withdraw $3,000. The 
creditor would not agree to settle for that amount. After evaluating the consequences of 
implementing a payment plan, Applicant’s attorney advised him that given the 
circumstances, he should not make further efforts to resolve the account. Applicant has 
paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c –1.d, and 1.f, totaling $737. Applicant disputed the 
mobile phone debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($471) with the creditor because the number attached 
to the account did not belong to him.9 
                                                          
6 Tr. 25-30, 60-64; AE L.  
 
7 Tr. 53-55, 64-69; GE 2.  
 
8 Tr. 37-47; 55-57, 59; AE A. 
 
9 Tr. 30-77, 57-58; GE 4; AE A, F-K. 
 
4 
 
Applicant earns approximately $73,000 annually and he has $120,000 in 
retirement savings. Applicant continues to provide financial support, including health 
insurance, for his two children, now 24 and 21. After paying his recurring bills, he has 
disposable income of $342 each month. In January 2016, Applicant completed a 
financial counseling class. He has also enrolled in a credit monitoring service. As a 31- 
year employee of his company, Applicant has developed a good reputation for his 
integrity, trustworthiness, reliability, and security consciousness. Since his 2013 report, 
Applicant has provided regular updates to his FSO about the status of his financial 
issues.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
10 Tr. 16-20, 47-50, 59, 71; AE M, O-EE. 
 
5 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”11 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
  
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $33,000 on six delinquent 
accounts. Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports in the record establish a prima 
facie case that Applicant had a history of not meeting his financial obligations and that 
he demonstrated an inability to pay his bills.12 However, Applicant has submitted 
sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns raised by his financial history. 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by events beyond his control between 1998 
and 2013: his divorce and a period of depression caused by issues with his children. 
These problems caused Applicant to accumulate debt, which he managed until the 
housing market downturn and credit crisis of the late 2000s. Applicant acted responsibly 
by consulting real estate and legal professionals for advice.13  
 
With the help and advice of his attorney, Applicant was able to resolve the largest 
debts alleged, SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.14 Mitigation in this instance is not diminished by the 
fact the SOR ¶ 1.b remains unpaid. Applicant made a reasonable offer to settle debt 
despite its being legally uncollectible and the creditor chose to reject the offer. 
Applicant’s efforts to make payments on SOR ¶ 1.b show a good-faith effort to resolve 
his delinquent accounts, which is bolstered by his payment of SOR ¶¶ 1.c – 1.d, and 1.f. 
Applicant provided a legitimate dispute for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e.15 With the 
                                                          
11  AG ¶ 18. 
 
12 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
13 AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
14 AG ¶ 20(c).  
 
15 AG ¶ 20(e).  
 
6 
 
debts in the SOR resolved, Applicant’s finances seem to be under control and no longer 
a source of concern.16  
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about his suitability for access to 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has held a security clearance for 31 years without 
incident. He has developed a reputation for reliability and truthfulness. Applicant has 
also shown that he takes his responsibility as a clearance holder seriously. He self-
reported his financial problems to his facility security officer in 2013 and has since 
provided periodic updates. These disclosures decrease the risk that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be a source of vulnerability or exploitation. Accordingly, Applicant has 
presented sufficient information to mitigate the financial concerns alleged in the SOR.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
16 AG ¶ 20(c). 
