                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-02147
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
May 31, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on August 25, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  On October 31, 2015, the
Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992 (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why the DoD
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on November 24, 2015, and elected to
have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to Applicant on or about
December 25, 2015.  Applicant received the FORM on January 4, 2016.  Applicant was
instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of
receipt.  Applicant did not submit a reply to the FORM.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on April 1, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.   
  The Government withdrew allegation 1.e., as it is a duplicate of the debt alleged in allegation 1.h.  (See,1
Government Exhibit 4.) 
2
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 29 years old, and is unmarried.  She has a Bachelor’s degree in
Computer Engineering.  She is employed for a defense contractor as a Compensation
Systems Analyst. She is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with this
employment.
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she is financially overextended and at risk
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
There are seven  delinquent debts set forth in the SOR totaling in excess of1
$25,000.  Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this
guideline, except for allegation 1.h., which she only denies because she disputes the
amount owed.  Credit reports of the Applicant dated September 9, 2014, and August 31,
2015, which include information from all three credit reporting agencies, indicate that
Applicant is indebted to each of the creditors listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 4
and 5.)       
     
Applicant states that her financial problems started at the end of 2013 and
through 2014.  She attributes them to her mistaken decision to make a career change
that was not successful, which ultimately caused her life to completely fall apart.  During
this period, her debts became delinquent and owing.  She has not yet been able to
recover from this mistake.  She states that she has contacted all of her creditors to let
them know of  her current financial circumstances.  She takes full responsibility for her
delinquent debts and plans to pay them when she is able.  She states that she needs an
opportunity to “get back on her feet” to properly take care of her debts.  Since August
2014, she has been working full time for her current employer.  (Government Exhibit 3.)
There is no documentary evidence in the record to show that Applicant has done
anything to resolve her delinquent debts.  At this time, the following delinquent debts are
overdue and owing: 
1.a., a delinquent debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for
collection in the approximate amount of $2,389.  Applicant admits the debt.  
3
1.b., a delinquent debt owed to a creditor for a student loan account that was
past due in the approximate amount of $1,782, with at total balance of about $9,379.
Applicant admits the debt.
1.c., a delinquent debt owed to a bank for an account that was charged off in the
approximate amount of $5,782.  Applicant admits the debt.
1.d., a delinquent debt owed to a creditor for an account that was charged off in
the amount of $274.  Applicant admits the debt. 
1.e., this allegation was a duplicate of the debt set forth in 1.h., and was
withdrawn by the Government.  Accordingly, this allegation is found for the Applicant.     
  
1.f., a delinquent debt owed to a creditor for an account that was charged off in
the approximate amount of $1,002.  Applicant admits this debt.  
1.g., a delinquent debt owed to a creditor that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $83.  Applicant admits the debt.
1.h., a delinquent debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for
collection in the approximate amount of $31,392.  Applicant denied the debt.  She
contends that the vehicle was sold and the debt was reduced to $11,913.  She states
that the debt was further reduced by a judgment in small claims court to $7,500.  She
states that she owes this creditor for three accounts that total approximately $10,000.
Applicant has failed to respond to the FORM.  There is no evidence in the record
to show that Applicant has done anything to address any of the delinquent debts set
forth in the SOR, even the smallest debt owed in the amount of $83.  Absent compelling
documentary evidence that Applicant has acted responsibly and in good faith to repay
her financial obligations, or established a track record of repayment, or otherwise has a
substantiated basis to dispute the legitimacy of the delinquent debt, the allegations in
the SOR have not been mitigated.  Based upon the evidence presented, each of the
delinquent debts listed in the SOR remain owing.
 POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
4
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  the frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  the extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  the motivation for the conduct; 
h. the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and
 i.  the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an applicant’s request for access to classified information.
5
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence that is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor judgment,
unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of Applicant.  Because of the scope and
nature of Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with her
security clearance eligibility.
The evidence presented shows that Applicant incurred a number of delinquent
debts in 2013-2014 that she has still been unable to pay.  She states that she has
contacted her creditors and informed them of her financial situation.  She states that she
plans to pay her debts when she “gets back on her feet.”  There is no documentary
evidence in the record to show that the Applicant has made a good faith effort to resolve
her debts.  Without compelling documentation showing that Applicant has made
financial arrangements and followed these arrangements to meet her past-due financial
obligations, she has not shown the requisite good judgment, reliability, or
6
trustworthiness that is necessary in order to be eligible for access to classified
information. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Applicant has been
working for her current employer since August 2014.  She has not made even one
payment toward resolving any of the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.  She has not
shown efforts to obtain financial counseling.  In fact, there is no evidence to show a
sufficient ratio of current income to debt and expenses to avoid future financial
delinquencies.  She has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy her delinquent debts.  In
fact, she has shown that she is not financially responsible.   
   
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  From the evidence presented, Applicant
has not demonstrated a pattern of financial responsibility, as she has not addressed any
of the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.  Thus, it cannot be said that she has made
a good-faith effort to resolve her past-due indebtedness.  She has not shown that she is
or has been reasonably, responsibly, or prudently addressing her financial situation.  It
appears that she has simply ignored her delinquent debts.  She has not demonstrated
that she can properly handle her financial affairs. 
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct forth above,
when viewed under all of the guidelines as a whole, support a whole-person
assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, an unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person
may not properly safeguard classified information.
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualifications
for access to classified information, it must be determined that the applicant is and has
been sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in her everyday life to adequately protect the
Government’s national interest.  Applicant has not met her burden of proving that she is
worthy of a security clearance.  Overall, based upon the seriousness of the conduct
outlined here, the Applicant has not demonstrated that she is sufficiently trustworthy,
and does not meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.
Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of her history of financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on her
ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that Applicant
has failed to overcome the Government's case opposing her request for a security
clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the
factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
7
    FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1:  Against Applicant.
    Subpara.    1.a. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.b. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.c. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.d. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.e. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.f. For the Applicant.
Subpara.    1.g. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.h. Against Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
