 
1 
  
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 15-01514 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges eight delinquent debts totaling 
$22,228. He failed to provide sufficient information about his finances and demonstrate 
progress resolving his SOR debts. Financial considerations security concerns are not 
mitigated. Access to classified information is denied.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On August 1, 2014, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire 
for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 2) On September 3, 2015, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued 
Applicant an SOR pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865,  Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
which became effective on September 1, 2006. The SOR set forth security concerns 
arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
On September 28, 2015, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he 
requested a decision without a hearing. On November 30, 2015, Department Counsel 
completed the File of Relevant Material (FORM). On February 21, 2016, Applicant 
received the FORM. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. On May 2, 2016, the case 
was assigned to me. The Government’s case consisted of five exhibits. (Items 1-5)  
 
2 
  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, and he denied 
the remaining SOR allegations. He also provided extenuating and mitigating 
information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old security guard currently employed by the same 
defense contractor since March 2014.2 From September 2010 to present, he has been 
employed as a security guard for various companies. In 1988, he graduated from high 
school. He has never served in the military. From 1989 to 2009, he was employed at a 
corporation as a press operator. In 1999, he married, and in 2007, he divorced. His 
daughter is 17 years old.   
 
Financial Considerations3 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports,  
October 9, 2014 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview 
(PSI), SF 86, and SOR response. (Items 1-5) He was unemployed from September 
2009 to September 2010. (Item 3) His SOR alleges eight delinquent debts totaling 
$22,228, and their status is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a is a telecommunications debt for $231. (Item 1) Applicant recognized 
the debt. (Item 3) He told the OPM investigator that he would look into it and pay it. 
(Item 3) In his SOR response, he said he settled the debt. (Item 1) Applicant is credited 
with resolving this debt.     
 
SOR ¶ 1.b is a tax lien owed to a state for $11,072 filed in 2006. SOR ¶ 1.d is a 
judgment filed in 2008 for $1,086. SOR ¶ 1.e is a judgment filed in 2008 for $1,801. 
Applicant said his former spouse collected unemployment in his name; however, he 
said the debt was paid off. Applicant did not list any periods of his unemployment from 
1989 to 2009. He said all three judgments pertain to the same debt. In his SOR 
response, he denied all three debts and commented that they were no longer on his 
credit report. (Item 1) He did not provide the credit report he was discussing with his 
SOR response.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c is a judgment filed in 2008 for $1,188. He denied responsibility for this 
debt, and he said it was not on his credit report. (Item 1)  
 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s August 1, 
2014 Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 2)  
 
3Unless stated otherwise the information in this section is from October 9, 2014 Applicant’s Office 
of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview. (Item 3) 
 
3 
  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f is a child support debt owed to a court in collections for $2,560. SOR ¶ 
1.g is a medical collection debt for $4,160. Applicant told the OPM investigator that he 
did not recognize these two debts, and he would look into them. (Item 3) In his SOR 
response, he said he paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f, and he denied responsibility for the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.g because it was not on his credit report. (Item 1) He is not credited 
with paying his child support debt in SOR ¶ 1.f without corroborating documentation.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.h is an insurance debt placed for collection for $130. (Item 1) Applicant 
recognized the debt. (Item 3) He told the OPM investigator that he would look into it and 
pay it. (Item 3) In his SOR response, he denied responsibility for this debt, and said it 
was not on his credit report. (Item 1)    
 
The only delinquent debt disclosed on his SF 86 was his child support being 
delinquent in the amount of $1,523; however, he said the arrearage was being paid by 
his employer out of his paycheck. (Item 2) 
 
Applicant’s August 13, 2014 combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax credit 
report includes the following derogatory financial entries: SOR ¶ 1.a is a 
telecommunications debt for $231 (Experian); SOR ¶ 1.b is a judgment filed in 2006 for 
$11,072 (TransUnion); SOR ¶ 1.d is a judgment for $1,086 (Experian and TransUnion); 
SOR ¶ 1.e is a judgment for $1,801 (Experian); SOR ¶ 1.f is a child support collection 
debt for $2,560 (Experian); SOR ¶ 1.g is a medical collection debt for $4,160 
(Experian); and SOR ¶ 1.h is an insurance debt placed for collection for $130 
(TransUnion). (Item 4) His August 13, 2014 combined Experian, TransUnion, and 
Equifax credit report does not include the SOR ¶ 1.c judgment filed in 2008 for $1,188. 
(Item 4)  
 
Applicant’s January 22, 2015 Equifax credit report includes the following 
derogatory entries: SOR ¶ 1.a is a telecommunications debt for $231; ¶ 1.b is a 
judgment filed in 2006 for $11,072; and SOR ¶ 1.c is a judgment filed in 2008 for 
$1,188.  His credit report indicates Applicant is disputing the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. (Item 5)   
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. There is no 
evidence that he violated security rules, abused alcohol, or used illegal drugs.  
 
The file lacks supporting documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to 
pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise resolved any of the delinquent accounts 
alleged in the SOR. There is no evidence of Applicant’s income, and he did not provide 
a budget or personal financial statement. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for his financial 
problems and other mitigating information. The FORM noted that Applicant had 30 days 
from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting forth 
objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not 
file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will be assigned to 
an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in 
this FORM. (FORM at 3) 
  
 
4 
  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
 
5 
  
 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SF 86, OPM PSI, and SOR response. Applicant’s 
SOR alleges eight delinquent debts totaling $22,228. His credit reports list the eight 
delinquent SOR debts. AG ¶ 19(g) reads, “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.” AG ¶ 19(g) does not 
apply because the record does not establish how Applicant’s $11,072 state tax lien was 
generated. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
6 
  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant’s stated efforts to resolve his delinquent debt do not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to all of his SOR debts; however, he presented 
some important mitigating information. He was unemployed from September 2009 to 
September 2010. He was also divorced in 2007. He had some medical debts. 
Unemployment, medical problems, and divorce are circumstances beyond his control 
that adversely affected his finances. He did not provide enough details about what he 
did to address his SOR debts after he became employed in 2010, and the degree of 
impact of these circumstances beyond his control to establish full mitigation. He did not 
describe receipt of financial counseling.    
 
                                            
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
  
 
I have credited Applicant with resolving the telecommunications debt in SOR ¶ 
1.a for $231. Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation relating to the other 
SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies 
of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the 
creditors; (2) correspondence to or from any creditors to establish maintenance of 
contact with creditors;5 (3) credible debt disputes indicating he did not believe he was 
responsible for the debts and why he held such a belief; (4) attempts to negotiate 
payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was attempting 
to resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution of his debts. 
 
Applicant told an OPM investigator that several of the SOR judgments were 
duplications of each other. His 2015 credit report indicates he disputed the judgment in 
SOR ¶ 1.c and it does not appear in his 2014 credit report. I have credited Applicant 
with mitigating the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. He failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) 
for any other SOR debts because he did not provide documented proof to substantiate 
the existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
progress resolving more of his SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance that his 
financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. 
Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish that financial considerations security 
concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
                                            
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old security guard employed by the current defense 
contractor since March 2014. From September 2010 to present, he has been employed 
as a security guard. From 1989 to 2009, he was employed at a corporation as a press 
operator. In 1999, he married, and in 2007, he divorced. He was unemployed from 
September 2009 to September 2010; he was also divorced in 2007; and he had some 
medical debts. Unemployment, medical problems, and divorce are circumstances 
beyond his control that adversely affected his finances. There is no evidence of abuse 
of alcohol, security violations, or use of illegal drugs.   
 
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. His SOR alleges 
eight delinquent debts totaling $22,228. I have credited him with paying the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.a for $231 and with disputing the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c for $1,188.6 He provided 
insufficient corroborating or substantiating documentary evidence of payments to his 
other SOR creditors, payment plans, or his communications to those creditors. He did 
not provide documentation showing his attempts to resolve any of his SOR debts in 
good faith. His failure to provide more documented evidence of progress resolving his 
SOR debts shows lack of financial responsibility and judgment and raises unmitigated 
questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. See AG ¶ 18. More information about inability to pay debts, financial 
history, or documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented 
resolution of his past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his 
obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
                                            
6It is important to be mindful of the Appeal Board’s admonition that “an applicant who begins to 
resolve debts only after an SOR placed him on notice that his clearance was in jeopardy may lack the 
judgment and self-discipline to follow rules and regulations over time or when there is no immediate threat 
to his own interests.” ISCR Case No. 14-05476 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-
03358 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015). Here, the record lacked evidence of payments of any debts, except 
for Applicant’s statement that he paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a.   
 
9 
  
 
person. I conclude that financial consideration concerns are not mitigated, and it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance 
eligibility at this time. Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
