 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00450 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 13, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 3, 2015, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on November 16, 2015. The 
 
2 
 
 
evidence included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-7 (Items 1-2 include pleadings 
and transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on 
January 11, 2016. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit any additional 
evidence nor did he object to any of the Government’s evidence. Items 3-7 are admitted 
into evidence. The case was assigned to me on March 14, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the SOR allegations. The 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He is married without children. He has worked for a 
contractor since June 2011. He experienced periods of unemployment from October 
2010 to November 2010, and from January 2009 to June 2010. He is a high school 
graduate and has taken some college courses.1  
  
 The SOR lists nine delinquent debts totaling approximately $22,901. The debts 
include seven collection accounts and two charged-off accounts. The debts are 
supported by credit reports from July 2015, December 2014, and July 2012, Applicant’s 
statement to a defense investigator in August 2012, and by Applicant’s admissions.2 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to his periods of unemployment in 
2009 and 2010. Even though he received unemployment benefits during this time, he 
was unable to pay his debts.3 
 
 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.b (consumer collection accounts $8,510; $2,177): 
 
 Applicant admitted he owed these collection accounts. His last actions on these 
accounts were in March and May 2008. There is no evidence of payment, payment 
plans, or settlement. These debts are unresolved.4 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 2, 4-7. 
 
3 Item 7. 
 
4 Items 2, 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c (charged-off consumer account $1,396): 
 
 Applicant admitted he owed this charged-off account. His last action on this 
account was in April 2008. There is no evidence of payment, payment plans, or 
settlement. This debt is unresolved.5 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.i (five collection accounts and a charged-off account $1,182; 
$1,105; $587; $546; $20; $7,378): 
 
 Applicant admitted that he owed these debts. His last actions on these accounts 
were in May to September 2008, February 2012, and April 2014. There is no evidence 
of payment, payment plans, or settlement. These debts are unresolved.6 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about his current financial status or a 
budget, other than to state in his August 2012 security clearance interview that his 
current financial status is not good. He stated he was able to pay his monthly living 
expenses, but not his accumulated debts. There is no evidence that he sought financial 
counseling.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
5 Items 2, 5. 
 
6 Items 2, 5-6. 
 
7 Items 2, 7. 
 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant presented some evidence that the debts were due to circumstances 
beyond his control (unemployment during 2009 and 2010), but he failed to provide 
documentation showing that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. I find AG ¶ 
20(b) partially applies. He did not provide documentation showing that the debts had 
been paid or that he established payment plans. There is no evidence of financial 
counseling. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. He did not produce documentary 
evidence to support a dispute of any debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered his periods of 
unemployment. Applicant has not established a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
