 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[NAME Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00639 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 7, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 17, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
on the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on  
January 6, 2016.  Applicant had 30 days to submit a response to the FORM. On 
February 19, 2016, he submitted a timely response to the FORM. On February 24,  
2016, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on March 1, 
2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits the SOR allegations. (Item 1)    
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain his security 
clearance. He has worked for his current employer since September 2003. He has held 
a security clearance since 2001. He has a high school diploma. He is married and has 
one adult stepson. (Item 2)   
 
On July 17, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 26 – Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts, Applicant listed several delinquent accounts. He indicated that his 
household income was reduced when his overtime and travel pay were reduced and his 
wife was forced to retire. He indicated that he was halfway through a payment plan with 
a debt-settlement company to resolve his delinquent accounts. (Item 3, section 26)  
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed the following delinquent 
accounts which are alleged in the SOR: a $20,892 credit-card account that was charged 
off in June 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 4 at 3; Item 5 at 2); a $15,322 credit-card account 
that was charged off in June 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 4 at 3); and $11,375 credit-card 
account that was charged off in June 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 4 at 4; Item 5 at 4)  
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits to all three debts. He states that his 
and his wife’s unsecured debt rose between 2010 and 2012 because his wife’s part-
time work hours were cut. She retired with the understanding that she would continue to 
be able to work 1,000 hours a year. His wife’s employer ended this agreement in 2011 
as a result of a change in company policy. Applicant’s income decreased because his 
company did not send him on travel work sites. He and his wife have been working on 
their financial issues since 2013. They have changed their spending habits and have no 
other unsecured debt other than the debts alleged in the SOR. (Item 1) 
 
The debts alleged in the SOR have been included in a debt-settlement program 
that Applicant entered into on April 30, 2013.  They have been making timely payments 
towards the program. The debt alleged in SOR ¶1.a is the next debt that the debt-
settlement company will enter into a debt settlement with payments to start in June 
2016. The debt alleged in SOR ¶1.b is being paid and will be paid in full in May 2016. 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶1.c was part of the debt-settlement agreement and paid off in 
January 2015. The debt-settlement program provided a letter indicating that Applicant is 
a client in good standing with the debt-settlement program. (Item 1) 
 
In his answer to the FORM, Applicant indicated he resolved a debt ($10,187) not 
alleged in the SOR in February 2014. (Item 6 at 1, 3, 10) He paid off the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c in January 2015. (Item 6 at 1-2) The July 2015 credit report verifies the debt  
alleged in  SOR ¶ 1.c is paid off. (Item 5 at 4) Applicant is making payments towards the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b and it will be paid off in May 2016. (Item 6 at 1, 4) Through 
his debt-settlement program, he intends to enter into a settlement with the debt alleged 
 
3 
 
 
in SOR ¶ 1.a with payments to begin in June 2016.  Applicant provided copies of his 
payment agreements for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, a copy of his 
agreement with the debt-settlement company, and proof that he was making payments 
towards his debt-settlement program.  (Item 6)  
 
When Applicant entered into the agreement with the debt-settlement company in 
April 2013, his total monthly income was $6,128. His total monthly expenses were 
$5,164. He had $964 left over each month after expenses. He agreed to pay $795 
monthly towards the agreement. His payments will continue under the agreement until 
April 2017.  He has been making timely payments since April 2013. (Item 6 at 18, 21)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
4 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns.  I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
encountered financial problems since about 2010.  The SOR alleges three delinquent 
accounts with a total balance of approximately $47,589. Both AG &19(a) and AG &19(c) 
apply.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
 
5 
 
 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control);  
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
AG & 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue). 
 
AG & 20(a) applies. Applicant incurred financial problems because his of reduced 
hours and travel in his job and the loss of his wife’s income. He took steps to resolve his 
delinquent accounts in April 2013 by entering into an agreement with a debt-settlement 
company. He has been making timely payments toward the plan since that time. Two of 
the three debts alleged in the SOR have been resolved. He is in the process of 
negotiating a settlement on the third debt. Applicant also paid off a fourth delinquent 
account that was not alleged in the SOR. Through his actions, Applicant has 
demonstrated his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.   
 
AG & 20(b) applies because Applicant and his wife encountered financial 
problems as a result of a reduction in his work hours and the loss of his wife’s income. 
Circumstances beyond Applicant’s control adversely affected his finances. His efforts to 
resolve his debts by entering into a debt-settlement agreement in April 2013 and his 
timely payments toward the agreement indicated that Applicant acted responsibly under 
the circumstances.   
 
6 
 
 
AG & 20(c) applies because Applicant assessed his financial situation when 
entering into the agreement with the debt-settlement company. Applicant systematically 
resolved his delinquent accounts. Only one delinquent account remains which based on 
Applicant’s track record, he is likely to resolve.   
 
AG & 20(d) applies because Applicant demonstrated that he made a good-faith 
effort to resolve his delinquent accounts.  In April 2013, he entered into a debt- 
settlement agreement.  He has followed the terms of the agreement and makes timely 
payments. He has resolved three of the four delinquent accounts included in the 
agreement. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c and one debt not alleged in the SOR) He established a 
plan to repay his delinquent accounts and has followed the terms of the plan.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of a meaningful track record necessarily includes 
evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an 
applicant is not required as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid 
off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his 
financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
 
7 
 
 
considered in reaching a determination.) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). 
         
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 13 years of 
service with his employer. I considered that the loss of his wife’s job and a reduction in 
income for Applicant adversely affected their finances. Applicant took steps to resolve 
his delinquent obligations by entering into a debt-settlement program. He has 
systematically resolved three of four delinquent debts and intends to enter into a 
settlement to resolve the remaining debt through his debt-settlement program. 
Considering his past history of timely payments and resolution of debts through the 
debt-settlement program over the past three years, I am confident Applicant will 
successfully resolve the remaining debt. The security concerns raised under financial 
considerations are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
  
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
