 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00910 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Betty Osborn, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the security concerns alleged under Guideline E, personal 
conduct, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, 
personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 4, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 17, 2016. 
 
2 
 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 22, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 16, 2016. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through L, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until 
March 30, 2016, to give Applicant more time to submit additional documents. He 
submitted documents that were marked AE M through R, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The record closed.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on March 24, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.a through 1.l. He denied SOR ¶ 
2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He completed the 11th grade. He was married from 
1978 to 1993. He has a grown child from a previous relationship. He has worked for a 
federal contractor from 1996 until he had medical problems in July 2014.2 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in August 2012. 
Question 26 on the SCA inquired about Applicant’s debts. He indicated that he had 
failed to pay his 2006 federal income taxes because his “mother was doing the 
paperwork and she failed to pay it for me and I didn’t know it until later.”3 He noted he 
owed $4,600 and that it was paid in full in February 2012. He did not disclose any other 
instances that he failed to pay his federal or state taxes.4  
 
 In July 2014 Applicant developed a serious and debilitating illness. He has been 
unable to work or pay his bills since then. He admitted he owes the delinquent debts in 
SOR ¶ 1.c through ¶ 1.l, totaling approximately $37,000. Applicant stated that he 
contacted the creditors to explain the reason he could not pay them. He does not know 
when he will be able to pay his delinquent debts. He does not have any money and 
relies on Social Security disability payments. The debts alleged in the SOR are 
supported by credit reports from September 2012 and July 2015.5   
 
 Federal tax liens were filed against Applicant in 2009 for $121,521 and in 2010 
for $32,015. Applicant testified that he worked away from his residence and his 
                                                          
1 HE I is Department Counsel’s email memorandum. 
 
2 Tr. 28-30. 
 
3 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing questionnaire for National Security Positions, 
signed August 30, 2012.  
 
4 GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. 30-31; 54-58; GE 2, 3; AE F and G. 
 
3 
 
 
stepmother took care of his bills, banking, and taxes. She was supposed to file his 
federal income tax returns for him and make required quarterly payments. He testified 
that she never filed his 2004 through 2011 federal income tax returns and did not pay 
his taxes as she agreed to do.6 He stated that he relied on her to prepare and file the 
returns, and paid for her to have a company complete them. He testified that in the past, 
he signed some of the tax returns and sometimes she signed for him. Applicant testified 
that he paid a tax attorney $6,000 to discuss his tax liability with the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) and arrange an installment agreement to pay his tax debt. He provided a 
document that shows he had an agreement with a tax “solution” company dated June 
2013.7 He stated that since 2012 he has been making monthly payments of $124 to the 
IRS. He provided a letter from the IRS indicating that it accepted an installment 
agreement to pay $124 a month beginning in December 2013. He provided proof that 
he made a payment of $124 to the IRS in December 2013 and January 2016. The IRS 
letter from November 2015 indicates that the balance owed by Applicant for tax years 
2004 through 2012 is $82,020. In the block “last payment received” the amount is zero.8 
Applicant testified that he uses his Social Security disability payment to pay the IRS. He 
indicated that the IRS may suspend his installment agreement because he cannot 
afford to make the payments.9  
 
 Applicant testified that he was unaware when he completed his SCA that he had 
delinquent federal income taxes or tax liens because he relied on his stepmother to 
handle the matters. He testified that he was providing his stepmother money to pay his 
bills before he became sick and that she was stealing his money and not paying his 
bills. He testified that she retrieved his mail when he was on travel. His stepmother no 
longer has access to his accounts. She abandoned him when he became sick.10  
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from an employer who described him as 
dependable, conscientious, honest, trustworthy, and an excellent employee.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
6 I have not considered information regarding unfiled tax returns for disqualifying purposes, but may 
consider it when analyzing Applicant’s credibility, in mitigation, and the whole person. 
 
7 AE R. 
 
8 AE I, K, N. 
 
9 Tr. 32-47, 61. 
 
10 Tr. 32-53, 59-61. 
 
11 AE A. 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.12 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant has two delinquent tax liens from 2009 and 2010. He also has 
delinquent debts totaling approximately $37,000. The above disqualifying conditions 
apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant attributed the federal tax liens to a period when he relied on his 
stepmother to pay his quarterly federal income taxes, file his returns, and pay his bills. 
He subsequently learned that she was stealing from him and not helping him manage 
his financial obligations. In 2014, Applicant became disabled and has been unable to 
pay his bills. None of the debts alleged in the SOR are resolved or paid. Applicant’s 
debts are recent and ongoing. There is insufficient evidence to conclude they are 
unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s stepmother abused her position of trust. Applicant is unemployed due 
to medical problems and has been unable to work since July 2014. He cannot pay his 
delinquent debts. He has had an installment agreement with the IRS to pay his 
delinquent federal income taxes since December 2013, but provided proof of making 
only two payments. He testified that the IRS is reviewing his situation and ability to pay. 
No other proof of payments was provided. Applicant’s medical condition resulting in his 
unemployment was beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant 
must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant failed to provide 
sufficient evidence to show he responsibly monitored his financial situation to ensure his 
taxes or other debts were being paid. Due to his medical condition he is unable to work 
and pay his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 None of the SOR debts are paid or resolved. It appears Applicant has an 
installment agreement with the IRS that began in December 2013. He provided 
evidence of two payments. He testified he has been making payments to the IRS since 
2012. The IRS letter indicates the balance he owes is less than the tax liens alleged. 
Applicant has not paid or resolved any of the other delinquent debts in the SOR. 
Applicant did not provide evidence that he received financial counseling. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved, 
under control, or that he has initiated good-faith payments to pay overdue creditors, 
other than the two payments to the IRS. AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies to the extent that 
he made an effort to contact the IRS and participate in an installment agreement. AG ¶ 
20(c) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
Applicant was unaware that his stepmother was not paying his quarterly federal 
taxes, and that as a consequence he incurred a large tax debt. Although he should have 
been more responsible in monitoring her conduct, I find he was unaware when he 
completed his SCA that his tax liens entered against him. I find Applicant did not 
intentionally fail to disclose he had federal tax liens. The above disqualifying condition 
does not apply. Applicant successfully refuted the personal conduct allegation. Hence, a 
discussion of mitigating conditions is not necessary. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 61 years old. He owes a large federal tax debt and approximately 
$37,000 in delinquent debts. He has an installment agreement with the IRS, but there is 
insufficient evidence to conclude he began making payments in 2012 or has made 
consistent payments. He provided evidence he has made only two payments since 
 
8 
 
 
negotiating that agreement in 2013. Applicant is unable to pay his delinquent debts, due 
to his medical problems and unemployment. He did not provide sufficient evidence to 
show he established a track record of being fiscally responsible or a plan to resolve his 
financial obligations. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations. Applicant successfully refuted the personal conduct allegations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:   Against Applicant 
     
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
