 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-02592   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 27, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of excessive alcohol consumption and criminal 
misconduct. Based upon a review of the testimony, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On May 15, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On December 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guidelines G (Alcohol) 
and J (Criminal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 13, 2016 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 15, 
2016. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 16, 2016, scheduling the hearing for 
April 4, 2016. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf. The record was left open until April 11, 2016, for Applicant to submit 
exhibits. Applicant failed to submit any documentation by April 11, 2016, and the record 
closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 12, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He has been employed by a government contractor 
since October 2009. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2005. He has never married and 
has no children. (GE 1.) 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was arrested and convicted of Driving Under the 
Influence of Alcohol twice: on August 27, 2010, and May 24, 2014. Applicant admitted to 
all of the allegations contained in the SOR.  
 
 On or about August 27, 2010, Applicant was at a bar. He consumed 
approximately four beers and a shot of whiskey. He did not feel intoxicated and chose to 
drive home. He was stopped by a police office for “rolling [through] a stop sign.” He was 
administered a breathalyzer test, which he failed. He was subsequently arrested and 
charged with Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol. He voluntarily attended an alcohol 
safety program prior to his court appearance. In October 2010, he pled guilty to Driving 
Under the Influence of Alcohol. He was sentenced to pay a fine; his driver’s license was 
suspended for six months; he was required to attend 12 to 16 Alcoholics Anonymous 
(AA) classes; and he was placed on probation for three years. (GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 15.) 
 
 On May 24, 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the 
Influence of Alcohol. He was attending a barbeque and consumed two glasses of 
whiskey and six or more beers over a period of several hours. He did not feel 
intoxicated and chose to drive home. He was stopped at a sobriety checkpoint. He was 
administered a sobriety test and failed it. Subsequently, he was arrested. Applicant pled 
guilty to the charge of Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol and was sentenced to 96 
hours of jail; three years of probation; and was required to enroll in an alcohol 
counseling program. Applicant testified he is still on probation for this offense. (GE 2; 
GE 3; Tr. 20-23.) 
 
 Applicant began consuming alcohol at the age of 19. (GE 2.) In addition to the 
alcohol arrests alleged, Applicant admitted that he received a citation for having an 
open container of alcohol on the beach in July 2013. (Tr. 19-20.)  
 
 Applicant testified that he has learned from his mistakes. He testified that he has 
not consumed alcohol in the past “10 to 12 months.” He no longer associates with the 
 
 
3 
 
 
friends he used to drink with, and now associates with supportive friends and family. He 
does not currently attend AA. (Tr. 14-21.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The disqualifying conditions raised by the evidence are: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.     
  
 Applicant was convicted of two Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol incidents in 
August 2010 and May 2014, after he consumed alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment and chose to drive. These incidents raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 
22(a) and 22(c).   
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s alcohol-related incidents are recent. Other than completing the court 
ordered alcohol-related classes, he produced little evidence of rehabilitation that would 
show future misconduct is unlikely to occur. No prognosis was offered into evidence. 
Applicant failed to meet his burden to mitigate the alcohol-related concerns. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and  
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation.  
 
Applicant has a recent history of criminal arrests and convictions that occurred in 
2010 and 2014. These offenses give rise to concerns about Applicant’s judgment and 
reliability, both because of the nature of the offenses and the quantity of criminal 
offenses. Further, he produced no documentation to show he was released from 
probation. The aforementioned disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
Four Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 
 
6 
 
 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life; 
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
  
 Applicant’s criminal past continues to cast doubt on his trustworthiness and 
judgment. His offenses are recent and he failed to present evidence to show that similar 
criminal conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 32(a) does not provide full mitigation. 
 
 Applicant failed to present evidence to show that he was pressured into criminal 
acts. He admitted each of the allegations. Neither AG ¶¶ 32(b) nor 32(c) provide 
mitigation. 
 
 Applicant failed to introduce evidence of sufficient rehabilitation. While he 
testified he had remorse for his past, and that he completed court-ordered alcohol 
classes, he presented nothing but his self-serving claims to show the levels of his 
current alcohol consumption. Further, he presented no documentation of job training or 
higher education, a good employment record, or other constructive community 
involvement. Not enough time has passed since his criminal convictions to support a 
finding of rehabilitation. AG ¶ 32(d) does not provide full mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines G and J in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s alcohol consumption 
and criminal conduct occurred around a designated set of friends with whom he no 
longer associates. He has completed the court-ordered alcohol classes. However, he 
failed to present enough evidence of rehabilitation to overcome his heavy burden to 
mitigate his alcohol abuse and criminal conduct. Overall, the record evidence raises 
doubts about Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from the cited 
adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
