 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-02318   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 5, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on two debts in the total amount of 
$32,371. He has fully resolved one delinquency, and has documented he is making 
payments under a written agreement on the other delinquency. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 25, 2015, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 13, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned me on February 1, 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 2, 2016, scheduling the hearing for March 3, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on March 10, 2016. The record was left open for Applicant to submit 
additional exhibits. Applicant presented additional exhibits on March 30, 2016 and April 
28, 2016, marked AE E and AE F. Department Counsel had no objections to AE E and 
AE F, and they were admitted. The record then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He served in the Navy for 30 years and achieved the 
rank of chief warrant officer 4. He successfully held a security clearance while in the 
Navy, without incident. He currently works for a government contractor. He has been 
married for 28 years and has three children. (GE 1; Tr. 16-17, 34, 40-41.) 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant was delinquent on two debts in the total amount of 
$32,371. In his Answer, Applicant admitted both debts. His debts are documented in the 
record credit report dated May 8, 2014. (GE 3.) After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant was indebted to a bank on a charged-off credit card in the amount of 
$3,722, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. This debt had been delinquent since May 2008. 
Applicant resolved this debt in full as evidenced by a letter from this creditor. (AE E.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted to a bank on a charged-off credit card in the amount of 
$28,649, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. This debt had been delinquent since April 2008. 
Applicant reached a written payment agreement with this creditor in March 2016 to 
resolve this debt for 12 payments of $500. He documented that he successfully made 
the first two payments under this agreement. This debt is being resolved. (AE E; AE F.) 
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquencies to a “debt consolidation gone wrong.” (Tr. 
15.) His wife had control of his finances while he was deployed and she incurred a large 
amount of debt. After returning from deployment, he sought to consolidate all of his debt 
with a credit counseling firm, but these two debts were inadvertently left unresolved. 
They were then charged off by the creditor and Applicant thought that he was not 
permitted to pay on charged-off accounts. However, he realized his error and made 
payments as set out above. There are no delinquent debts on his current credit report. 
(GE 6; AE B.) He completed a financial counseling class entitled “Saving and Investing.” 
(AE A.) He testified that he has enough money left over at the end of the month to make 
payments on his remaining debt until it is fully resolved, without getting further into debt. 
He is committed to resolving his financial obligations. (AE C; AE D; Tr. 30-34.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal (Gold 
Star in Lieu of Eighth Award) in November 2012. (AE A.) His DD Form 214 shows he 
has also received the Meritorious Service Medal, three Navy and Marine Corps 
Achievement Medals, and two Navy Unit Commendations, among many other 
decorations and citations. (AE E.) His performance appraisals for his work with a 
government contractor reflect he is an outstanding employee. (AE E.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
 
4 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant accumulated two debts in the total amount of $32,371. They have been 
delinquent since 2008. These debts establish both a history of delinquencies and an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy his obligations. The evidence raises security 
concerns under the above conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. I find the following two provide 
mitigation: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems occurred while he was deployed. He attempted to 
resolve them responsibly after he returned, but two of his debts were inadvertently left 
off his debt resolution plan. While it took him a long time to finally address his remaining 
two delinquencies, he has recently acted responsibly by addressing them. One debt is 
fully resolved and he is making payments on the other debt. He has shown a recent 
track record of making consistent payments. He can be trusted to continue to make his 
monthly payments on his remaining delinquency. There are clear indications that his 
delinquencies are being resolved or are under control. Applicant’s indebtedness does 
not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The security 
concerns with respect to his financial delinquencies are mitigated.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. While Applicant’s actions to 
resolve his debts came after the hearing, he testified credibly about his understanding 
that charged-off debts could no longer be repaid. Once he discovered his belief was in 
error, he took immediate action and contacted his creditors. Given his 30 years of 
service in the Navy, his history of holding a security clearance without incident, and his 
recent efforts to resolve his debt, overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt 
as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He met his 
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
