 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00987 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 3, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on December 21, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on December 29, 2015. He responded with a letter and bankruptcy 
documents that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B. The case was 
assigned to me on February 8, 2016. The Government exhibits included in the FORM 
and AE A and B are admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since May 2014. He served in the U.S. military from 2003 until he 
was honorably discharged in 2010. He attended a technical school and college without 
earning a degree. He married in 2008, separated in 2012, and divorced in 2014. He has 
a minor child.1   
 
Applicant was unemployed from May 2013 until he was hired by his current 
employer in May 2014. The unemployment, along with his separation, divorce, and 
being a single parent without the aid of child support, created financial problems. It 
appears that Applicant’s ex-wife now has custody of their child.2   
 
 Applicant decided his best recourse was to handle his debts through bankruptcy. 
He filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in June 2015. Under Schedule D, Creditors 
Holding Secured Claims, the petition listed $8,641 for a car loan. The petition listed 
$306 owed in child support to Applicant’s ex-wife under Schedule E, Creditors Holding 
Unsecured Priority Claims. Under Schedule F, Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority 
Claims, the petition listed debts totaling $61,190, which included $16,232 for a student 
loan. Applicant’s dischargeable debts were discharged in September 2015. The court 
noted that domestic support obligations and most student loans are not discharged in a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy case.3   
 
The SOR alleges the Chapter 7 bankruptcy case, which was not completed when 
the SOR was issued, and nine delinquent debts totaling about $22,300. Applicant 
denied owing the debts, indicating that his Chapter 7 bankruptcy case was final.4   
 
All of the debts alleged in the SOR were listed in the bankruptcy petition, except 
for the $98 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. The debt is not specifically listed under 
the collection company named in the SOR. Applicant stated it was listed in the 
bankruptcy petition under the medical center that was the original creditor. The 
bankruptcy discharged all the debts alleged in the SOR with the exception of the $238 
debt to the Department of Veterans Affairs, which was paid in February 2015. Before he 
filed the bankruptcy case, Applicant paid other debts that were not alleged in the SOR.5   
                                                          
1 Item 3.  
 
2 Items 2-6; AE A.  
 
3 Items 2; AE B.  
 
4 Item 2.  
 
5 Items 3-6; AE B.  
 
3 
 
Applicant received financial counseling as a requirement of his bankruptcy case. 
His student loans were deferred, but they will still have to be paid, as will any child 
support. Applicant is gainfully employed; he receives benefits from the Department of 
Veterans Affairs; and his divorce and bankruptcy are behind him. His financial problems 
have been resolved.6     
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
6 Items 3-6; AE B.  
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable or unwilling to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by his unemployment, separation, 
divorce, and being a single parent without the aid of child support. He acted responsibly 
under the circumstances and resolved his financial problems through the legal remedy 
of a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case. A fundamental goal of the federal bankruptcy laws 
enacted by Congress is to give debtors a financial “fresh start” from burdensome debts.7 
The Supreme Court made this point about the purpose of the bankruptcy laws in a 1934 
decision: 
 
[I]t gives to the honest but unfortunate debtor . . . a new opportunity in life 
and a clear field for future effort, unhampered by the pressure and 
discouragement of preexisting debt.8 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is applicable. Applicant’s resolution of his debts through Chapter 7 
bankruptcy does not qualify as a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.9 AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. However, through the 
bankruptcy, the problem has been resolved and is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) is only partially applicable because of the recency of the 
bankruptcy discharge. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
                                                          
7 See http://www.uscourts.gov/FederalCourts/Bankruptcy/BankruptcyBasics/Process.aspx.  
8 Local Loan Co. v. Hunt, 292 U.S. 234, 244 (1934). 
9 See ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 
(App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
6 
 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
