The Government submitted six items for the record.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-01208
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On August 19, 2015, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a review based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on April 11, 2016. Department
Counsel submitted a File of Relevant material (FORM), dated December 24, 2015.1
Applicant received the FORM on December 28, 2015. Applicant responded to FORM
with a packet of documents. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Applicant objected to his 2012 Personal Subject Interview on the basis that it was not authenticated and      2
is over three years old. Since it was so long ago, he cannot be certain that it is accurate. I did not consider the
2012 interview. 
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the SOR allegations under  Guideline
F (1.a through 1.u), and he provided explanations.  2
Applicant is 48 years old. He is married and has one young child. He obtained
his undergraduate degree in 1993. Applicant completed his security clearance
application in 2012. He has been with his current employer since 2012. This is his first
request for a security clearance. (Item 3)
The SOR alleges 21 delinquent debts, including twelve collection accounts, and
nine charged-off accounts. (Items 4-5) The approximate total for the delinquent debts is
$96,650. Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to his unemployment which
occurred in 2009. He referred to this as an economic depression which was the first
time in his life that he was unemployed. His salary was reduced from $85,000 per
annum to $400 a week in unemployment benefits. Applicant explained that he paid all
of his bills through June 2010 in the hopes of finding another job soon. He claimed he
sold his assets and used his savings to pay his mortgage. The unsecured debts went
unpaid. He emphasized that his delinquent debts were due to an inability to pay and not
an unwillingness to pay. (Item 2)
Applicant believed that his case should be mitigated because his case should
rest on one or two mitigating factors such as circumstances beyond ones control and
the behavior happened long ago. He is certain that this will not occur again. He claimed
that he did not lack judgment or self-control in this situation. He believed that he acted
responsibly in the situation because he paid his mortgage, his health insurance, his car
insurance, bought food for his family, paid utilities, and terminated cable. He also
borrowed from his family. He prioritized his debts. He stopped paying his consumer
debts in June 2010.
Applicant’s answer to the SOR explains that for each delinquent account nothing
is owed because the account has been deleted or will soon be deleted. He elaborated
that although some have not been removed, that they are a cancelled debt. (Item 2) He
noted that since the debts are about six years old and have been charged-off accounts,
he does not owe the money for the account listed on the SOR. He emphasized that
charged-off means the creditor has cancelled the debt. He also noted that he had
received a letter of cancellation of debt for another account, but cannot locate it.
(Answer)
Applicant submitted documents showing his unemployment earnings in 2009,
2010, and 2011. (AX A) He submitted a 2012 credit bureau report showing that before
2010, he had been paying his accounts. (AX B) He provided a 2011 Form 1099-C for a
3
cancellation of debt for the account in SOR 1.b in the amount of $19,999. (AX C) This
debt was dismissed by court order in May 2015. (AX D) He included a letter dated July
2013 to a credit repair company, but he soon cancelled the service because he could
not pay. (AX H) In 2014, he obtained the services of another company, but company
records do not reflect that any payments were negotiated or made to Applicant’s
consumer accounts. He included several letters to a few creditors not listed on the SOR
asking them to negotiate a settlement. He noted a state statute of limitations from one
state that has absolved him from unsecured debts after four years. (AX F) He received
a letter from a dentist (AX K) that reflects that he made partial payments for his bill in
the amount of $50 per month and asked for a settlement. (AX K) There was no
response to the letter in the file. He also received a letter referring to a settlement for
another account, but he did not include a response. There is no information in the
record concerning his present income.
Applicant notes that he has not incurred new debt and cites to his most recent
credit report. (AX J) He presented a certificate of ownership for his two automobiles
dated 2013 and 2014 to show that they are paid. He presented a release of lien, dated
2015, from a homeowners association because he paid a special assessments tax on
his home beginning in 2010. (Response to FORM) He presented a copy of a credit
score that had risen to 726, which is considered, a good score. (AX G) He presented
his bank statements that show he has been paying back the loan from his father. (AX F)
In Applicant’s Response to FORM, he stated that he does not intend to service
any of the SOR debt, that he is not being harassed or pressured and can’t be sued and
the debt has expired. He believes it would be highly irresponsible and illogical for him to
start to pay back tens of thousands of dollars for debt that is no longer being collected
by anyone. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      6
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 Id.      8
4
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance of3
evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  4 5
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a8
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
.  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
5
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. It also states that an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
The Government produced credible evidence that Applicant  incurred delinquent
debts and had delinquencies due to unemployment. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations)
apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against
him and mitigate security concerns.  
Applicant is now employed and states that his unemployment from 2009 was
unique to the economic downturn and will not occur again. He provided information that
he paid his mortgage and prioritized debts. However, his significant amount of collection
account debt is not resolved nor in any plan. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)
only receives partial application.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
partially applies. Applicant’s long unemployment was certainly beyond his control. He
provided for his family, paid basic bills, paid for two autos and initially thought he would
try to settle his other debts. However as time went by, he decided that the unsecured
debts were not a priority and due to the age of the debts and the fact that some were
charged-off indicating that he is not legally required to pay the accounts. However, he
does not believe that he owes any of the debts on the SOR because he at the time had
no ability to address them. He insists that he is not unreliable but was a victim of the
economic downturn. He has no intention of paying on “old” debts. Despite his efforts to
pay basic bills and inability to pay at the time, does not provide sufficient mitigation for
security concerns.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has some application. He has provided some
information that he paid non-SOR debts and one SOR debt. There is no  information
that he has received formal financial counseling. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications
that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control), however, does not apply.
6
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 48 years old. He was unemployed in 2009 during the economic downturn.
He provided for his family and paid his mortgage. He paid his basic bills. He could not
find a job immediately and received unemployment benefits. He prioritized his bills. He
decided that the unsecured debt payments had to stop in 2010. At first he decided to
settle accounts. He paid some bills and provided documentation for them. He disputed
some. It was not his fault that he was unable to pay all the debts listed on the SOR.
However, he now believes that due to the age of the debts and the fact that they are
charged-off, he is not responsible for them. He does not intend to pay any of them
listed on the SOR, There is nothing in the record concerning any criminal behavior. He
has had steady employment since 2012 and has no new debts. He clearly believes that
he has mitigated the security concerns under the financial guidelines because he would
be silly to pay old debts now and that he has shown that he paid his mortgage and
other accounts. This is not sufficient mitigation for security clearance guidelines under
financial considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:                       AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
7
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.c-1q: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.s-t: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.u: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
