 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-03205 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate security concerns raised by his longstanding financial 
problems. Over the past decade, while employed as a defense contractor, he 
disregarded his financial obligations, including failing to timely file and pay his federal 
and state income taxes. His past-due federal tax debt totals approximately $24,000. 
Notwithstanding the matters beyond Applicant’s control that contributed to his financial 
situation, he failed to provide sufficient information to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his financial circumstances. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On October 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
his circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a determination based on the 
administrative (written) record.  
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 9, 2015, Department Counsel prepared his written case, a file of 
relevant material (FORM), and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the pleadings, 
Applicant’s security clearance application (SCA), a summary of his security clearance 
background interview, and credit reports from 2012 and 2015. These items were 
admitted into the record, without objection, as Exhibits 1 – 5.  
 
 On December 13, 2015, Applicant filed his response to the FORM (Response). 
The Response was marked Exhibit (Ex.) 6 and, without objection, admitted into the 
record.2 On March 3, 2016, I was assigned Applicant’s case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, who is in his late thirties, is married. He has been with his current 
employer since 2006. He has held a security clearance since 2011.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems date back to around 1999 when his grandmother, 
who was living with his mother and paying about half of the family’s household 
expenses, passed away. Applicant left college and found work to help support his 
mother. His mother was unemployed from 2003 to 2007. Applicant was employed at a 
low-paying retail job from 2002 to 2005, and then was unemployed for about five 
months before securing his current job in 2006. At about the same time, Applicant’s 
mother filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy to save the family home from foreclosure. 
Applicant helped his mother pay the $1,200 monthly bankruptcy payments and the 
bankruptcy was completed in approximately 2012. (Ex. 2; Ex. 3 at 5-9; Ex. 6.E.) 
 
 Applicant, while financially assisting his mother from 2006 to 2012, disregarded 
his own financial obligations. Notably, he did not file his federal or state income tax 
returns from 2007 to 2011, incurring a combined federal and state tax debt for those 
years totaling approximately $24,000. He disclosed this adverse financial information on 
his 2012 SCA. During the course of his background interview, Applicant stated that, 
after his mother’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy case was completed, he contacted the IRS 
and the state and entered into an installment agreement to resolve his past-due federal 
and state taxes. Applicant notes in his Answer that he also owes federal taxes for 2012 
and 2013, but worked out a payment arrangement with the IRS to resolve this additional 
federal tax debt. (Ex. 1 – Ex. 3.) 
 
 Applicant submitted documents with his Response reflecting payments to the IRS 
to resolve past-due federal taxes. Applicant also submitted notices from the IRS, noting 
that he owed a combined total of nearly $24,000 for tax years 2009 – 2013. (Ex. 6.A; 
Ex. 6.B.) He did not submit documentation to corroborate his past assertions that he 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 With the Response, Applicant submitted seven attachments, which have been marked Ex. 6.A – Ex. 6.G 
and are admitted into the record without objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum noting the 
Government had no objection to the Response is included in the record as Appellate Exhibit I.  
 
3 
 
 
addressed his state tax situation. Applicant’s failure to timely file and pay his federal and 
state income taxes are referenced at SOR 1.a through 1.c.3 
 
Applicant also incurred a number of other past-due debts, including defaulting on 
his federal student loans. In 2011, Applicant contacted the creditors holding his student 
loans and agreed to a repayment plan. He provided documentation detailing student 
loan payments. Notwithstanding these payments, Applicant’s student loan balance has 
increased from the approximate $12,000, alleged in the SOR, to about $14,000. 
Applicant’s federal student loans remain in collection status. He hopes to consolidate 
and rehabilitate his student loans in the near future. (Ex. 1; Ex. 5; Ex. 6.C; Ex. 6.D) 
Applicant’s delinquent federal student loans are referenced at SOR 1.d through 1.g.  
 
The SOR also alleges at 1.h and 1.i two judgments filed against Applicant in 
2009 and 2006, respectively. Applicant denies these judgments, stating he settled and 
paid both judgments. He provided letters from 2011 addressed to both judgment 
creditors and copies of the cashier’s checks drawn on his mother’s bank account. He 
admits the $748 collection account referenced in SOR 1.j and claims it is paid, but did 
not provide documentation to substantiate his claim. He denies the $300 medical 
collection account referenced in SOR 1.k. Applicant’s 2015 credit report does not reflect 
the debts referenced in SOR 1.h – 1.k.  
 
Applicant did not provide information regarding his current finances or job 
performance. He also did not provide information regarding whether he has received 
financial counseling but, as of the 2012 background interview, he had not received such 
counseling. His mother moved in with him following a natural disaster that resulted in 
the loss of her home.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision. 
  
                                                          
3 The SOR allegations cover the period of 2007 – 2009, and not the additional federal tax debt for 2012 
and 2013. This additional federal tax debt is only being considered in assessing Applicant’s mitigation 
case and whole-person factors.  
 
4 
 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Applicant’s failure to timely file and pay his federal and state taxes from 2007 to 
2011 and his delinquent federal student loans raise the financial considerations security 
concern.4 The record evidence also establishes the disqualifying conditions at: 
 
                                                          
4 The record evidence tends to indicate that the debts listed at 1.h – 1.i were resolved in the past and, in 
any case, the security concerns raised by these debts is relatively minor when compared to the concerns 
raised by the other SOR allegations.  
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 19(a):  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
AG ¶ 19(g): failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant bears the burden of mitigating the security concerns raised by the 
evidence. The financial considerations guideline lists a number of conditions that could 
mitigate the concern. The following mitigating conditions are most relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s finances were impacted by his own unemployment and 
underemployment, and his mother’s unemployment. His decision after gaining full-time 
employment to financially assist his mother is both understandable and commendable. 
Notwithstanding this favorable information, Applicant’s repeated failure to file and pay 
his taxes raises serious security concerns. He did contact the IRS four years ago to 
resolve his tax situation and has resolved his past-due taxes for 2007 and 2008. Yet, his 
overall tax debt has remained the same, as he did not pay his federal income taxes for 
2012 and 2013. He provided no documentation to corroborate his past statements that 
he addressed his state tax situation. In short, Applicant’s tax debts are substantial and 
remain an ongoing security concern.5 Furthermore, in light of Applicant’s failure to pay 
his 2012 and 2013 federal taxes when due, he failed to establish that similar security-
significant issues are unlikely to recur. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02694 (App. Bd. 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case 12-09545 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 21, 2015) (“A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her 
legal obligations, such as filing and paying taxes, does not demonstrate the high degree of good 
judgment and reliability required of those granted access to classified information.”). See also, ISCR Case 
No. 14-04752 at 2 (App. Bd. May 17, 2016) (“Failure to comply with Federal and/or state tax laws 
suggests that an applicant has a problem with abiding by well-established Government rules and 
regulations. Voluntary compliance with rules and regulationsis essential for protecting classified 
information.”). 
 
6 
 
 
Dec. 9, 2015) (notwithstanding installment agreement to resolve taxes owed for prior 
years, adverse decision sustained, in part, because applicant failed to timely pay federal 
taxes in subsequent years).  
 
 Additionally, despite full-time employment for the past 10 years, Applicant’s 
federal student loan accounts remain in collection. Applicant provided no information 
regarding his current finances and the record is silent as to whether he has received 
financial counseling. On the basis of this record, Applicant failed to clearly establish that 
his financial situation is under control.  
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to classified information.6 Applicant failed to meet his burden of 
persuasion. Specifically, I find that AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) partially apply and 20(d) fully 
applies, but are insufficient to mitigate the financial considerations security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of all the relevant 
circumstances, to include the factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my 
comments under Guideline F and highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 I gave due consideration to all the favorable and extenuating factors in this case, 
including Applicant’s honesty about his financial situation throughout the course of the 
security clearance process and that he has held a clearance for at least five years 
without apparent issue except for those set forth in the SOR. Furthermore, his finances 
were heavily impacted by his decision to assist his mother, which raises favorable 
inferences regarding his overall character.  
 
 On the other hand, Applicant’s decision to neglect his own financial 
responsibilities and obligations, notably, his obligation to file and pay his taxes and 
federal student loan obligation, raises unresolved questions about his reliability and the 
other pertinent character traits required of those granted access to classified 
information. Accordingly, notwithstanding the favorable information in the record, the 
security concerns raised by Applicant’s finances remain. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with doubts about his present eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:         Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.h – 1.i:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
