1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-02538 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 16, 2014. On 
October 2, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 30, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 
17, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on February 22, 2016. On February 26, 
2 
 
2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the 
hearing was scheduled for March 22, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through C, which were 
admitted without objection. I kept the record open until April 6, 2016, to enable him to 
submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX D through G, which 
were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX D 
through G are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on March 30, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-
1.n, but commented that some of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR had been 
paid. He attached documentation showing payment of two debts. He did not admit or 
deny SOR ¶ 2.a. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in 
my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 61-year-old inspection supervisor employed by a defense 
contractor since September 1980. He also holds three part-time jobs as a limousine 
driver, football official, and event staff supervisor for a local university. Applicant married 
in September 1986, and he and his wife have four adult children. He has held a security 
clearance since about 1984. (Tr. 34.) 
 
 The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts, which are reflected in his June 2014 and 
February 2015 credit bureau reports. (GX 3; GX 4.) The evidence concerning these 
debts is summarized below.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: home mortgage loan (past due payments of $244,967; balance 
on loan of $453,641). Applicant’s financial problems began when he and his wife 
decided to refinance their home mortgage loan to reduce their monthly payments, and 
they obtained an adjustable-rate loan. Applicant’s wife was handling the family finances 
at the time, and she suggested the refinancing. When the rate adjusted and the 
payments increased, and they could no longer afford them. They offered to make partial 
payments and tried to renegotiate the loan, without success. They stopped making 
payments about four years ago. In a personal subject interview in August 2014, 
Applicant told the investigator that his wife was taking most of the family income and 
donating it to their church. They were notified in February 2011 that the lender was 
foreclosing on the property. They moved out of the house and expected it to be sold. In 
November 2011, they discovered that the property had not been sold, when the 
homeowners’ association notified them that the association dues had not been paid. As 
of the date of the hearing, they had paid the past-due association dues, which are not 
alleged in the SOR. (GX 2 at 2; Tr. 38-43.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: credit-card account placed for collection for $1,135. Applicant 
testified that he thought this account was paid off because he never received any bills. 
3 
 
He contacted the creditor after receiving the SOR and was informed that the account 
had been sold. (Tr. 44-45.) The debt is unresolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: credit-card account placed for collection for $538. After the 
hearing, Applicant settled this debt for $349.70. (AX F.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: credit-card account charged off for $511. Applicant provided no 
information about this account. (Tr. 46.) It is unresolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: satellite television service referred for collection for $164. 
Applicant speculated that the debt might be for equipment. He had satellite service 
about five or six years ago. (Tr. 46-47.) The debt is unresolved.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: telecommunications bill referred for collection for $78. The 
account is current. (AX E.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: credit-card account referred for collection for $68. Applicant 
provided no information about this account. It is unresolved. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.h-1.k: four judgments obtained by a property management 
company for late rent payments ($1,630; $1,140; $1,151; and $245). Applicant 
testified that each judgment was filed within a few days after the rent was past due. (Tr. 
48-50.) All four judgments were satisfied in 2011 and 2012. (Attachments to SOR 
answer.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m, electronics company debt referred for collection for 
$452; credit card account referred for collection for $452. Applicant settled a $662 
bill from a collection company, to whom both debts had been referred, for $66. (AX A.) 
He settled it shortly before the hearing, and he was not sure that his payment settled 
both debts. (Tr. 51-52.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.n, insurance bill referred for collection for $52. This debt was paid 
before Applicant received the SOR. (AX G; SOR Answer.) 
 
 Shortly before the hearing, Applicant made the final payment of $353 on a 
$1,155 debt to a furniture store. (AX B.) He recently received an offer for a pre-
approved credit card from the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, with a $1,500 credit limit. 
(AX C.) He thought it was ironic for the holder of a delinquent debt referred for collection 
to offer him additional credit. (Tr. 54.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA in June 2014, he did not disclose any 
delinquent debts. He testified that he thought the home would be sold, although they still 
owned it when he submitted his SCA. He testified that “it didn’t cross [his] mind” to 
disclose the delinquent mortgage-loan payments. He also testified that he had not 
checked his credit report, had not received bills from any of the creditors alleged in the 
4 
 
SOR, and was unaware that he had other delinquent debts in addition to the mortgage 
loan. (Tr. 55-56.) 
 
Applicant’s annual salary is about $82,000. With overtime, he usually earns 
about $95,000 per year. (Tr. 36.) He and his wife now have a joint bank account, which 
is used for household expenses, and each has a separate account. Applicant has about 
$1,000 in his personal account. He pays the rent, car payments, and insurance. His wife 
pays the utilities, cable, and personal expenses. At the hearing, he was unfamiliar with 
the amounts and status of the recurring debts handled by his wife. His wife recently 
retired and receives a pension, but Applicant does not know how much she receives. 
(Tr. 61-64.)  
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling. He considers his current 
financial situation as “good.” (GX 2 at 4.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
5 
 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit bureau reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. The increase in the interest rate on 
Applicant’s home loan was a circumstance beyond his control, but it was not 
unforeseeable. He gambled on the interest rate going down and lost. The financial 
mismanagement by his wife was a not condition completely beyond his control. He 
chose to let her handle all the family finances and remained uninvolved until they fell 
behind on their mortgage loan. When he discovered her mismanagement, he did not act 
responsibly. He took no significant action to assess their financial situation. As of the 
date of the hearing, he was still uncertain about the status of the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.g. Even after taking control of the rent payments, car payments, and 
insurance payments, he trusts his wife to pay the utilities, cable service, and personal 
expenses, with no oversight or participation on his part. He knows she receives a 
retirement pension, but has not bothered to find out how much income she contributes 
to the family finances. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) requires a showing of “good faith,” which means acting in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR 
Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Evidence of past 
irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under pressure of qualifying for 
a security clearance. This mitigating condition is established for the debt alleged in SOR 
7 
 
¶ 1.a, on which Applicant made reasonable efforts to resolve the delinquent mortgage-
loan. The resolution of this debt has been pending since February 2011, through no 
fault of Applicant. AG 20(d) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.h-1.k, 
and 1.n, which were resolved before Applicant received the SOR. It is not established 
for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m, which were resolved after Applicant 
received the SOR and less than a month before the hearing. It is not established for the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, which was resolved after the hearing. It is not established for the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.g, on which no significant action has been 
taken.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant has not disputed any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish resolution of every 
debt alleged in the SOR, make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, or pay 
the debts alleged in the SOR first. He or she need only establish a plan to resolve 
financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. See ISCR Case 
No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant’s response to his delinquent 
debts has been haphazard and not part of a credible, reasonable plan.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . .” When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the 
Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 
03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s experience and level of 
education are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information 
on a security clearance application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance for many years and has been required to 
revalidate his clearance several times. The evidence reflects that Applicant has been 
8 
 
uninvolved in the family finances for many years. After being notified that his clearance 
is in jeopardy, he took control of some of the family financial obligations, but is still 
uninterested in the family obligations administered by his wife. Under these 
circumstances, his claim that he was unaware of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.n is 
plausible and credible. He admitted that he knew the home mortgage-loan was in 
trouble, but it “slipped [his] mind,” which is consistent with his history of disinterest in 
financial matters. Applicant’s omissions from his SCA were the product of culpable 
ignorance. Culpable ignorance does not equate to intentional falsification. Accordingly, I 
conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is not established. No other disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F and E in my whole-person 
analysis and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a mature adult with 
many years of service as a defense contractor with a security clearance. However, he is 
financially naïve and, until recently, disinterested in his family’s financial health. Even 
after receiving the SOR, he has not demonstrated the sense of urgency expected of one 
entrusted with classified information. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial delinquencies. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.k:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.l and 1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.n:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
