 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07987 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 15, 2000, Applicant was denied a security clearance for financial 
considerations by a decision of a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
administrative judge. With an undated letter, Applicant requested to re-apply for a 
security clearance. That request was accepted by DOHA on August 29, 2011, and the 
Applicant was allowed to re-apply. On March 7, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR with an undated response, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 16, 2014. The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
who received it on April 21, 2014. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit any 
further information. The case was assigned to me on June 9, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations, although he 
stated that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was paid and he was making payments on the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. Those admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. He is married and has two children. He has worked for 
his current employer, a defense contractor, since 1997. He possesses a high school 
diploma. He has no military service.2  
  
 The SOR lists 14 delinquent debts totaling $28,619, consisting of consumer debt, 
repossessed car deficiencies, telecommunications debt, and some medical debts. 
These debts are supported by credit reports dated November 2011, February 2013, and 
December 2013. Applicant did not provide any documentation supporting payment of 
the debts or establishing any payment plans.3  
 
 Applicant’s recent financial difficulties occurred about five years ago when he 
became overwhelmed by his bills because he was the principal wage earner for his 
family. He purchased three vehicles between 2001 and 2005, which were all 
repossessed for non-payment. He stated to an investigator that he does not feel he can 
pay his delinquent debts and will not do anything to settle them. He has not received 
any credit counselling for his debts.4 
 
 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 6-7. 
 
2 Item 8. 
 
3 Items 1, 9-10, 12. 
 
4 Item 11. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s personal financial statement indicated he has a $570 net monthly 
remainder after his expenses and debt payments. This does not account for payments 
toward most of the SOR-related debts.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
5 Item 13. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provide 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that the debts are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Applicant provided evidence that he became overwhelmed with debt in 2009, which 
contributed to his financial problems. However, in order for this mitigating condition to 
fully apply, Applicant must demonstrate responsible behavior in light of the 
circumstances. He presented no such evidence of responsible behavior. I find AG ¶ 
20(b) does not apply. Applicant presented no evidence of financial counseling and there 
is no clear evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or under 
control because the debts remain unpaid. There is no evidence that he has made a 
good-faith effort to pay the SOR debts. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. He 
failed to present documentary evidence showing the payment of SOR ¶ 1.b, or the 
payment plan for SOR ¶ 1.c. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I also considered Applicant’s 
personal situation. However, he has not shown a track record of financial stability, to 
include his past financial problems which led to his clearance denial in 2000, and the 
current unpaid SOR-related debts.  
 
6 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
