1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-09911
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
During a previous investigation, Applicant did not completely reveal the extent of
his alcohol and illegal drug abuse history until the fifth time that he was interviewed.
Although he was forthcoming about his illegal drug use during the current investigation,
he continued to provide false information regarding past alcohol abuse. Applicant has
failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case
On January 2, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).
2
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 2, 2014, admitting subparagraphs 1.a,
1.b, and 1.e, and denying subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d. He requested a hearing,
whereupon the case was assigned to me on April 16, 2014.
On May 8, 2014, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the case for June 2,
2014.  At the hearing, I received eight Government exhibits marked as Government
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, in addition to ten Applicant exhibits, marked as Applicant’s
Exhibit (AE) A through J. Also, I considered the testimony of Applicant and three
character witnesses. The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 9, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 33-year-old married man with two children. The youngest child is a
baby, and the oldest child is a teenager from a previous relationship. He and his wife
have been married for two years. Applicant has a high school education and has taken
some college courses.
Applicant works in the information technology field as a help desk technician on a
military base. He has been working in this field for five years and is highly respected on
the job. According to his supervisor, he is “the go to guy” for the company’s clients, and
his trustworthiness is “above reproach.” (Tr. 50) 
Applicant’s second-level supervisor, the company’s senior program manager, is
similarly impressed. He characterized Applicant’s work as exemplary, and described
him as a disciplined manager and a dedicated family man. (Tr. 59)
During a previous security clearance investigation, over the course of four
interviews between June 2008 and December of 2008, Applicant falsified facts
concerning the extent of his use of illegal drugs. Specifically, in June 2008, he stated
that his use of illegal drugs was limited to marijuana approximately ten times between
2001 and 2003. Also, he stated that he had never abused any prescription drugs. (GE 1
at 3) 
Over successive interviews, revelations about Applicant’s drug use increased. By
Applicant’s fifth interview, in February 2009, he decided to “come clean” about his past
drug use. (Tr. 38-39) He admitted that he used marijuana 20 times spanning 1999 to
2007, rather than 10 times from 2001 to 2003, as he had stated earlier. Also, he
revealed that he used ecstasy eight times between 2000 and 2007, hallucinogenic
mushrooms twice between 2000 and 2003, and cocaine once in 2001. Also, he
admitted that he abused a prescription drug in February or March of 2007. (GE 5 at 1 -
2)
During the earlier investigation, Applicant also initially falsified information about
his alcohol involvement. Specifically, in September 2008, he stated that he never drives
after drinking alcohol, and had only blacked out once from excessive alcohol
consumption, whereas after deciding to “come clean” (Tr. 39) in February 2009, he
3
 
admitted driving while intoxicated approximately five times between 2000 and 2008, and
blacking out three to ten times.   (Compare GE 3 at 1-2 with GE 5 at 3)
  
As part of the current investigation, on November 22, 2010, Applicant completed
a security clearance application. In response to Section 23, requiring him to disclose
drug activity within the last seven years, he disclosed his use of marijuana, ecstasy, and
hallucinogenic mushrooms, but did not disclose his inappropriate use of a prescription
painkiller. (GE 7 at 33)
In Applicant’s August 2013 response to interrogatories, he reported that he had
never driven a car while intoxicated, and had blacked out twice from excessive alcohol
consumption, instead of three to ten times as he stated in the earlier investigation.  (GE
8 at 6. During cross-examination, Applicant testified that he did not report the five
episodes of driving while intoxicated between 2000 and 2008 that he had reported in the
earlier investigation because he was no longer “sure about it.” (Tr. 45) Also during
cross-examination, Applicant admitted blacking out multiple times (Tr. 41), but provided
a smaller estimate during the current investigation because he “was not sure of the
dates, or times, or specifically, the number,” of episodes. (Tr. 30)
Applicant admits falsifying information about his drug use and his alcohol
consumption during his earlier investigation. He attributes these falsifications to
immaturity, and he contends that such behavior will not recur. (Response at 1) He
denies falsifying any additional information about drug or alcohol use during his current
information, contending that any inconsistencies were unintentional. (Response at 1)
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing
the complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in
the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a security clearance.
4
 
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern under this guideline is as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Applicant admitted falsifying material, relevant information about his illegal drug
use and his alcohol consumption during several interviews conducted as part of an
earlier security clearance investigation. AG ¶ 16(b), “deliberately providing false or
misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security
official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative,”
applies.
Applicant’s omission from his current security clearance application of a
prescription drug that he abused, and his response to interrogatories conducted as part
of a current investigation regarding his alcohol consumption raise the question of
whether AG ¶ 16(a),  “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities,” and AG ¶16(b), as set forth above, apply.
During the previous investigative process, Applicant did not fully disclose the
extent of his illegal drug use until his fifth interview. During the current investigative
process; however, Applicant’s explanation of his abuse of illegal drugs has been
forthcoming and consistent with information provided during the previous investigative
process. I resolve subparagraph 1.a in his favor.
Applicant answered “Yes” to the question on his current security application
about past drug use, and listed all of his drug use except the prescription painkiller that
he abused more than six years ago.  Under these circumstances, his contention that the
omission was unintentional is credible. I resolve subparagraph 1.c in Applicant’s favor.
Conversely, Applicant is still providing shifty, contradictory answers regarding his
alcohol consumption and alcohol involvement. Under these circumstances, AG ¶ 16(b),
applies without mitigation to his interview response in subparagraph 1.b, and his
interrogatory responses in subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e.
5
 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant deserves credit for his stellar work performance. However, applicants
have a duty to provide truthful, candid responses during the security clearance
investigative process. Applicant’s response to questions about his alcohol consumption
and involvement does not meet this threshold. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                            
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
6
 
