 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-07094   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kenneth Roberts, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Between 1998 and 2010, Applicant 
used marijuana on at least six occasions. His most recent use occurred in July 2010 
while he had a security clearance. Applicant failed to mitigate the drug involvement and 
personal conduct concerns raised by his behavior. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 20, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the drug involvement and personal 
conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. Applicant 
timely answered the SOR (Answer) and initially requested an administrative 
determination. After receiving the file of relevant material, Applicant retained counsel 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.2 
 
This case was initially assigned to another administrative judge in August 2013. 
However, the scheduling of the case was delayed because Applicant was deployed 
overseas until January 2014. The case was assigned to me on October 30, 2013.3 The 
hearing commenced on January 30, 2014, by video teleconference (VTC), but was 
continued to February 19, 2014 to allow the parties to cure discovery-related issues.4 
Before the rescheduled hearing date, Applicant requested a continuance, which I 
granted, without objection from Department Counsel.5 When the hearing reconvened by 
VTC on March 8, 2014, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through H, without objection. Applicant offered the testimony 
of one witness before I halted the hearing because of recurring technical issues.6 On 
April 29, 2014, the hearing reconvened and Applicant completed the presentation of his 
case-in-chief. Applicant offered AE I, which I admitted over Department Counsel’s 
objection. Applicant’s counsel offered a written copy of his closing argument, which is 
appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant also testified. I received the 
completed transcript on May 12, 2014.7 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant, 32, works as a munitions technician for a federal contractor. He was 
initially granted a security clearance in 2001. During a 2011 reinvestigation, Applicant 
revealed illegal drug use. Applicant admits, as alleged in the SOR, that he used 
marijuana on numerous occasions in 2000, 2009, and 2010. Applicant also admits that 
his marijuana use in 2010 occurred while he held a security clearance.8 
 
Applicant first used marijuana in 1998 while he was still in high school. In 2000, 
Applicant went to college on a baseball scholarship. He used the drug at least two more 
times at parties. After testing positive for marijuana on a urinalysis test ordered by his 
coach, Applicant was dismissed from the team and lost his scholarship. As a result, 
Applicant could not afford to continue his education and had to leave school. Applicant’s 
drug use and the resulting loss of his scholarship caused a rift with his parents and they 
                                                          
2 Notice of Appearance, dated July 19, 2013. 
 
3 The correspondence related to the scheduling of the case can be found in the correspondence folder of 
the case file.  
 
4 January 30, 2014  Transcript (TR1).  
 
5 Continuance request, dated February 12, 2014.  
 
6 March 18, 2014 Transcript (TR2).  
 
7 April 29, 2014 Transcript (TR3). 
 
8 GE 1, GE 6, Answer. 
 
3 
 
kicked him out of the house. During his case-in-chief, Applicant testified that he only 
used marijuana once at a college party. He also testified that he enlisted in the Air Force 
after high school. He did not reveal the events leading up to his decision to enlist.9  
 
Applicant served eight years in the Air Force and was honorably discharged in 
January 2009. After leaving active duty, Applicant struggled to find employment and 
accepted a position with a national retail chain and eventually moved on to a position 
with a private security company. Applicant testified that he used marijuana again on at 
least two occasions in 2009, while he believed his security clearance was inactive. 
Applicant began working his current position in July 2009 and soon began deploying to 
locations overseas. In between deployments in July 2010, Applicant used marijuana 
again. According to Applicant, the circumstances of his 2009 and July 2010 marijuana 
use were similar. Each incident of use occurred at house parties with individuals he did 
not know very well and with whom he no longer associates. According to the record, 
Applicant’s July 2010 drug use occurred at a party thrown by his sister-in-law at her 
home to celebrate Applicant’s recent marriage to her sister. The party was attended by 
family members and close friends.10  
 
When completing his security clearance application in March 2011, Applicant 
reviewed the questions about past drug use and approached his supervisor for advice. 
Applicant confessed his past marijuana to his supervisor and asked what he should 
disclose on the form. Applicant heeded his supervisor’s advice to tell the truth and 
disclosed his illegal drug use as required. In preparation for the hearing, Applicant 
underwent a substance abuse evaluation. The evaluator, a certified rehabilitation 
counselor and a licensed alcohol and drug counselor, opined that Applicant exhibited a 
low risk of substance abuse issues.11  
 
Applicant testified that he regrets each instance of his past drug use. On each 
occasion, he claims that his judgment was impaired by alcohol consumption. Although 
he continues to consume alcohol, Applicant promises not to use illegal drugs in the 
future.12   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
                                                          
9 TR3. at 8, 25, 44-46, 59-62; GE 3-4. 
 
10 TR3. at 25-28, 51-53, 59-62; GE 5. 
  
11 TR3. at 38-39, 42-43; AE A. 
 
12 GE 4, AE A. 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Applicant’s conduct is disqualifying under the drug involvement and personal 
conduct guidelines. Use of an illegal drug raises concerns about a person’s ability or 
willing to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.13 Applicant admitted disqualifying 
conduct under the drug involvement guideline; specifically, having a history of illegal 
drug use14 and using illegal drugs after being granted a security clearance.15 Under the 
personal conduct guideline, the decision to use illegal drugs suggests questionable 
judgment, which raises additional concerns about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.16 Applicant’s use of illegal 
drug is disqualifying under the personal conduct guideline because his conduct supports 
a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, reliability, 
lack of candor, and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that he may not properly safeguard classified information.17 
None of the mitigating conditions available under either guideline apply. 
 
                                                          
13 AG ¶ 24. 
 
14 AG ¶ 25(a). 
  
15 AG ¶ 25(g). 
 
16 AG ¶ 15. 
 
17 AG ¶ 16(c). 
 
5 
 
Applicant’s illegal drug use is not mitigated by its infrequent nature or the 
passage of time. Nor can his use, at least six times between 1998 and 2010, be 
considered isolated incidences. Applicant’s use of illegal drugs did not occur under 
unusual circumstances, each use occurred in a social setting. The record does not 
contain any evidence to indicate that Applicant’s use of illegal drugs was caused by 
substance dependence or abuse issues, emotional or physical problems, or any form of 
duress. Applicant has expressed his intent not to use drugs in the future. However, 
Applicant has not presented anything to guarantee this statement, such as a signed a 
statement of intent with automatic revocation for any future violations – an option 
suggested among the drug involvement mitigating conditions. Furthermore, his 
promises to abstain from illegal drug use are undercut by his testimony and the record 
evidence. During the hearing Applicant provided inconsistent testimony about the 
circumstances of his illegal drug use. Throughout his testimony, he offered a 
whitewashed version of events, eliminating the more unfavorable aspects of his conduct 
until confronted on cross-examination.  
 
Applicant chose to use illegal drugs and his decision to do so continues to reflect 
negatively on his current security worthiness. At 18 years old, Applicant experienced 
devastating consequences after using marijuana. He endured the embarrassment of 
being dismissed from his college baseball team, he lost his scholarship and was forced 
to withdraw from college, all culminating in a rift in the relationship with his parents. 
Given this experience, Applicant’s decision to use illegal drugs again, especially after 
being granted a security clearance, cannot be considered a minor lapse in judgment, 
but a pattern of behavior that indicates and unwilling to follow rules and regulations. 
  
Applicant argues that the mistakes he has made in his personal life should not be 
used as the basis for revoking his security clearance because he has performed his 
professional duties with honor, dependability, and trustworthiness.18 Applicant believes 
that self-reporting his misconduct shows that he continues to be worthy of the 
government’s trust. However, security clearance decisions are not limited to conduct 
during duty hours;19 off-duty conduct, especially where it reflects poor judgment, 
provides a rational basis for the government to question an applicant’s security 
worthiness.20 Furthermore, Applicant’s eventual self-reporting of his illegal drug use 
does not change the security significance of the underlying conduct. Here, Applicant 
engaged in an activity he knew to be in direct contravention of federal law and his 
responsibilities as an individual holding a security clearance. His behavior showed a 
disregard for the law, regulations, and the fiduciary relationship he voluntarily entered 
into with the Government when he was granted access to classified information.  
 
                                                          
18 AE A. 
 
19 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0620 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 22, 1999). 
 
20 See, e.g., Cole v. Young, 351 U.S. 536, 550 n.13 (1956); Croft v. Department of Air Force, 40 M.S.P.R. 
320, 321 n.1 (1989). 
 
 
6 
 
Based on the record, I have doubts about Applicant’s judgment and 
trustworthiness. I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. The federal 
government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in persons 
granted access to classified information.21 Applicant has demonstrated a serious lack of 
judgment in his repeated decision to use illegal drugs. He has not met his burden of 
production or persuasion to mitigate the alleged security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:      Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.a      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
21 Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
 
