 
 1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13331 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant abused drugs as a youth, including marijuana, Percocet, and Vicodin. In 
1980, at age 20, he “sniffed” cocaine on a couple of occasions, and he abused Oxycontin. 
He developed an addiction to Vicodin after being prescribed the drug for pain in 2006 and 
2007. He also took Vicodin prescribed for family members and friends when he had none 
available. Applicant has not used any Vicodin since he began treatment with Suboxone in 
2007, and he does not intend to abuse any illegal or non-prescribed drug in the future. 
Allegations of regular abuse of cocaine from 1977 to 2006 and falsification of his security 
clearance application and interrogatories are unsubstantiated. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On February 28, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and explaining why it was unable 
to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue security clearance 
eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 10865, 
 
 
 2 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on March 31, 2014. He requested a 
decision based on the written record without a hearing. On April 29, 2014, the Government 
requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
administrative judge pursuant to paragraph E3.1.7 of the Directive. The Government 
provided discovery to Applicant by letter dated May 11, 2014. On May 13, 2014, the case 
was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine whether it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. On May 14, 
2014, I scheduled a hearing for June 4, 2014. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Three Government exhibits (GEs 1-3) were 
admitted into evidence. Medical records were admitted as GE 3 over Applicant’s objection 
to the accuracy of some of the information. Five Applicant exhibits (AEs A-E) were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) 
received on June 16, 2014. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline E that Applicant regularly used cocaine from 
approximately 1977 to at least 2006 (SOR 1.a) and illegally acquired Vicodin that had been 
prescribed to others on various occasions between 2006 and 2007 (SOR 1.b). In addition, 
Applicant is alleged to have falsified his July 2011 Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) by not disclosing any cocaine abuse in response to 
whether he illegally used any controlled substances in the last seven years (SOR 1.c). 
Applicant is also alleged to have falsified his January 2013 response to interrogatories by 
not disclosing that he regularly used cocaine from approximately 1977 to at least 2006 
(SOR 1.d). 
 
 When he answered the SOR allegations, Applicant admitted only the illegal 
acquisition of Vicodin (SOR 1.b). In a detailed response, Applicant “strongly” denied that he 
used cocaine on a regular basis over the years alleged. He cited a language barrier 
between him and his physicians, which could have caused erroneous statements in his 
medical records. Applicant denied the alleged falsifications. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admission to illegally obtaining Vicodin on occasion between 2006 and 
2007 is accepted and incorporated as a finding of fact. After considering the pleadings, 
exhibits, and transcript, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old machinist, who has worked for the same defense 
contractor since January 1994. A high school graduate, he obtained training as an 
 
 3 
electronics technician from 1984 to 1986. Applicant was granted a DOD confidential 
security clearance around 1994. (GE 1.) 
 
Applicant and his spouse have been separated since August 2009. His spouse has 
a grown daughter from a previous relationship. Applicant did not adopt his stepdaughter, 
who was seven years old at the time of his marriage to her mother, although he considers 
her to be his daughter. Applicant and his girlfriend have been cohabiting since September 
2010. (GEs 1, 2.) 
 
Applicant began drinking beer and smoking marijuana at age 12. At age 15, he used 
Percocet. Two years later, he used Vicodin, although apparently those narcotics were 
prescribed for him. (Tr. 37.) After a period of sobriety, he tried cocaine once or twice at age 
20, around 1980. (Tr. 33, 38.) In 1982, he used hallucinogenic mushrooms once. (Tr. 40.) 
Applicant continued to use alcohol, at times to abusive levels (three driving under the 
influence arrests between 1981 and 1984 and a fourth in 2000), but he denies any abuse 
of a controlled drug after 1982 until 2006. (GEs 2, 3; Tr. 35.) 
 
Around April 2006, Applicant was prescribed Vicodin, an opioid analgesic, for pain 
from a chronic skin condition. He began abusing his prescription, taking more than the 
prescribed dosage, and also obtaining the drug on occasion from family members and 
friends for whom the drug had been prescribed. By February 2007, his use of Vicodin had 
increased from several pills a week to three or four pills a day. He estimates that he took a 
total of 200 Vicodin pills before voluntarily seeking treatment for his drug addiction in 
February 2007. (GEs 1, 2.) 
 
 Applicant was referred by his primary care physician for Suboxone (buprenorphine) 
treatment for his opiate addiction. Around February 2007, Applicant stopped using Vicodin 
and began taking Suboxone under the care of a physician. (GEs 1-3.) In mid-May 2010, 
Applicant changed to his current Suboxone clinic. He asserts it was because this physician 
accepted insurance (GE 3; Tr. 32), although the evidence shows that clinic patients were 
required to pay upfront for visits and drug screens.
1 
(GE 3.) On his intake to the clinic on 
May 18, 2010, Applicant reported that he had been in outpatient Suboxone treatment since 
2008. Handwritten notes indicate about Applicant’s substance abuse history: “Age 12 
marijuana, Alc, acid; 15 Percocet; 16 Vicodin; 18 Alc—quit Alc 1992; 20 cocaine sniff, 
Oxycontin [illegible].” In his typed summary, Applicant’s treating physician at the clinic 
characterized Applicant’s substance abuse history, as follows: 
 
49-year-old white male with a history of substance abuse since the age of 12 
when he used marijuana and ETOH. When he was 15 he used Percocet, 
age of 17 Vicodin, age of 18 continues to drink in excess. He had some 
sobriety then went back to cocaine alcohol and some sniffing of Oxycontin 
together with Methadone. Patient is interested to be sober because of his 
current life. He has no legal issues. Patient is attending group meetings and 
is not in counseling. 
                                                 
1 
The clinic’s policy required payment in full at the time of the office visit, but the clinic would submit insurance 
claims on Applicant’s behalf. (GE 3.) 
 
 4 
 
Applicant’s urine tested positive for Suboxone but negative for any other drugs, including 
cocaine, marijuana, and opiates. Applicant was prescribed Soboxone, which he is now 
taking in reduced dosage to wean him off the drug. (GE 3; Tr. 58.) 
 
 On July 25, 2011, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of an e-QIP on 
which he responded affirmatively to the illegal use of a controlled substance in the last 
seven years. He indicated that he used Vicodin from about January 2006 to December 
2006, and that his prescription for Vicodin “led to an addiction as a follow on. [He] was 
forced to seek alternate methods of obtaining the prescription pills.” Applicant added that 
he has received Suboxone treatment since 2007. Under the additional comments section, 
Applicant wrote:  “The pride in my work and my dedication to my company far surpasses 
any issues in my past.” (GE 1.) 
 
 On September 2, 2011, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), partially about his alcohol-related offenses 
and illegal use of controlled substances. Applicant indicated that he consumed no alcohol 
between 1992 and 2000, because he had been drinking too much. He did not explain why 
he resumed drinking, but he reported current use of six beers a week over the course of a 
Saturday, not to intoxication. When asked about his illegal use of controlled substances 
over the last seven years, Applicant stated that he had been prescribed Vicodin in early 
2006 by his primary care physician. To cope with his pain, he started taking more than the 
recommended dose on a daily basis. At Applicant’s request, his physician renewed his 
prescription. Applicant admitted that he also obtained Vicodin from his mother and friends 
when he did not have any of his Vicodin available. After about six months of abusive use of 
the drug, he realized that he had an abuse problem. Around February 2007, he stopped 
using Vicodin, and he began taking Suboxone medication to curb his cravings for Vicodin. 
His compliance with his treatment was monitored by monthly drug tests. Applicant 
expressed his intent to continue to take his Suboxone on a daily basis until it is no longer 
prescribed for him. Applicant denied any drug abuse other than Vicodin in the past seven 
years, and any illegal use of a controlled substance while possessing a security clearance. 
(GE 2.) 
 
 On January 18, 2013, Applicant completed drug interrogatories for the DOD CAF. 
He responded affirmatively to whether he had ever used any drug illegally, including 
whether he misused a prescription drug. He listed Vicodin (opiate) use between April 2006 
and February 2007, “several a week to 3-4 a day;” one-time hallucinogen use in 1982; and 
cocaine use once or twice around 1980. About the illegal purchase of any drugs, Applicant 
added: 
 
Approximately 2006 (spring) a friend asked if I could help him with his 
mortgage that month. I did help him. A couple weeks later, knowing my 
shoulder was bothering me, he offered me pills (Vicodin) 20 or thirty and 
thanked me for helping him and I accepted them. 
 
 
 5 
Applicant expressed that he would never use drugs again in his lifetime. He indicated that 
he has been taking Suboxone under medical direction since February 2007, and that he 
was taking a reduced dosage at present to wean him from the drug. Applicant added that 
he has passed all drug tests administered at his monthly visits to the clinic. He expressed 
his commitment to remaining drug free and his willingness to submit to drug testing to 
prove his abstinence. (GE 2.) 
 
 As of June 2014, Applicant was still taking the Suboxone medication. He had not 
abused any controlled substance since February 2007, and he intends no future use of an 
illegal drug or of a potentially addictive prescription drug. (Tr. 42.) 
 
 Applicant takes pride in his work in the defense industry. Character references and 
work performance evaluations confirm his dedication and professionalism on the job. (AEs 
A-E.) Applicant earned the highest rating for job knowledge in 2007 (AE E) and again in 
2008, despite some unplanned personal time in 2008, due to “personal problems.” (AE D.) 
In 2011, Applicant was considered for transfer to a new machine with the potential of 
becoming the lead machinist on second shift, but he had not been granted his security 
clearance. (AE C.) Applicant received mostly fully satisfactory ratings for his performance 
in 2013. He delivered quality work in all aspects, but he could not be as versatile in his 
work assignments because of his lack of a security clearance. Applicant’s supervisor was 
“not able to utilize him to his fullest.” (AE B; Tr. 26, 44.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
 
 6 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concerns about personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant admits that he illegally obtained Vicodin from family members and friends 
on occasion between 2006 and February 2007 (SOR 1.b). However, he denies the alleged 
regular abuse of cocaine from about 1977 to at least 2006 (SOR 1.a). Applicant also 
denies that he falsified his e-QIP (SOR 1.c) and his response to interrogatories (SOR 1.d) 
by failing to disclose that cocaine abuse. Applicant admits that he used cocaine once or 
twice in 1980, which he disclosed in response to interrogatories, and which was well 
beyond the e-QIP’s seven-year reporting requirement. 
 
 Cocaine abuse on a regular basis for some 29 years would be very difficult to 
mitigate. However, the Government’s evidence falls considerably short of its burden of 
establishing that Applicant used cocaine beyond once or twice in 1980.
2
 Available medical 
records of the Suboxone clinic (GE 3) include handwritten intake notes, as follows: 
 
Age 12 Marijuana, Alc, acid 
                                                 
2 
Under E3.1.14 of the Directive, Department Counsel is responsible for presenting witnesses and other 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted. 
 
 7 
       15 Percocet 
       16 Vicodin 
       18 Alc 
Age – quit Alc 1992 
       20 cocaine sniff 
       -- Oxycontin 
 [Illegible] 
 
The physician’s typed summary of this office visit reads in pertinent part: 
 
49-year-old white male with a history of substance abuse since the age of 12 
when he used marijuana and ETOH. When he was 15 he used Percocet, 
age of 17 Vicodin, age of 18 continues to drink to excess. He had some 
sobriety then went back to cocaine alcohol and some sniffing of Oxycontin 
together with Methadone. 
 
The Government relies on the physician’s summary statement, that Applicant “went back to 
cocaine,” to support its allegation of regular cocaine abuse for many years. The medical 
summary is not a model of clarity. The time frame for Applicant’s reported sobriety and 
abuse of cocaine is not mentioned. “Went back” could mean relapse into substance abuse 
that included cocaine rather than a recurrence of cocaine use, especially where the 
handwritten medical notes indicate that Applicant used cocaine only at age 20. If the 
Government had proof of more extensive abuse of cocaine, it was not presented. Nothing 
in the available medical records indicates that Applicant first used cocaine in 1977; that he 
abused it on a basis that could reasonably be characterized as regular; or that he used the 
drug until 2006. Without substantial evidence that Applicant used cocaine in other than 
1980, I cannot conclude that he falsified either his e-QIP or his response to interrogatories. 
That being said, Applicant exercised poor judgment implicating Guideline E when he used 
cocaine, albeit in 1980, and when he more recently acquired Vicodin, at no cost to him, 
from friends and relatives. Disqualifying condition AG 16(c) applies in that Applicant’s 
repeated violations of the laws pertaining to the use of controlled substances may be 
insufficient to deny him security clearance eligibility under the drug involvement guideline 
because of the passage of time, but they clearly reflect questionable judgment. AG ¶ 16(c) 
provides as follows: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so much time has 
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment,” partially applies. Proven cocaine abuse was limited to 
 
 8 
once or twice around 1980. While seven years have passed since Applicant stopped 
abusing and illegally obtaining Vicodin, his involvement with the drug was neither minor nor 
infrequent. 
 
 To Applicant’s credit, he sought treatment when he realized he had become 
addicted to Vicodin. At the referral of his primary care physician, he began taking 
Suboxone around February 2007 under the guidance of a clinic physician. No evidence 
was presented of his treatment with that physician, and I cannot speculate about his initial 
progress. Medical records of his treatment with his current Suboxone prescriber are limited 
to his first two visits, which were in May 2010. While some update from the physician about 
Applicant’s progress would have been helpful, there is no evidence that he has used any 
Vicodin or other opiate since 2007. Applicant has been candid about his Vicodin addiction, 
which lends credibility to his denials of any ongoing Vicodin abuse and of any intent to 
abuse any controlled substance in the future. AG ¶ 17(d) applies: 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶ 17(f), “the information was unsubstantiated or from a 
source of questionable reliability,” is implicated in that the Government did not present 
substantial evidence to support its allegation of regular cocaine abuse by Applicant from 
1977 to at least 2006, or of falsification, either of his e-QIP or his response to DOD CAF 
interrogatories. Applicant’s favorable character references, including from a co-worker who 
has known Applicant for over 20 years, attest to Applicant’s professionalism and skill. It is 
possible, although unlikely, that Applicant could achieve a consistent level of quality work if 
he had been a regular abuser of cocaine for over 20 years. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).
3
 
 
Applicant is a longtime defense contractor employee, who tried marijuana and 
cocaine as a youth. He resumed drinking after four DUI offenses and a lengthy abstinence 
from 1992 to 2000, and he abused Vicodin between 2006 and February 2007. There is no 
                                                 
3 
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 9 
evidence of any relapse since he began taking Suboxone, which apparently causes an 
adverse reaction if taken with opiates. He is still taking Suboxone, but at a reduced dosage, 
and his compliance is monitored by routine drug testing. After considering all the facts and 
circumstances, I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
___________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
