 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------ )  ISCR Case No. 12-00725 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
        Statement of the Case 
 
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), dated December 13, 2013, detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a January 9, 2014, response to the SOR, Applicant denied all allegations 
raised, and requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 2, 2014. DOHA 
issued a notice of video teleconference hearing on April 16, 2014, setting the hearing for 
May 1, 2014.  
 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered 14 
documents, which were accepted as Exhibits (EX) 1-14 without objection. Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
offered testimony and two packets of documents, which were accepted without 
objection as Exhibits (EX) A-B. He was given until May 7, 2014, to submit any additional 
materials. On May 9, 2014, the transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received. On 
request, Applicant’s deadline was later extended. He was given until May 13, 2013, to 
submit supplemental information, at which time a packet of documents was received 
and accepted into the record without objection as Ex. C. The record was then closed. 
Based on my review of the testimony and materials, I find that Applicant failed to 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old senior software engineer who has worked in that 
capacity for his present employer for about a year, although he has previous experience 
working for that company. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1980. Applicant is single. 
He is currently in repayment on a Chapter 13 bankruptcy, discussed below. Applicant 
has been fully compliant on his bankruptcy obligations. (Tr. 55) 
 
 Up to 1999, Applicant worked as a process control engineer. He took out a 
mortgage and bought a house with proceeds from his stock margin account. (Tr. 91) He 
saved a lot of money and acquired about $600,000 in available assets. He believed he 
had three choices: 1) to keep investing his assets; 2) pursue a doctoral degree; or 3) 
become an entrepreneur. He chose to become an entrepreneur. He then found a 
partner with a bachelor’s degree in business, focused on a particular type of business, 
and spent nearly $400,000 to buy an industrial building and equipment. He made stock 
purchases on margin. (Tr. 76) He became an “optimistic and aggressive entrepreneur” 
who attended “all the entrepreneurial meetings.” (Tr. 77)  Applicant “believed that, 
because [his] partner was a business major, how could [they] possibly not succeed.” 
(Tr. 76) 
 
 Applicant’s meetings and research on entrepreneurship taught him: 
 
that the angel investors and venture capitalists, they like to see you maxed 
out on your credit cards and your home mortgage, you know, because that 
shows – that shows commitment. That shows that you really are doing 
what it takes, you have no choice but to succeed. I personally think that 
the other reason they like to see that is because you will be desperate 
enough to take any deal they give you. (Tr. 79) 
 
Things did not work out with Applicant’s first partner, and the two parted ways. Applicant 
then invented a product with potential and recruited multiple business partners with 
memoranda of understanding. He pursued this business while continuing to operate his 
original business. By 2005, he stopped buying stock on margin. (Tr 132) Around the 
same time, he sold his original business and the industrial building, and he applied the 
proceeds to his new venture. At the same time, he accepted a part-time position with his 
current employer in order to raise more money for his investment. During this time, he 
possessed a security clearance. (Tr. 15) In 2006, he “saw the stock market going up 
 
3 
 
 
[and] figured this is foolishness, you know, what could go wrong,” and he took two loans 
on his home, which he ultimately merged together. (Tr. 91-92) He then refinanced that 
loan in 2007, resulting in the debt noted in the SOR at ¶ 1.c. ($94,000 mortgage) 
 
 Despite such efforts, Applicant could not raise sufficient funds and attract as 
many investors as his project demanded. In 2008, Applicant left the part-time job when 
the funding for his position was depleted. He decided to devote himself further to his 
own business. Then, he developed chronic fatigue syndrome. Being inspired by a 
celebrity investor’s comment that “marketable winners . . . never, never, never give up,” 
he persevered on his project. (Tr. 84) His fatigue made him functionally unemployable 
for about nine months in 2008 or 2009, although he had sufficient energy to do some 
work for his own business. (Tr. 135-136) 
 
During this time, Applicant was living off credit cards, using them for everything 
from work-related expenses to his personal mortgage. (Tr. 85) He noted, “I am living off 
the credit cards and trying to push the business through, and that is exactly what the 
venture capitalists and angel investors want you to do. That is what I was expected to 
do. . . . And that is what my business partners expected me to do.” (Tr. 85-86) His 
decision to proceed in this manner led to his receiving repeated calls from his creditors. 
Meanwhile, the economy sputtered. Applicant consulted a bankruptcy attorney, who 
encouraged him to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. (Tr. 87) Seeing no other 
option, Applicant did so in April 2010. He listed over $200,000 in unsecured debts and 
over $100,000 in secured debts. The court-approved repayment plan called for him to 
continue paying his secured creditors during the five years of the plan. He was also to 
repay the unsecured creditors less than $15,000, which was about 7.3% of his 
unsecured debt, over the same period.  
 
Applicant maintains that the four debts noted at SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a-1.d, 
which represent nearly $150,000 in delinquent debt, were included in his bankruptcy 
petition. The debt at SOR allegation ¶ 1.c was included in the bankruptcy. (Tr. 124-125) 
SOR ¶ 1.a represents a debt of $17,796; SOR ¶ 1.b represents a debt of $12,617; SOR 
allegation ¶ 1.d represents a debt of $23,000. It is unclear whether ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d are 
related or duplicative, and whether they are related to the bankruptcy entries with the 
same creditor name noted in the petition. Applicant failed to provide documentary 
evidence showing the debt at ¶ 1.b was made part of the bankruptcy repayment plan, 
although that creditor is named in the Notice of Creditors matrix.   
 
During the hearing, Applicant was told documentary evidence was needed to 
confirm his assertion that all four debts at issue were being satisfied under the 
bankruptcy plan. (See, e.g., Tr. 110-111, 114-125) After the May 1, 2014, hearing, 
Applicant was given until May 7, 2014, to submit any relevant documentation he wished 
to have considered. He later requested an extension of an additional two weeks. 
Applicant, instead, was given until May 13, 2014, to submit any additional materials. 
(Case File, Procedural History, Emails of May 2014)  
 
 
4 
 
 
In a letter dated May 13, 2014, Applicant’s attorney wrote an explanation as to 
the claims after reviewing Applicant’s full bankruptcy file. This included documents not 
introduced in this proceeding. For example, regarding SOR ¶ 1.b, which he stated “is 
identified in [Applicant’s] Schedule F, page 2, as a debt owed [to that creditor] in the 
amount of $12,612.62.” (Ex. C) The attorney also referenced Schedule F in reference to 
SOR allegation ¶ 1.d. Like other cited documents in his correspondence, Schedule F 
was not offered into evidence or identified as such. No alternative creditor names, 
collection agents, or successors were identified or demonstrated to be linked to the 
SOR-identified creditors. There is no evidence indicating any of the debts cited in the 
SOR are duplicative. No evidence was submitted showing that any creditor ultimately 
decided not to file a claim. 
 
Applicant admits that he “burned through” cash from at least 2005 through 2010 
in pursuit of his entrepreneurial dreams and in order to show his commitment to his 
business. (Tr. 144) The cash he “burned” was borrowed cash, a type of behavior he 
noted is “what an entrepreneur is supposed to do.” (Tr. 144-145) In 2006, Applicant did 
not know such behavior could be considered antithetical to the behavior of one 
maintaining a security clearance. (Tr. 152) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
5 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant had 
acquired multiple delinquent debts amounting to about $300,000 in secured and 
unsecured debts. This is sufficient to raise two of the financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance-related security concerns in this case: 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant does not dispute any of the debts at issue. He was functionally 
unemployable for about nine months during his period of debt acquisition due to chronic 
fatigue syndrome, although he had sufficient energy to make some progress on his 
personal business. During that time of partial disability, Applicant admits he continued to 
“burn through” borrowed money. There is no evidence he has received financial 
counseling, although it is generally required as a prerequisite to a bankruptcy filing 
Regardless, Applicant does not appear to have benefitted from counseling.  
 
Without more information about Applicant’s income at the time of the bankruptcy 
filing and the results of the “best interests” of the creditors test, it cannot be determined 
whether 7.3% repayment to unsecured creditors represents a good faith effort at 
repayment. The plan has been in place for several years, demonstrating progress has 
been made on at least a majority of the debts included. It remains unclear, however, 
whether the debts noted at SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d (representing over 
$53,000) were fully included in the bankruptcy for satisfaction or otherwise resolved. To 
his credit, Applicant seems to now understand that what he believed to be the 
entrepreneurial mindset is inconsistent with financial good judgment and reliability. 
Given his bankruptcy filing to free himself of tremendous debt, I find mitigating condition 
AG ¶ 20(d) has partial applicability. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Despite the low rate of repayment for unsecured debts, Applicant did avail 
himself of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection to address those obligations. This is a 
legally available avenue for individuals faced with high debt. It remains unclear whether 
three of the four debts in the SOR, however, were properly included in Applicant’s 
bankruptcy petition and repayment plan. The lack of clarity is based in large part on an 
evidentiary deficiency by Applicant. This deficiency becomes problematic in this process 
since the burden is placed squarely on an applicant to mitigate cited security concerns.  
 
Regardless, aside from the specific debts noted in the Guideline F allegations, 
Applicant’s actions are worrisome with regard to his general handling of his finances. 
His description of his purposeful behavior from 2005 through at least 2010 as an 
“entrepreneur” demonstrates reckless and disturbing behavior. His practice of 
purchasing stock on margin similarly reflects a willingness to take unnecessary risks.  
These kinds of activities, which clearly reflect poor judgment, are not the type of 
behavior expected of one who maintains a security clearance. Common sense should 
indicate that such risk-taking is antithetical with the protection of classified information. 
Applicant appears to now understand this to be the case. However, more time is 
needed for him to show that he is capable of maintaining his finances in such a way as 
to establish a track record of responsible financial management. I find security concerns 
remain unmitigated. Clearance is denied.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
