1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 12-01699 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 22, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 19, 2013, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 12, 2013. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on January 24, 2014. The case was assigned to me on February 
24, 2014. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 6, 2014, scheduling the hearing 
for March 26, 2014. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
2 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were received 
into evidence without objection. 
 
I held the record open until April 21, 2014, to afford the Applicant the opportunity 
to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted AE F, which was received 
into evidence without objection. On June 4, 2014, I provided the Applicant an 
opportunity to submit additional documents by the close of business that day. Applicant 
timely submitted AE G, which was received into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 2, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR debts with explanations. After a thorough 
review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old flight line inspector, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since October 2011. He seeks a security clearance to enhance his 
position within his company. (GE 1, Tr. 22-23, 64.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in June 1981. (GE 1, Tr. 38.) He served in 
the U.S. Air Force from March 1984 to March 1988, and was honorably discharged as a 
sergeant (pay grade E-4). His Air Force Specialty Code was strategic aircraft 
maintenance specialist. (AE A, Tr. 23-24, 39.) Applicant successfully held a security 
clearance while he was in the Air Force and after he was discharged from the Air Force 
as a defense contractor from 1988 to 2005. (GE 1, Tr. 23-25.) 
 
 Applicant was married from July 1991 to May 2002, and that marriage ended by 
divorce. Two children were born during that marriage -- a 9-year-old daughter and a 19-
year-old son. Applicant remarried in May 2004, and has three stepchildren as a result of 
his second marriage – a 21-year-old stepdaughter, an 18-year-old stepson, and a 16-
year-old stepson. Applicant and his wife have custody of his 9-year-old daughter and his 
three stepchildren. His former spouse has custody of his 19-year-old son. (GE 1, Tr. 26-
27.) His current wife works part-time as a phlebotomist. (Tr. 41.) Applicant pays his 
former wife $300 monthly alimony. (Tr. 43.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges fives debts totalling $124,453 – a charged-off credit card 
account for $6,500, a charged-off mortgage account for $78,606, a judgment in favor of 
a mortgage company for $24,136, a past-due credit card account for $4,975, and a 
past-due credit card account for $10,236. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e, Tr. 44-52.) 
 
3 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to his former spouse’s poor real estate 
choices and spending indiscretion during his previous marriage. Applicant’s former 
spouse managed the family budget and was primarily responsible for making or 
initiating all spending decisions. Applicant acknowledges his responsibility for failing to 
become involved as their financial situation deteriorated. By the time Applicant divorced 
his former spouse in 2002, he was seriously in debt. After Applicant remarried and was 
considering his options, he stated “I realized I was just a year or so away from 
everything falling off my credit report.” Applicant attempted to negotiate with his 
creditors, but was unable to negotiate settlements or make payment arrangements with 
them. He added that he and his second wife have five children between them and that 
he cannot afford to repay the debts from his former marriage. (SOR answer, GE 2, Tr. 
27-34.) 
 
Applicant stated that he paid his bankruptcy attorney his required fees in 
November or December 2012. He stated that he wanted his debts to “fall off” his credit 
report so he “could get a better credit rating before I filed for bankruptcy.” Applicant 
estimates that his debts “fell off” his credit report during the timeframe of March to June 
2013. (Tr. 34-36, 52-54.)  
 
Applicant indicated on his October 2011 e-QIP that he was going to file 
bankruptcy. He contacted his bankruptcy attorney in “probably mid-2012.” (GE 1, Tr. 
54.) Applicant had not filed his bankruptcy petition as of his hearing date, which was 
March 26, 2014. According to Applicant, his attorney requires additional creditor 
information from him that he has been unable to provide. Applicant testified at his 
hearing that he had “a lull in his schedule this week but (his attorney) went on vacation . 
. . so I am going to try to push him next week to try to sit down and see what it’s going to 
take to get through these last couple of events. Hopefully we will file within the next 
month or two.”1 (Tr. 54-59.) Applicant’s SOR debts remain unresolved. 
 
Applicant’s September 2011 budget reflects a net monthly remainder of $3,318. It 
does not take into account his pay raise or his wife’s $13,000 annual salary. In any 
event, his budget reflects that Applicant maintains a modest lifestyle and is living within 
his means. (GE 2, Tr. 40-42.) On June 4, 2014, Applicant completed the mandatory 
financial counseling required to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (AE G.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted four work-related reference letters. The authors of these 
letters collectively speak very highly of Applicant and recommend him for a security 
clearance. They noted Applicant’s superb work performance and his contribution as a 
defense contract employee. ( AE B – AE E.)  
 
                                                          
1
As indicated, supra, I held the record open until April 21, 2014 to allow the Applicant an 
opportunity to submit additional material, in particular, proof of having filed his Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
petition. His petition was not filed during that timeframe. On June 4, 2014, I reopened the record and 
contacted Applicant to determine whether his attorney had filed his petition. Applicant informed me that 
his petition had not been filed as of June 4, 2014. 
4 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
5 
 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that apply and raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-
12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, e-QIP, OPM interview, and SOR response.  
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions are fully established. Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are numerous and ongoing. Despite having been put on notice of the 
Government’s concerns regarding his finances, he has done little to address those 
concerns. Although he has good intentions and had a viable plan to regain financial 
responsibility, he has failed to follow through with his Chapter 7 bankruptcy. To receive 
full credit under AG ¶ 20(c), Applicant must demonstrate not only that he has completed 
financial counseling, but also must show his problem is under control or has been 
resolved.  
 
Applicant is unable to repay his SOR debts and they remain unmitigated. A 
different outcome in this case may have occurred had he followed through with his 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, especially after the Government made him aware of its concerns. 
Post-hearing, the Applicant was given an additional opportunity to follow through with 
his Chapter 7 bankruptcy and for reasons not entirely clear, failed to do so. Applicant 
has made an insufficient effort to address his debts and I am precluded from finding in 
his favor.2  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
                                                          
2
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
7 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further comments are 
warranted. 
Applicant’s military service in the Air Force from 1984 to 1988 and lengthy 
employment as a Government contractor weigh in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen 
and contributes to the national defense. Apart from his SOR debts, there is no evidence 
to suggest that he is not current on his day-to-day expenses. 
 
A security clearance adjudication is aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. June 21, 2010.) An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to 
establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish 
a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. 
There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts 
simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid 
first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).   
 
However, Applicant’s failure to address his debts in any meaningful manner since 
they were brought to his attention as early as 2011 precludes a favorable decision. 
Given his background, his failure to recognize the importance of regaining an 
acceptable level of financial responsibility is disappointing. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole-person, I conclude he has not mitigated financial considerations 
security concerns. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
