 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 12-03270 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on October 22, 2011. On 
November 26, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant received the SOR on December 6, 2013; answered it on December 24, 
2013; denied all the allegations; and requested a decision on the record without a 
hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on March 14, 
2014. On March 21, 2014, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was 
 2
sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on 
April 14, 2014, and did not respond. The case was assigned to me on May 30, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old training specialist employed by a defense contractor 
since September 2009. He served on active duty in the U.S. Army from May 1984 to 
August 2009, received an honorable discharge, and retired as a sergeant first class 
(pay grade E-7). His military assignments from at least June 1999 until his retirement 
were with Army Special Forces units. (Item 5 at 15; Item 6 at 8-9.) As a contractor, he 
has served with special operations forces, and he recently returned from a 15-month 
deployment to Afghanistan. (Answer to SOR.) He held a security clearance during his 
military service and retained it after he was hired by a defense contractor.  
 
 Applicant married in June 1988. He and his wife have three children, ages 26, 
24, and 20. 
 
 The SOR alleges 11 unresolved delinquent debts totaling about $21,885. All the 
debts alleged in the SOR except the $2,000 federal tax debt alleged in SOR 1.a are 
reflected on Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) dated November 9, 2011, and 
June 26, 2013. (Items 7 and 8.) In his response to the SOR, Applicant provided 
evidence that the federal tax debt and the $1,620 debt to the commercial lender alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.j had been resolved.  
 
Applicant presented no evidence reflecting that any of nine delinquent debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.i and 1.k were paid, resolved, included in payment plans, or 
disputed. In his response to the SOR, he simply stated that they were no longer on his 
credit report. All nine unresolved debts have been charged off, referred for collection, or 
purchased by another creditor. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i was purchased by another 
creditor in September 2006. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.k was purchased by another creditor 
in October 2006. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h were charged off in 
November 2006. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.f were charged off in December 2006. 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was referred for collection in June 2011. (Items 7 and 8.) 
 
Applicant stated during a personal subject interview (PSI) in December 2011 that 
he did not intend to pay the charged-off debts reflected on his CBRs. (Item 6 at 12.) He 
explained that the tax debt arose because insufficient taxes had been withheld from his 
pay. The debt was paid by deductions from his retired pay. He offered no explanation 
for the other delinquent debts except to state that they “snowballed” because of 
excessive spending. He has never sought or received financial counseling. (Item 6 at 
12.)  
 
Applicant submitted a personal financial statement dated September 12, 2013. It 
reflects net income, including his military retired pay, of $5,085, monthly expenses of 
$4,381, no debt payments, and a net remainder of $704. (Item 6 at 15.) 
 3
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 4
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
  
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially 
applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
AG ¶ 19(e): consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(g): failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns 
as required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(e) are established by Applicant’s CBRs and his 
admission during his PSI that his delinquent debts were due to excessive spending. AG 
¶ 19(g) is not established, because the evidence reflects that Applicant’s federal tax 
 5
debt was caused by insufficient withholding from his pay rather than a failure to file 
returns. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are ongoing, numerous, and did not occur under circumstances making them 
unlikely to recur. They arose from excessive spending and not from circumstances 
beyond his control. He has not sought or received counseling, and he has not disputed 
any of the debts. 
 
 Applicant’s only response to the nine unresolved debts is that they do not appear 
on his CBRs. The record does not reflect why the $42 medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is not 
listed on the most recent credit report. However, eight of the nine unresolved debts are 
more than seven years old. Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a credit report may not 
list accounts placed for collection or charged off that antedate the credit report by more 
than seven years. The exceptions to this prohibition do not apply to this debt. 10 U.S.C. 
§ 1681c. The absence of the debts on his most recent credit report proves nothing 
about the status of the debts except their age. Furthermore, merely waiting for a debt to 
drop off a credit report by the passage of time is not a factor in an applicant’s favor. 
See, e.g, ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001). 
 
 6
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
Because Applicant requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I 
had no opportunity to evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor or to 
question him about his delinquent debts. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. 
Jul. 23, 2003). He served honorably in the U.S. Army for more than 25 years and held a 
security clearance during his military service. He presented no evidence of the quality of 
his performance as a contractor employee. Eight of the nine delinquent debts alleged in 
the SOR became delinquent while he was still on active duty, and he has taken no 
action to resolve them in spite of his steady employment, stable income, and significant 
discretionary income. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial 
considerations. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.i:    Against Applicant 
 7
  Subparagraph 1.j:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
