1
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 12-05607
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 27, 2014
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on January 26, 2012. (Item 5.)  On September 17, 2013, the Department of
Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct) concerning
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 9, and October 22, 2013, and
requested a decision by an administrative judge without a hearing. (Item 4.) Department
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case (FORM) to Applicant on January 23,
2014. The FORM contained twelve documents. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the
FORM on March 24, 2014. He was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to submit
any additional documentation. Applicant elected not to submit any additional
2
information. The case was assigned to me on May 15, 2014. Based upon a review of
the pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 44 and married. He is employed by a defense contractor and seeks
to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable,
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Applicant
admitted allegations 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.o, 1.p, 1.q, 1.t, 1.v, 1.w, 1.z, and 1.aa in the SOR
under this Paragraph. Those admissions are findings of fact. Applicant denied
allegations 1.a, 1.c, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, 1.s, 1.x, 1.y, and 1.bb. He neither
admitted nor denied allegations 1.j, 1.r, and 1.u. His silence is viewed as a denial of
those allegations. He also submitted additional information to support his request for a
security clearance.
The SOR lists 28 delinquent debts, totaling approximately $54,735. The
existence and amount of these debts is supported by credit reports dated February 10,
2012; May 2, 2013; and January 14, 2014. (Items 9, 10, and 11.) (See also
Interrogatories submitted by Applicant on June 19, 2013. (Item 6.)) The current status of
the debts is as follows:
1.a. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor for a judgment in the
amount of $4,402. He admitted that this judgment was not paid in his interrogatory
response. (Item 6 at 3.) The most recent credit report in the record, dated January 14,
2014, still shows this judgment as unpaid. (Item 11 at 1.) No payments were shown to
have been made on this judgment. This debt is not resolved.
1.b. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for a judgment in the
amount of $678. He states in his Answer, “Could pay when I was unemployed because
of contract ending. Just fell behind.” (Item 4 at 1.) No other evidence was submitted.
This debt is not resolved.
1.c. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor for a judgment in the
amount of $997. He states that this debt is paid in his Answer and in his interrogatory.
(Item 4 at 1, Item 6 at 4, 15.) Applicant further stated in his interrogatory that he would
submit proof of payment. (Item 6 at 16.) No such evidence was submitted. The most
recent credit report in the record still shows this judgment as unpaid. (Item 11 at 1.)
Based on all available information, I find this debt is not resolved.
1.d. Applicant admits that he was indebted to a creditor for a medical bill in the
amount of $19. Applicant states in his Answer that this debt was paid. (Item 4 at 1.) The
3
most recent credit report in the record shows this debt as paid. (Item 11 at 1.) This debt
is resolved.
1.e. Applicant admits that he was indebted to a creditor for a different medical
bill in the  amount of $19. Applicant states in his Answer that this debt was paid. (Item 4
at 1.) The most recent credit report in the record shows this debt as paid. (Item 11 at 1.)
This debt is resolved.
1.f. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor for a mobile phone bill in
the amount of $1,660. However, he stated in his interrogatory that this debt is not paid.
(Item 6 at 4-5.) No other information was submitted. This debt is not resolved.
1.g. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor for a medical bill in the
amount of $218. He states in his Answer, “I don’t know what this is. I have two different
types of medical coverage.” (Item 4 at 2.) However, he stated that this debt is not paid in
his interrogatory. (Item 6 at 5.) The most recent credit report in the record still shows
this debt as unpaid. (Item 11 at 2.) This debt is not resolved.
1.h. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor for a medical bill in the
amount of $312. He states in his Answer, “Don’t know what this is from.” (Item 4 at 2.)
However, he stated that this debt is not paid in his interrogatory. (Item 6 at 5.) The most
recent credit report in the record shows this debt as unpaid. (Item 11 at 2.) This debt is
not resolved.
1.i. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due mobile
phone bill in the amount of $598. He states in his Answer, “I have no knowledge of what
this is.” (Item 4 at 2.) However, he stated that this debt is not paid in his interrogatory.
(Item 6 at 5-6.) The most recent credit report in the record shows this debt as unpaid.
(Item 11 at 1.) This debt is not resolved.
1.j. Applicant did not admit or deny that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-
due medical debt in the amount of $389. He stated that this debt is not paid in his
interrogatory. (Item 6 at 6.) The most recent credit report in the record shows this debt
as unpaid. (Item 11 at 2.) This debt is not resolved.
1.k. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $3,890. He states in his Answer, “I don’t know what this is.” (Item 4 at 2.)
However, he stated that this debt is not paid in his interrogatory. (Item 6 at 6.) The most
recent credit report in the record shows this debt as unpaid. (Item 11 at 2.) This debt is
not resolved.
1.l. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due credit card
bill in the amount of $1,400. He states in his Answer, “My account was paid off. Re-
opened and up to date.” (Item 4 at 2.) He stated the same thing in his interrogatory, and
in an interview with an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM).
(Item 6 at 6, 15, 25.) The most recent credit report in the record shows three accounts
The second, partial account number 224, is concerned with allegation 1.bb. The third, partial account number1
108, appears to have been opened in June 2013. (Item 11 at 2.)
4
with this creditor.  One of these accounts, partial account number 764, is this debt. The1
credit report states, “Account transferred or sold.” (Item 11 at 2.) Based on the available
evidence I find that Applicant has not shown this debt to have been paid. This debt is
not resolved.
1.m. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $4,889. He states in his Answer, “Have no knowledge of what this is.” (Item 4
at 2.) However, he admitted the existence of this debt in his interrogatory, and in an
interview with an investigator from OPM. (Item 6 at 7, 24.) The most recent credit report
in the record shows this debt to be unpaid. (Item 11 at 2.) This debt is not resolved.
1.n. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due credit card
debt in the amount of $2,887. He states in his Answer, “Have no knowledge of what this
is.” However, he admitted the existence of this debt in his interrogatory, and in an
interview with an investigator from OPM. (Item 6 at 7, 24.) This debt is not resolved.
1.o. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $570. (Item 4 at 2, Item 6 at 7, Item 11 at 3.) He submitted no other
information. This debt is unresolved.
1.p. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $2,486. (Item 4 at 2, Item 6 at 8, Item 11 at 2.) He submitted no other
information. This debt is not resolved.
1.q. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $570. (Item 4 at 2, Item 6 at 8, Item 11 at 2.) He submitted no other
information. This debt is not resolved.
1.r. Applicant did not admit or deny that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-
due debt in the amount of $4,176. He stated that this debt is not paid in his
interrogatory, and in an interview with an investigator from OPM. (Item 6 at 8, 24.) This
debt is not resolved.
1.s. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt for a
repossessed automobile in the amount of $6,512. However, Applicant admits that this
debt is unpaid in his interrogatory, and in an interview with an investigator from OPM.
(Item 6 at 7-8, 25-26.) The most recent credit report in the record shows the debt as
being charged off. (Item 11 at 4.) This debt is not resolved.
1.t. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $505. (Item 4 at 3, Item 6 at 9, Item 11 at 4.) He submitted no other
information. This debt is not resolved.
5
1.u. Applicant did not admit or deny that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-
due debt in the amount of $490. He stated that this debt is not paid in an interview with
an investigator from OPM. (Item 6 at 27.) The most recent credit report in the record
shows the debt as being charged off. (Item 11 at 4.) This debt is not resolved.
1.v. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $982. (Item 4 at 3, Item 6 at 9-10, Item 11 at 4.) He submitted no other
information. This debt is not resolved.
1.w. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due debt in the
amount of $1.051. (Item 4 at 3, Item 6 at 10, Item 11 at 4.) He submitted no other
information. This debt is not resolved.
1.x. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the
amount of $10,956. He states in his Answer, “Don’t know what this is.” (Item 4 at 3.) He
admits this debt is not paid in his interrogatory. (Item 6 at 10.) He stated to the OPM
investigator who interviewed him on April 2, 2012, that he was not aware of this debt or
what it pertained to. He further indicated that he would contact the creditor to resolve
the situation. (Item 6 at 24.) No further information was provided. This debt is not
resolved.
1.y. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the
amount of $116. He states in his Answer, “Don’t know what this is.” (Item 4 at 3.) He
admits this debt is not paid in his interrogatory. (Item 6 at 10.) He stated to the OPM
investigator who interviewed him on April 2, 2012, that he was not aware of this debt or
what it pertained to. He further indicated that he would contact the creditor to resolve
the situation. (Item 6 at 25.) No further information was provided. This debt is not
resolved.
1.z. Applicant admits that he was indebted to a collection agency for a past-
due debt in the amount of $342. He states in his Answer, “This is being taken care of. I
spoke to a representative about it.” (Item 4 at 3.) No further information was provided.
This debt is not resolved.
1.aa. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the
amount of $471. (Item 4 at 3.) No further information was provided. This debt is not
resolved.
1.bb. Applicant denies that he is indebted to a creditor on a past-due credit card
bill in the amount of $3,150. He states in his Answer, “This was paid and account is
current.” (Item 4 at 2.) He stated the same thing in his interrogatory, and in an interview
with an investigator from OPM. (Item 6 at 15, 25.) As stated under 1.l, above, this is
another one of the three accounts Applicant has with this creditor. Partial account
number 224 is this debt. The credit report states, “Account transferred or sold.” (Item 11
at 2.) Based on the available evidence I find that Applicant has not shown this debt to
have been paid. This debt is not resolved.
There is also evidence in the record that indicates Applicant was having financial problems as long ago as2
2002. (Items 7, 8.)
It is noted that Applicant also failed to discuss his bad debts in a security form he filled out in 2002, as he3
admits in a sworn statement to an agent of the Defense Security Service on June 14, 2002. (Item 8.)
6
Applicant submitted no evidence that he has received any financial counseling.
He states that some periods of unemployment, which encompass eight months during
the time from June 2008 to December 2011, had an impact on his finances. The
evidence also shows that he has been gainfully employed since January 2012, with a
monthly remainder of approximately $2,000. (Item 6 at 14, 21.)2
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has made false statements to the Department of Defense during
the clearance screening process. Applicant denied the three allegations under this
paragraph.
Applicant filled out a Government questionnaire in January 2012 in which he
stated that he had not had any judgments entered against him, that he had not had bills
turned over to a collection agency, and that he had not had any account or credit card
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed.  (Item 5 at Section
26.)  These answers were not true, as set forth in detail under Paragraph 1, above.
Applicant states that he did not intend to mislead the Government in regards to
his answers on the questionnaire. He states in his Answer that he “overlooked” the
questions about his financial situation, including the judgments, automobile
repossessions and bad debts. He further stated in his Answer, “I truthfully answered the
questions based on the knowledge that I have for the time period asked during the
investigation. In no way did I mean to give the perception of falsifying paperwork.”
(Answer at 6.) 
However, given the state of the evidence, Applicant’s financial situation was
precarious and he knew, or should have known, the extent of his problems. Applicant
has simply not presented enough evidence to show that the alleged falsifications were
the result of innocent error. Therefore, under the circumstances, I find that they were
intentional.3
Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. He submitted
no character references or other evidence tending to establish good judgment,
trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or
character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
7
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
8
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant has over $54,000 in past-due debts, all of which had been
due and owing for several years. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially
disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying
conditions may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@
Applicant=s financial difficulties have been in existence since at least 2008, and he had
financial problems all the way back in 2002. With the exception of allegations 1.d and
1.e, he has not resolved any of the debts that caused the problems, which continue to
date. This mitigating condition does not have application in this case. 
AG ¶ 20(b) states that the disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.”  Applicant stated, but did not support, allegations that some
of the debts were the result of periods of unemployment. No evidence was introduced
showing that he had acted responsibly with regard to any of these debts, except the two
$19 medical debts that he repaid.
AG ¶ 20(d) states it can be mitigating where, “the individual has initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” Allegations 1.d and
1.e, each in the amount of $19, were shown to be paid by a credit report submitted by
9
the Government. Applicant has not submitted any evidence to show that he has made
successful payment arrangements with, or made payments to, any of the other creditors
listed in the SOR. Applicant stated that he paid off several other debts, but he did not
submit any documentary evidence to support his statements. He was interviewed by an
investigator from OPM in April 2012. (Item 6 at 21-28.) Accordingly, he has had
knowledge for almost two years that his financial situation was of concern to the
Government. 
Applicant submitted no evidence that he had taken any action to contest any of
the debts in the SOR. Accordingly, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. It requires that “the
individual [have] a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which
is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.”
In conclusion, as stated above, looking at Applicant’s entire financial situation at
the present time, I cannot find that “there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control,” as is required by AG ¶ 20(c). Paragraph 1 is found against
Applicant.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The security concern relating to Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty or unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 and especially
considered the following:  
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
Applicant knowingly and purposely falsified his security clearance application on
January 26, 2012. He alleges that his failure to list his financial difficulties was due to
oversight, and not an intentional act. However, the fact remains that for years he has
had financial difficulties. It simply strains credulity for Applicant to claim to have had
virtually no knowledge of his very bad financial situation.
I have reviewed the mitigating conditions and find none of them apply to the facts
of this case. In particular, I have examined the span of time, just about two years, since
10
the falsifications. There is insufficient evidence that Applicant currently shows good
judgment or is reliable. Paragraph 2 is found against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge must consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The discussion under
Guidelines F and E, above, applies here as well. Applicant has had financial problems
for several years, which have not been resolved. He has a long history of not paying his
debts. Applicant’s conduct with regard to his finances was not mitigated. In addition,
Applicant failed to show that the false denials and omission of relevant and material
information from his e-QIP were accidental and not intentional.
Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), his conduct is recent and continuing. I cannot find that there
have been permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, I also
cannot find that there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)); or that there is no likelihood of continuation or recurrence (AG ¶
2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
situation, and falsifications to the Government. Accordingly, the evidence supports
denying his request for a security clearance.
11
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.t: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.u: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.v: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.w: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.x: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.y: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.z: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.aa: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.bb: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c.: Against Applicant
12
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
