 
1 
 
 
 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-01590 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleges 18 student loans, which are past due or in collection totaling $180,000; 
17 delinquent medical debts totaling more than $32,000; and seven other debts totaling 
more than $11,000. The medical debts were incurred in treating his son for cancer. He 
has documented insufficient payments on his delinquent debts. The financial 
consideration security concerns have not been mitigated. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on December 5, 
2013, the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance. On January 12, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
hearing. On March 13, 2014, I was assigned the case. On March 27, 2013, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the hearing 
convened on April 15, 2014. I admitted Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 5 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits A through C, without objection. Applicant and a friend testified at the 
hearing. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. 
No additional material was received. On April 23, 2014, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied 20 debts and admitted the 
remaining factual allegations in the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein. After 
a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 The SOR alleges 39 charged-off, collection, and unpaid debts, which total more 
than $200,000. Additionally, three additional debts, which total more than $60,000, were 
more than 120 days past due. Applicant denies owing the 17 medical debts, which total 
more than $32,000. He admits owing the 18 in-collection and past-due student loans, 
which total more than $180,000.2 He denies two (SOR 1.v, $1,209 and SOR 1.gg, $478) 
of the remaining seven SOR debts, which total in excess of $10,000, and he admitted 
the rest.  
  
 In December 2011, Applicant met with an investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) during which he was questioned about his delinquent 
debts. In June 2013, Applicant responded to written financial interrogatories concerning 
the delinquent obligations now listed in the SOR and certified the accuracy of a 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI) completed in December 2011.  
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old program control analyst who has worked for a defense 
contractor since October 2011, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Ex. 1, Tr. 14, 
22) He produced no work or character references. He had previously worked for his 
current employer from January 2006 through June 2008. (Ex. 1, Tr. 14) During this 
period, he attended school part time. He started working for the company as a graduate 
intern and transferred, with the company from one state to another. (Tr. 20) From 
August 2008 through November 2008, he worked for a DoD contractor in Kuwait and 
Baghdad, where he worked in finance. (Ex. 2, Tr. 20, 33) From November 2008 through 
October 2009, he was an accountant working for a different DoD contractor. (Ex. 2) 
 
 In October 2009, Applicant’s son was diagnosed with rhabdomyosarcoma, a rare 
form of muscular cancer. Applicant had health insurance from his company, but the 
company asserted his son’s condition was a pre-existing condition and refused to pay 
for the medical treatment. (Ex. 2, Tr. 40) His wife’s insurance did pay for treatment, but 
there was a two-month period where the medical expenses were unpaid by insurance. 
(Tr. 39) His son died in April 2011. (Ex. C) From October 2009, when he was “let go” 
                                                          
2 The same student loan obligations appear numerous times on Applicant’s credit report. The true value 
that is owed on his student loans is between $50,000 and $60,000.  
 
3 
 
 
 
 
from his company, until April 2011, he took care of his son. (Tr. 14, 21) His annual 
income went from $65,000 to $20,000. (Ex. 2) He received approximately $400 in 
weekly unemployment compensation. (Ex. A) During this time, his wife was working as 
a substance abuse counselor. (Tr. 39) His current annual salary is $63,000. (Tr. 29)  
 
The events leading to Applicant’s son’s death put extreme pressure on him and 
his spouse. (Ex. 2) They separated and in October 2012 divorced. They had three 
children. Applicant pays $462 every two weeks in child support and is current on his 
support. (Ex. B, Tr. 32)  
 
During Applicant’s son’s illness, numerous medical bills were incurred. He is not 
currently receiving calls or mail concerning the medical debts. (Tr. 29) He stated he had 
“not seen a medical bill in years, because they all go to my ex-wife, and to my 
knowledge, those [medical bills] are not being paid.” (Tr. 24) He believes the total 
medical debt was “well into the six figures.” (Tr. 25, 29). He knows of $85,000 being 
owed on one account and more than $30,000 owed on a different account. (Tr. 29)  
 
The charged-off account in SOR 1.a ($489) resulted when Applicant’s then-wife, 
now ex-wife, emptied the checking account causing some checks to overdraw the 
account. He has had no recent contact with the creditor. (Tr. 25) The debt in SOR 1.v 
($1,209) was for an apartment lease where his ex-wife lived after their separation. (Tr. 
27, 42) She moved to this location to be closer to her work. (Tr. 43) After two or three 
months at that location, she learned their son was sick, and she moved into a larger 
apartment to allow her son to have his own room. (Tr. 43) Applicant never lived at that 
location or signed any lease for that location. He never had a credit card or account with 
the department store that was 120 days past due (SOR 1.oo, $478), and he believes it 
is his ex-wife’s debt. In 2009, when he relocated, he failed to pay for the last month of 
cable service (SOR 1.gg, $205). (Ex. 2) In December 2011, he was questioned about 
this debt. (Ex. 2) At the hearing, he stated he needed to contact the cable company 
concerning this debt. (Tr. 28)  
 
 Applicant was unemployed while attending school from: May 2001 through 
August 2002, May 2003 through December 2003, February 2004 through May 2005, 
and July 2005 through January 2006. (Ex. 2) In December 2005, he obtained his 
bachelor’s degree. To attend school, he obtained numerous student loans. In his 
December 2011 PSI, he stated he thought his student loans were in deferment, but 
learned the day before his interview that the loans were in collection. At that time, 
between $50,000 and $60,000 was owed on his student loans. He arranged to make 
$470 monthly payments for nine months to bring the student loan account out of default 
status. (Ex. 2) Monthly payments were to commence on December 18, 2011. (Ex. 2) He 
made no payments under this arrangement. (Tr. 46)  
 
 In late 2013, Applicant received notice that garnishment would start on the 
student loans. (Tr. 44) At the hearing, Applicant stated he had made payment on his 
student loans for several months and was trying to establish a plan to get his student 
loans out of default. (Tr. 22, 27) He said he had a repayment agreement and would 
provide a copy following the hearing. (Tr. 46) No student loan documentation was 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
received following the hearing. His numerous student loans have not been consolidated 
into a single loan. (Tr. 23) He asserts he pays $488 monthly on some of his student 
loans and an additional $136 is garnished from his pay every two weeks. (Ex. B, Tr. 23, 
45)  
 
 In August 2008, Applicant obtained a $10,000 loan with $234 monthly payments. 
(Ex. 3, 4) By November 2009, the loan balance had been reduced to $7,000. At that 
time, he was unable to continue his payments and the loan was turned over to a 
collection agency (SOR 1.e, $6,758). In his December 2011 PSI, he stated he had 
arranged a repayment agreement to settle the $7,000 debt for $5,600. (Item 2) He 
agreed to make $237 monthly payments 24 months. (Ex. 2) At the hearing, he stated he 
has had no recent contact with the creditor. (Tr. 26) He said the collection firm wanted a 
$4,000 lump-sum payment or $6,000 paid in three monthly payments. (Tr. 48) He was 
unable to accept either offer. (Tr. 48)  
 
 In June 2008, Applicant purchased a home for $147,682. (Ex. 3) He attempted to 
sell the home when he relocated. He was unable to keep current on his monthly 
mortgage payments and in October 2009, the lender started foreclosure proceedings. 
(Ex. 2) The foreclosure proceedings ended when the home sold. (Ex. 2)  
 
  Applicant and his wife had joint credit cards. (Tr. 26) In November 2009, 
payments became delinquent resulting in two collection accounts: one for $1,199 (SOR 
1.d) and the other for $1,702 (SOR 1.f). (Tr. 25, 26) He has not had any recent contact 
with either creditor. (Tr. 26) 
 
 Applicant paid for his 2007 truck and no longer has the $470 monthly payment 
reported on his PFS. (EX. 2, Tr. 30) The PSI listed his monthly net remainder (net 
income less monthly expenses and monthly debt payment) as $214. (Ex. 2) This 
amount has increased now that he no longer has to make truck payments. (Tr. 31) He 
has not received any financial or debt counseling. (Tr. 31)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has more than $30,000 in delinquent medical debts, is in default or 
past due on student loans totaling more than $60,000, and has more than $10,000 in 
other collection accounts. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The majority of Applicant’s delinquent accounts were medical bills related to his 
son’s illness or student loans. There is no evidence of frivolous spending or living 
beyond one’s means. A few of the delinquent obligations are not his, but are his ex-
wife’s debts. However, he has documented minimal payments on some of his debts.  
 
 Applicant was questioned about his delinquent obligations during his December 
2011 OPM interview. He asserted he had arranged a repayment plan on his student 
loans. However, he never made payment in accord with that plan. He now asserts he 
had a repayment agreement and was making $488 monthly payments to bring his 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
student loans out of default. He said he would provide a copy of the agreement 
following the hearing. No documentation on his student loans or payment thereon was 
received. He documented that $137 was being garnished from his wages every two 
weeks. He asserts this garnishment was to pay his student loans. He never provided 
any documentation showing who received the garnishment payments. No other 
delinquent obligations discussed during the December 2011 interview have been paid. 
Even the $205 cable bill, incurred in 2009, remains unpaid.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully mitigate Applicant’s financial 
considerations security concerns. In 2009, his son was diagnosed with cancer that took 
his son’s life in April 2011. Applicant had insurance, but his insurance provider refused 
to pay, saying the condition was a pre-existing condition. For two months, prior to 
Applicant’s wife’s insurance paying the medical bills, there was no insurance to cover 
medical expenses. This is a condition beyond his control, and I find for him as to the 
unpaid medical bills.  
 
Applicant has received no credit or financial counseling. He has not 
demonstrated that his financial problems are under control or that he has a plan to bring 
them under control. His evidence is insufficient to show he has made a good-faith effort 
to satisfy his debts. He asserts he is making payments to bring his student loans out of 
default, but failed to document his claim. He was made aware of the Government’s 
concern about his finances during his December 2011 PSI, in the June 2013 written 
financial interrogatories, and by the December 2013 SOR. Applicant has documented a 
monthly garnishment, but failed to establish who is paid by the garnishment.  
 
Because Applicant has multiple delinquent debts and his financial problems are 
ongoing in nature, the mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Applicant’s handling of his finances, under the circumstances, casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Likewise, he receives only partial 
application of the mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(b), for in 2009, his son began 
medical treatment and in 2011, he was divorced. There is little evidence of the effect 
these events have on Applicant’s current ability to address his delinquent debts other 
than his $463 bi-weekly child support payments. The large medical bills incurred would 
only affect his ability to address his other delinquent obligations if he was making 
payment on those medical bills, which he is not. 
 
Applicant has been employed in his current job since October 2011. He has had 
a sufficient opportunity to address his financial delinquencies. He has failed to act timely 
or responsibly under the circumstances and has failed to resolve his debts or 
significantly reduce his delinquent debts.  
 
Good-faith requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. Even if 
Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
outside his control, it must still be considered whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.3 
  
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because Applicant 
has not received financial counseling, nor is there an indication he has resolved his 
delinquent obligations. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) applies to his ex-
wife’s apartment debt (SOR 1.v, $1,209) and the department store account (SOR 1.oo), 
which is 120 days past due. It does not apply to the other debts because, to date, 
Applicant’s efforts to address his delinquent accounts have been minimal. In additional 
to his student loans, presently in default, those debts include two credit card debt -- 
SOR 1.d ($1,199) and SOR 1.f (1,072), a delinquent loan – SOR 1.e ($6,758), a $205 
cable bill (SOR 1.gg), and bank debts – SOR 1.a ($489) incurred on his checking 
account. There is no evidence to show he has had recent contact with his creditors or 
evidence he has tried to establish repayment plans. Applicant has failed to act 
aggressively, timely, or responsibly to resolve his delinquent debts.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant 
has not provided documented proof to substantiate the basis of any disputed account.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The debts set forth in the SOR were 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. January 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 
(App. Bd. November 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. December 1, 1999). 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
not incurred on luxuries, but were for medical treatment and student loans. Additionally, 
his son died in 2011, following a long illness and that same year he was divorced. He is 
not living beyond his means. He drives a 2007 truck.  
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
While his son’s illness and death and his divorce were circumstances beyond 
Applicant’s control, he has done little to address his long-standing delinquent accounts. 
Even the $205 cable bill he was questioned about in December 2011 has yet to be paid. 
The only documented payment is the $137 bi-weekly garnishment. His long-standing 
failure to repay his creditors or to arrange repayment plans reflects traits which raise 
concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
The concept of “meaningful track record” includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required to establish 
that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is for him 
to demonstrate he has established a plan to resolve his delinquent debt and has taken 
significant action to implement that plan. I must reasonably consider the entirety of 
Applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that plan 
is credible and realistic. There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all 
outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan may provide for payment 
on such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant brings his student loan payments current and 
paid the other delinquent obligations, established compliance with a repayment plan, or 
otherwise substantially addressed his past-due obligations, he may well demonstrate 
persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not 
warranted.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves questions 
and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from 
his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c: For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.t:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.u:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.v:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.w – 1.y:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.z:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.aa – 1.ff:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.gg:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.hh – 1.ll:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.mm and 1.nn: Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.oo and 1.pp: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
