 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-04891 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Nicole A. Smith, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
        Statement of the Case 
 
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), dated December 23, 2013, detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a January 22, 2014, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the four tax liens 
referenced under Guideline F and requested a hearing before a Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
February 26, 2014. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 20, 2014, setting the 
hearing for April 17, 2014.  
 
 
2 
 
 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered five 
documents, which were accepted as Exhibits (GX) 1-5 without objection. The 
Government also introduced a Hearing Exhibit (HE), which was similarly accepted as 
HE 1. Applicant offered testimony and 12 documents, which were accepted without 
objection as Exhibits (AX) A-L. He was given until April 23, 2014, to submit any 
additional materials. Upon Applicant’s request, the deadline for post-hearing 
submissions was moved to April 28, 2014. On April 29, 2014, the transcript (Tr.) of the 
proceeding was received. On April 30, 2014, the Government forwarded four packets of 
material from Applicant without objection, which were accepted into the record as AX M-
P. The record was then closed. Based on my review of the testimony and materials, I 
find that Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old program manager and senior analyst who has worked 
at his present place of employment for seven years. He has a master’s degree in 
human resource development. Applicant served on active duty in the United States 
military for 21 years. He achieved the rank of lieutenant colonel before his 1998 
honorable discharge. (Tr. 19) He has maintained a security clearance since 1978. 
Applicant is married. His wife does not currently work. Their two grown children are in 
their late 20s. Applicant took out student loans for their undergraduate educations, on 
which he paid until 2012, when the children took over paying down their loan balances. 
(Tr 21, 53) Both children are now employed. His daughter earns about $40,000 a year, 
while his son earns about $20,000. They will continue to live with Applicant “until they’re 
on their feet.” (Tr. 14) They do not pay their father rent. 
 
 Between 2000 and 2001, Applicant’s civilian salary climbed from about $68,000 
to around $125,000. His 2002 credit report reflects that Applicant had rehabilitated 
some delinquent debts. (Tr. 68) In 2004, Applicant’s taxes were audited for tax years 
2001, 2002, and 2003. The audit was triggered due to miscalculations made by 
Applicant’s tax preparation service. His taxes were recalculated and a repayment plan 
for about $10,000 was instituted, on which Applicant has regularly paid. (Tr. 22-23) A 
subsequent tax liability for tax year 2007 was rolled in to Applicant’s repayment plan 
balance. There were no issues regarding his tax year 2004, 2005, or 2006 returns.  
 
 In the interim, Applicant bought a new home in 2002 after moving to a new state 
for work. His mortgage company was bought out and the terms of his initial mortgage 
agreement “kind a changed somewhat,” including an increase in his monthly payments 
from about $2,200 to $2,300. (Tr. 24) A subsequent downsizing at work about a year-
and-a-half later caused him to miss some of his monthly payments when he was laid off 
from work, leading him to reassess his finances in order to catch up on his loan 
obligation. (Tr. 24-25) He was subsequently hired elsewhere, but at a pay cut of about 
$10,000. In all, he fell behind about eight payments on his mortgage. In 2005, he was 
hired back by his former employer, but he was again laid off in 2007. A severance 
package “pretty much kind of held [them] while [he] was trying to find a new job.” (Tr. 
27) He was unemployed for about five months. (Tr. 64) 
 
3 
 
 
In 2007, Applicant moved to his current state of residence after accepting a new 
job. As he prepared to sell the house, his mortgagor was being acquired by a bank. 
Several people expressed interest in the home, but the mortgagor was preoccupied with 
its own ownership transition. Meanwhile, Applicant’s mortgage payments had increased 
to “well over” $3,000 a month. (Tr. 28) By this time, he was paying less than this 
amount. Money became even tighter when he started renting a property in his new state 
of residence for $2,700 a month. With input from the Veteran’s Administration (VA), 
Applicant was advised to seek a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure in order to keep from having 
his credit ruined. Applicant described a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure as “where . . . the 
mortgage company accepted the . . . deed on the property, and they took control of it 
and just resold it, and paid off the VA percentage of that money they had recouped.” (Tr. 
28) All this moved along slowly through 2008, while Applicant continued to make 
payments on his tax repayment plan. At the time, Applicant earned about $105,000 a 
year plus approximately $20,000 in military retirement disbursements. Applicant also 
receives $900 a month for military disability. Therefore, Applicant was earning nearly 
$136,000. At the time, his wife was generating an additional $14,400 a year. 
 
Moving forward from 2008, Applicant owed a little over $13,000 in taxes for tax 
years 2008 and 2009; approximately $18,700 for 2010 and about $15,000 for 2011. 
Each year, these obligations were folded into his federal Internal Revenue Service (IRS)  
tax repayment plan. He continued to owe taxes despite reducing his personal 
deductions. (Tr. 32) By 2011, he was taking no personal withholding. He had no other 
forms of deductions for those years, except “your typical deductions, your contributions, 
and the charitable stuff throughout the year.” (Tr. 32) 
 
As the tax repayment plan was repeatedly extended with obligations from 
subsequent years, Applicant kept in contact with the IRS. The IRS has increased his 
monthly payments on that plan from $290 in 2004 to $800 today. Those sums are 
based on an IRS calculation and a “suggested figure.” (Tr. 34) Last year, the IRS was 
poised to increase the monthly payment amount, but Applicant requested a review of 
that raise. Over the years, Applicant has missed payments on the repayment plan, while 
a recalculation of the amount due was pending. He has also missed payments on the 
IRS plan because he “just could not pay it.” (Tr. 36) 
 
Applicant currently earns $130,000, an increase from the $100,000 he earned 
when he started his current position six years ago. (Tr. 64) In addition, he presently 
earns $32,000 from the VA in retirement benefits, plus $10,800 a year for military 
disability. In sum, he has a yearly income of about $173,000. (Tr. 61) His wife no longer 
works. Applicant’s net monthly income is presently $9,718. He currently contributes to a 
retirement savings account, which has a present balance of around $70,000, and a 
small IRA worth a few thousand dollars. (Tr. 59-60) After all expenses, including a $260 
monthly payment on a state tax repayment plan, Applicant has a net monthly remainder 
of $100 or less. (Tr. 70-71) He is otherwise current on his bills. A recent bout with 
cancer was successfully addressed, and most expenses were covered by TRICARE 
and TRICARE Supplemental insurance. He has relocated twice in the past two years 
 
4 
 
 
because landlords have sold the properties Applicant has rented. Consequently, 
unanticipated moving expenses were incurred.  
 
Applicant, his wife, and two children share a four bedroom, 3,200 square foot, 
house. Applicant has two vehicles on which he is making payments, a car loan of 
approximately $50,000 with an $875 a month payment for a GMC Yukon acquired in 
2012 and a leased 2010 Cadillac. Applicant stated that he and his wife are surviving on 
the basics. They seldom entertain or go out. They bundled their phone, cable, and 
Internet service. Their cell phone bill averages $210 a month. He might turn in the 
Cadillac at the end of its lease. He requested an extension to file his 2013 federal taxes 
while he seeks professional assistance with both his 2013 taxes and his overall financial 
situation. (Tr. 63-64) Applicant’s plan for addressing the tax liens, which remain at issue, 
is to find and retain a certified public accountant (CPA) who can help him:  
 
put in place some type of better tax management plan throughout the 
year, so that we don’t have to keep incurring these heavy taxes. . . . The 
second part of that is . . . talking to an attorney to try and help us work with 
the IRS to perhaps see if the IRS can relieve some of the interest and 
penalties to make our payments really . . . account for something. (Tr. 71)  
 
As of the time the record closed, there was no evidence Applicant had retained a CPA 
or attorney for these tax-related purposes.  
 
 Applicant submitted multiple letters and other records reflecting him to be a 
patriot, a valued employee, and an exemplary retiree from the U.S. military. Indeed, he 
was highly decorated during his time in military service. Numerous recommendations 
echo these sentiments and refer to his excellence in his civilian professional capacities.   
 
In sum, the December 2013 SOR alleged that four tax liens filed in 2011 for tax 
years 2008 through 2011 had a collective balance of about $70,000. Applicant testified 
that the balance is now closer to $60,000, but offered no evidence to show how this 
sum was reduced. He also testified that the balances owed for 2001-2006 were 
satisfied. A tax advocate made little headway in reducing penalties and interest on 
Applicant’s repayment account in 2010-2011. Applicant’s monthly payments on the debt 
repayment plan are presently satisfying interest and penalties, leaving little progress on 
the underlying sum owed. Consequently, Applicant is presently “treading water” with 
regard to his tax debt. There is no indication that notable progress will be forthcoming. 
In contrast, Applicant hopes to have his state tax issues, which are subject to a $260 a 
month repayment plan, satisfied by the end of 2014. (Tr. 70)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
5 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
 
6 
 
 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant had four 
federal tax liens (2008-2011) filed in 2011, representing close to $70,000 in delinquent 
debt. They are the most current federal tax obligations that have been owed by 
Applicant on a rolling basis for over a decade. This is sufficient to raise two of the 
financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance-related security concerns in this case: 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Although Applicant’s initial tax issues were the result of poor tax return handling 
by a tax preparation service that resulted in an audit, he continues to have a federal tax 
obligation issue every year or so despite taking zero exemptions and deductions. This is 
not a recent development. Applicant has been aware that he needs professional 
guidance or help in this area, but has, thus far, failed to retain appropriate assistance. 
Therefore, it cannot be said that the debts at issue were created by circumstances 
beyond Applicant’s control and that he acted responsibly under those circumstances. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant has also not received financial counseling. As noted, he is 
contemplating the retention of professionals (a CPA and an attorney) to help him with 
his past, present, and future tax issues. To date this plan has yet to be implemented.  
 
Meanwhile, Applicant is subject to a tax repayment plan with the IRS, on which 
monthly payments have risen from $280 to $800 as the principal owed to the IRS for 
various years has risen over the past decade. It appears Applicant cannot presently 
afford to pay more on the plan: He objected to a recent recommendation to increase his 
monthly payment to the IRS; he currently has a net monthly remainder of less than 
$100; and he already has been late or missed some of his repayment plan payments. 
There is no evidence he plans to make future adjustments to his life or lifestyle that 
might increase his available income. Therefore, the evidence does not reflect much in 
the way of true progress on the actual debt at issue, only on the interest and penalties 
which have yet to be successfully challenged. 
 
In light of the $60,000 to $70,000 outstanding tax debt, monthly payments of 
$800 do little to reduce the actual debt at issue; at best, they only help address 
Applicant’s monthly acquisition of new and additional penalties and interest. In the end, 
Applicant is left “treading water” on the underlying debt itself, with no signs of notable 
progress occurring in the near future. Moreover, lacking evidence regarding his 2013 
tax liability, it is unknown whether he continues to acquire more tax liability. At best, only 
AG Mitigating Condition ¶ 20(d) applies, to the extent that Applicant has tried to address 
his tax liens through an IRS-approved repayment plan. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old program manager and senior analyst who has been 
with his present employer for seven years. He has a master’s degree in human 
resource development. Applicant served on active duty in the United States military for 
21 years before receiving an honorable discharge. While in the military, he served with 
distinction. Applicant is married and has two grown children, both of whom live with 
Applicant and his wife. He is a mature, accomplished, and credible man. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Through no fault of his own, Applicant acquired some debt when an audit 
revealed that his tax filings were improperly completed by a professional tax preparation 
service. The resultant repayment plan, while not onerous, became burdensome in 
subsequent years when more recent tax filings reflected additional tax liabilities that 
were rolled onto his IRS repayment plan. Today, due in part to Applicant’s monthly $800 
payment on the IRS plan, Applicant is left with a net monthly remainder of under $100.  
 
Although Applicant admits he missed some payments on his IRS plan, he has 
been relatively diligent in making payments toward the rolling tax debt he has acquired 
throughout the past decade. At this point, however, $800 a month is insufficient to make 
any true or meaningful progress on the debt itself. Instead, Applicant is basically just 
paying off interest and penalties. This does little to resolve the debt at issue or to show it 
is under control. Moreover, Applicant’s plan to address the debt at issue – to enlist the 
aid of a CPA and attorney – has yet to go beyond the planning stage. To date, there is 
no evidence that this plan has been adopted or successfully implemented. In short, the 
debt at issue remains in limbo, and Applicant presently does not have the income to 
increase his payments on the IRS debts in such a way that progress can be made. 
Consequently, I find that financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
