 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 12-04508 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carolyn E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, the Government’s File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), Applicant's response, and the exhibits, I conclude that Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial considerations. 
Her request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) that detailed security concerns under Guideline F 
(financial considerations). This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992) as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
In her March 11, 2014 Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied1 the six allegations 
under the financial considerations guideline. She also requested a decision based on 
                                                 
1 Applicant's answer was equivocal as to whether she admitted or denied the allegations. Although she 
stated, “To the best of my knowledge, ‘I admit’ to the following answers to your questions,” her further 
 
 
 
2 
the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) prepared a written presentation of the Government’s 
case in a FORM dated April 16, 2014. It contained the Government’s argument and 
documents (Items 1-9) to support the preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request 
for a security clearance. Applicant received the FORM on April 24, 2014, and was 
allowed 30 days to file objections and submit material to refute or mitigate the security 
concerns. She timely submitted a response and one two-page document. (Items 10, 11) 
Department Counsel did not object to Applicant's submission. (Item 12) The case was 
assigned to me on June 2, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings and the evidence, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old and holds an associate’s degree, completed in 2006. 
She has lived with a cohabitant since 1993, and did not list children in her 2011 
security clearance application. She has been employed full-time by the same defense 
contractor since 1988, and received a top secret security clearance at that time. As of 
2011, her position was senior administrative assistant. (Items 5, 6) 
 
 In her 2011 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed nine delinquent 
credit card accounts totaling approximately $22,400. During her February 2012 security 
interview, Applicant explained that her finances were in good order before 2006, but at 
the time, she was paying only the minimum monthly payment on her multiple credit 
card accounts. She did not provide information about the circumstances that led to 
having multiple credit card accounts. She noted in her interrogatory response that 
“Everyone makes mistakes and hardships do happen.” However, she did not elaborate 
on the hardships that may have led to her delinquencies. (Items 4, 5, 6) 
 
 Applicant decided that paying the minimum monthly amount did not sufficiently 
reduce her credit card balances, and retained a law firm that provided a credit card 
debt-resolution program. Applicant provided evidence from the company confirming 
that she retained it in September 2006, and that it required that her debts be at least 
six months delinquent before it would negotiate with creditors. She signed a four-year 
contract to pay $420 monthly. She stated in her response to the FORM that, “Before I 
joined this program, all my credit cards were getting paid on time.” (Items 5, 6, 10, 11) 
 
 Applicant provided evidence that the law firm settled ten accounts on her behalf 
between 2007 and 2010. She settled three other accounts in 2007, without the 
assistance of the law firm. She completed the debt-resolution program in October 
                                                                                                                                                            
statements indicate that her debts have been paid or resolved through a debt-resolution program, her 
credit report is “clean,” and her “finances are in very good order.” Department Counsel interpreted her 
response as a denial of all six allegations. (FORM; Item 4) 
 
 
 
3 
2010. The record contains no evidence of financial counseling. At her 2012 security 
interview, Applicant stated she did not plan to open new credit card accounts, but to 
pay with cash in the future. (Items 6, 11) 
 
 Applicant noted in her 2013 interrogatory response that her “[F]inancial situation 
has greatly improved,” and “[A] lot of my credit cards will drop from my credit report in 
2013. I have worked hard to correct my financial situation. I am not late on anything 
now.” She stated in her Answer that her finances are in order, and she is “no longer 
financially overextended.” (Items 4, 6) 
 
 Applicant's credit reports show the following. 
 
o The January 2012 credit report shows 21 positive accounts with “pays as 
agreed” status. A total of 15 other accounts were late, charged off by the 
creditor, or in collection status, including the debts at SOR allegations 1.a, 1.b, 
1.c., 1.e, and 1.f. Of the 15 negative accounts, 8 had been resolved through 
settlement for less than the full balance. (Items 4, 6, 9) 
 
o The July 2013 credit report lists 14 accounts in current status, as well as five 
of the previously settled accounts. Six delinquent, collection, or charged off 
accounts appear, including the SOR debts at allegations 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. 
(Item 8) 
 
o The January 2014 credit report shows five accounts that have been “closed 
or paid with a zero balance.” It shows one delinquent account (allegation 1.a). 
Three of the settled accounts still appear on the credit report. (Item 7) 
 
 Applicant submitted a September 2013 personal financial statement (PFS) 
showing monthly net pay of $2,636. Her monthly expenses total $2,318. She also pays 
$35 to $45 monthly on five accounts, totaling $195 per month in debt payments. None 
of the SOR debts are included in her monthly debt-payment list. Applicant has 
approximately $123 net remainder each month, and savings of $4,000. (Item 6) 
 
 The following six SOR debts total $36,688. 
 
 1.a – Credit card: $2,056. Applicant explained in her security interview that she 
used this credit card to pay for veterinary expenses. She opened it in 2008. It became 
delinquent in 2009, and was sold to a collection agency. Applicant stated in her Answer 
that she has had a payment plan for the account since June 2013 and is making 
payments.2 Her January 2014 credit report shows that the debt is being paid under a 
“partial payment agreement.” (Items 4, 7, 9) 
                                                 
2 Attached to her interrogatory response, Applicant provided a copy of a $50 cancelled check, dated 
August 17, 2013. However, it is unclear if the check relates to the debt at allegation 1.a, as the payee’s 
name does not appear in the SOR. Applicant did not provide an explanation of the check. (Item 6) 
 
 
 
4 
 1.b – Credit card: $10,225. Applicant has had more than one account with this 
creditor (Creditor A).3 The Creditor A account alleged in the SOR was opened in 2001 
and became delinquent in 2006. Applicant stated the debt was in her debt-resolution 
program, and that it had been dropped from her credit report as of August 2013.4 An 
account with Creditor A was settled by the law firm in July 2008. However, the account 
that was settled is not the one alleged in the SOR, as they have different account 
numbers. (Items 4, 8, 9) 
 
 1.c – Credit card: $3,641. This account was opened in 2005 and became 
delinquent in 2006. In her 2013 interrogatory response, Applicant said she did not 
recognize it. In her Answer, she said it was included in her debt-resolution program. 
However, an account with this creditor does not appear in the list of settled accounts 
provided by the law firm. Applicant stated that the debt has not appeared on her credit 
report since August 2013. It does not appear on her January 2014 credit report. (Items 
4, 7, 8, 9, 11) 
 
 1.d – Medical debt: $44. This medical debt became delinquent in 2012. In her 
2013 interrogatory response, Applicant said she did not recognize it. However, in her 
Answer to the SOR, she stated she has paid it. She did not provide paperwork 
supporting her claim. Her July 2013 credit report shows it is in collection status. (Items 
4, 8) 
 
 1.e – Credit card: $8,407. Applicant has had more than one account with this 
creditor (Creditor B). She opened this account in April 2009, and it became delinquent 
in 2011. She stated in her Answer to the SOR that the debt was included in her debt-
resolution program. The law firm did settle an account with Creditor B in October 2008. 
However, that account had a different account number than the one with Creditor B 
that is cited in the SOR. During her security interview, Applicant stated she is an 
authorized user on this account, and her cohabitant is the account owner. However, 
her 2012 credit report shows it is not a joint account.5 (Items 4, 9) 
 
 1.f – Credit card: $12,315. This debt became delinquent in 2006. Applicant 
stated in her interrogatory response that she was an authorized user on the account 
with her cohabitant, and that, “I’m not sure where this card stands as we get no calls 
anymore since we have met statue [sic] of limitations in [state].” Applicant's 2012 credit 
report confirms that it is a joint account. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated this 
                                                 
3 The law firm settled an account with Creditor A in July 2008. However, the account number of the 
settled account does not match the account numbers of either of the two delinquent accounts with 
Creditor A that appear in the SOR (allegations 1.b and 1.f). 
 
4 Applicant states that several accounts have been dropped from her credit report based on her state’s 
statute of limitations. (Items 4, 6)  
 
5 Applicant may have confused this account with the account cited in allegation 1.f, on which she is an 
authorized user. (Item 9) 
 
 
5 
debt was in her debt-resolution program. However, the Creditor A account settled by 
the law firm has a different account number than the account at allegation 1.f. The debt 
does not appear in her 2013 or 2014 credit reports. (Items 4, 7, 8, 9 at p. 11) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and policy in the AG.6 Decisions must also 
reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred 
to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying or 
mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government must produce 
admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the 
applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a 
“right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.8 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship with the 
Government based on trust. Therefore, the Government has a compelling interest in 
ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as her or his own. The 
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
                                                 
6 Directive. 6.3. 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
9 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
6 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . .  
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant has several credit card accounts and one 
medical debt that became delinquent between 2006 and 2012. The debts total 
$36,688. Her delinquencies support application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). The record contains no indication that Applicant's debts stem 
from gambling, or alcohol or drug abuse. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, I considered the following conditions that can potentially 
mitigate security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Although Applicant’s debts started becoming delinquent in 2006, they are not in 
the distant past because they remain unpaid. Her unresolved financial situation casts 
doubt on her judgment, and AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be applied. AG ¶ 20(b) relates to 
financial problems that stem from conditions that an applicant could not foresee or 
control, and which have a negative effect on her finances. The mitigating condition is 
not relevant, because Applicant did not provide information showing that the 
circumstances that led to her delinquencies were beyond her control.  
 
 Mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) relate to bringing finances under 
control through good-faith efforts to resolve debts. Applicant’s credit report shows that 
 
 
7 
she has a payment plan in place on the debt at allegation 1.a, and I find for the 
Applicant as to that allegation. She stated in her Answer that she paid the medical debt 
at allegation 1.d. However, she submitted no documentation to support her claim. I find 
against the Applicant on that allegation. The Appeal Board has held that “it is 
reasonable for a Judge to expect Applicants to present documentation about the 
satisfaction of specific debts.”10  
 
 Applicant contends that the remaining debts were paid through her debt-
resolution program. However, the evidence shows that the debts in the SOR are not 
the same as the debts that were paid between 2008 and 2010 through her program. 
Applicant also appears to believe that debts that are no longer reported on her credit 
report, based on operation of her state’s statute of limitations, are resolved. However, 
the Appeal Board has held,  
 
[S]ecurity clearance decisions are not controlled or limited by any statute 
of limitation, and reliance on the noncollectability of a debt does not 
constitute a good-faith effort to resolve that debt within the meaning of the 
Directive. The federal government is entitled to consider the facts and 
circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing 
to satisfy the debt in a timely manner. Applicant’s decision not to pay [her] 
debts reflects poorly on [her] judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information. Applicant’s decision also shows an 
unwillingness to take responsibility for [her] actions.11 
 
Applicant took positive steps to deal with her debts four to eight years ago by settling 
three debts on her own and resolving ten debts through her debt-resolution program. 
Applicant receives partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). However, her 2012 credit report 
shows that, after her debt-resolution program was complete, several debts remained or 
became delinquent. There is no evidence she has taken steps to resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR at allegations 1.b through 1.f. Her finances are not 
under control, and AG ¶¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
totality of an applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge 
should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
                                                 
10 ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 2010, quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 3 (App. 
Bd. May 1, 2006)). 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 11-08274 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 2013). 
 
 
8 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant’s history includes positive elements, including her long history of 
supporting a federal defense contractor. She resolved three debts through her own 
efforts in 2007. Moreover, she receives credit for initiating a program in 2006 to resolve 
her debts, and following through on that plan. Her efforts resulted in resolution of ten 
delinquent debts between 2007 and 2010.  
 
 However, since 2010, she has not been as vigilant about her remaining debts. 
Excluding the one debt she is paying, her current delinquent debt load is more than 
$34,000. Given her long history of holding security clearances, she has been aware 
that delinquent debts are a security concern. However, she has not taken steps to deal 
with these debts. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information 
shows Applicant has not satisfied the doubts raised about her suitability for a security 
clearance. For these reasons, I conclude she has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a   For Applicant   
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.f  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
