 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02521 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq.   
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated sexual behavior and personal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 6, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines D (sexual 
behavior) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 28, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 5, 2014. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 14, 
2014, scheduling the hearing for June 10, 2014. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 19, 2014.  
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Department Counsel’s Letter to Applicant 
 
Department Counsel sent an informational letter to Applicant on April 3, 2014. 
The letter is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which 
were admitted without objection.  
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing the allegation 
under SOR 1.d. The motion was granted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2010. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1980 
until he was honorably discharged in 1985. He seeks to retain a security clearance, 
which he has held since about 2006. He attended college for a period, but he is a few 
credits short of an associate’s degree. He married in 1982 and divorced in 1988. He 
married again in 1993 and divorced in 2003. He married for the third time in 2014. He 
has two adult sons, and he has three adult stepchildren.1 
 
 Applicant was arrested in October 1991 and charged with the felony offense of 
lewd and lascivious assault upon a child.2 The victim was the 11-year-old daughter of 
Applicant’s live-in girlfriend. The girl’s mother became Applicant’s second wife when 
they married in 1993. The girl told the police that Applicant fondled her breasts under 
her clothes and fondled her vaginal area on top of her clothes. Applicant lied to the 
police officers about what occurred. He initially told the officers that he did not touch the 
girl. The police report indicated that Applicant was given a polygraph and admitted to 
accidently touching the girl’s breast with his hand remaining on the breast longer than it 
should have. He admitted to having a problem and that he wanted help.3  
 
 Applicant was in jail awaiting trial for about 30 days. He received a deferred 
adjudication in which he was required to complete community service and counseling. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 22-25. 102, 105; GE 1-5. 
 
2 The charge has also been described as sex offense – against child – fondling. 
 
3 Tr. at 26, 67, 89-90, 105; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 5-8; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant completed four years of counseling and other terms of his deferred 
adjudication, and the charge was dismissed.4 
 
 Applicant admitted that he fondled the girl’s breasts over her clothes on about 
three occasions. He denied touching her vaginal area, and he denied fondling her 
breasts under her clothes. He admitted that he initially lied to the police, but he testified 
that he confessed the same day. He denied that he was administered a polygraph by 
the police. He stated that he was administered several polygraphs in conjunction with 
the counseling requirements of his deferred adjudication, but he passed all those 
polygraphs. He stated that he had never failed a polygraph at any time in his life.5 
 
 Applicant stated that he learned through therapy that his unemployment caused 
him to feel like he lost control in his life. Abusing the girl was a way of gaining control. 
He stated that therapy taught him to control his emotions, and that now he “generally 
[has] respect for anybody and everything.” He stated that the 1991 charge was “one of 
the most significant” events in his life, and that he has learned valuable lessons from the 
experience. He stated that there has been no recurrence of that type of behavior.6 
 
 Applicant stated that as part of his counseling and rehabilitation, he was required 
to tell a number of people what he did. He told the child’s mother and father. He told his 
parents, but he has not told his siblings or his children. One of his sons is married with a 
daughter who is about nine years old. That son found out about Applicant’s arrest, and 
he does not have any contact with Applicant. Applicant’s current wife is also aware of 
Applicant’s conduct. Applicant’s employer and co-workers are not aware of his actions. 
Applicant stated that, if necessary, he would tell anyone about his actions, and that the 
information could not be used as a basis for coercion.7  
 
 A security clearance application (SF 86) with Applicant’s name and information 
was submitted in December 2003. The copy of the SF 86 submitted in evidence is 
unsigned, but it reported: “DATE SUBJECT SIGNED THE FORM: 2003/12/17.” 
Applicant denied submitting the SF 86. He indicated that he provided information in 
response to e-mail requests from his company, but he never actually filled out the SF 
86. In an SF 86 submitted in September 2005, Applicant listed that he was investigated 
for a background investigation in December 2003, and that he “[w]as issued Interim 
Secret Clearance in December 2003 by DISCO.” Similar information was listed on a 
2011 SF 86. Applicant eventually admitted that he may have submitted the SF 86.8 After 
considering all the evidence, including the personal information on the 2003 SF 86 and 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 28-30, 35, 68; GE 3, 5-8; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 26-28, 34-35, 89-92, 95-96, 107-108. 
 
6 Tr. at 31-33, 83-84, 88, 99-100. 
 
7 Tr. at 36-37, 49-50, 101-105; GE 5. 
 
8 Tr. at 37, 51-64; GE 1, 2, 4. 
 
4 
 
Applicant’s later reference to a 2003 investigation, I find by substantial evidence9 that 
Applicant filled out and submitted the 2003 SF 86 that was admitted as GE 1.  
 
 Applicant answered “No” to Section 21 of the 2003 SF 86, Your Police Record – 
Felony Offenses, which asked:  
 
Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any felony offense? 
(Include those under the Uniform Code of Military Justice.) For this item, 
report information regardless of whether the record in your case has been 
“sealed” or otherwise stricken from the record. The single exception to this 
requirement is for certain convictions under the Federal Controlled 
Substances Act for which the court issued an expungement order under 
the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 3607.10 
 
 Applicant submitted a questionnaire for national security positions (SF 86) on 
September 20, 2005. He answered “No” to all the police record questions, including 
question 23a, which asked: “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any 
felony offense? (Include those under Uniform Code of Military Justice.)”11 The 
preliminary information for the police record questions advised: 
 
For this item, report information regardless of whether the record in your 
case has been “sealed” or otherwise stricken from the court record. The 
single exception to this requirement is for certain convictions under the 
Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an 
expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 
3607.12 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation on November 18, 
2005. He discussed his arrest for fondling his then-girlfriend’s daughter. He admitted 
that he touched the girl’s breasts outside her clothes on about two or three occasions. 
He stated that the police came to his house and confronted him with the allegations. He 
reported to the background investigator that he denied the charges to the police and 
took a polygraph, which he failed. He stated that he completed all the terms of the 
deferred prosecution, and the charges were dismissed. He stated that he did not list the 
arrest on his SF 86 because it asked if he had ever been charged with or convicted of 
                                                          
9 Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” ISCR Case No. 10-09035 at 
5 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2014) (citing Directive ¶¶ E3.1.14; E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the 
weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence 
does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal 
Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than 
a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994); ISCR 
Case No. 04-07187 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2006). 
 
10 GE 1. 
 
11 Tr. at 37; GE 2. 
 
12 GE 2. 
 
5 
 
any felony offense, and he did not consider that he was charged because the charges 
were dismissed. He admitted to the investigator that “charges cannot be dismissed if 
one has never been charged.”13  
 
 Applicant testified that he brought the 1991 arrest to the attention of the 
investigator, and that he gave the investigator a copy of a letter from the State’s 
Attorney. He denied telling the investigator that he took a police polygraph. He stated 
that he told the investigator that he took polygraphs during the course of his therapy. 
Applicant admitted that, based upon the investigator’s questions, he knew at the time of 
the 2005 interview that he should have listed the 1991 charge on his SF 86. Applicant 
received a top secret security clearance in about 2006.14 
 
 Applicant began work for his current employer in November 2010. He submitted 
a questionnaire for national security positions on July 23, 2011. He stated that he used 
his 2005 SF 86 to update the information on the 2011 SF 86.15 The preliminary 
information for the police record questions advised: 
 
For this item, report information regardless of whether the record in your 
case has been sealed, expunged, or otherwise stricken from the court 
record, or the charge was dismissed. You need not report convictions 
under the Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an 
expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 
3607. Be sure to include all incidents whether occurring in the U.S. or 
abroad. 
 
For questions a and b, respond for the timeframe of the last 7 years (if an 
SSBI go back 10 years). Exclude any fines of less than $300 for traffic 
offenses that do not involve alcohol or drugs. 
 
Applicant answered “No” to question 22c, which asked: “Have you EVER been charged 
with any felony offense? (Include those under Uniform Code of Military Justice.)”16  
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation on August 30, 2011. 
He discussed his arrest. He admitted that he fondled the girl’s breast. He stated that the 
girl was 14 or 15 at the time. He stated that he did not list the charge on his SF 86 
because of an oversight and confusion over the question. Applicant testified that he had 
not seen the girl in more than a decade, and he “guessed at her age” during the 
interview.17  
                                                          
13 Tr. at 72; GE 3. 
 
14 Tr. at 24, 41-44, 72-77, 93, 106-109. 
 
15 Tr. at 44, 63; GE 4. 
 
16 GE 4. 
 
17 Tr. at 47-48, 94-95, 106; GE 5. 
 
6 
 
 Applicant denied intentionally providing false information on his SF 86s. He 
stated that he did not think that he was required to list his felony charge because the 
charge was dismissed. He stated that it was explained to him that if he “successfully 
completed the program that [the] State’s Attorney would take and drop the charges and 
[he] would have no record of the arrest.” He testified that it was not until the investigator 
read the question to him during his 2011 interview that he realized that he was required 
to list a charge that had been dismissed. He also stated that he thought the DOD was 
well aware of the charge because he had fully discussed it with them in 2005. He 
testified that when he submitted the 2011 SF 86, he “had not recalled what was 
discussed in the 2005 interview as far as whether [he] should have answered yes or 
no.”18 
 
 After considering all the evidence, I find that Applicant intentionally falsified SF 
86s submitted in 2003, 2005, and 2011, by failing to disclose his felony charge of lewd 
and lascivious assault upon a child.19 Rationale for this finding is discussed in the 
Analysis section. I further find that Applicant intentionally provided false information in 
his interviews in 2005 and 2011, in his SOR response, and during his hearing testimony 
when he denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86s.20  
 
 Applicant submitted a number of documents attesting to his excellent job 
performance. His wife describes him as “a decent, honest, hardworking and loyal man.” 
She is aware of the details surrounding Applicant’s 1991 arrest. She indicated that 
Applicant “has never given [her] any reason to suspect that his inappropriate conduct in 
1991 might recur.” She also wrote that to her knowledge, Applicant has “never lied to 
[her] or anyone else about anything, particularly concerning his 1991 arrest.”21 
 
 
                                                          
18 Tr. at 35-41, 47-49, 66-71, 77-89, 98, 111-112; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
19 The Appeal Board explained the process for analyzing falsification cases: 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred.  
ISCR Case No. 03-10390 at 8 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2005) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 
9, 2004)). 
20 Applicant’s false statements during his interviews, in his SOR response, and during his testimony were 
not alleged in the SOR, and they will not be used for disqualification purposes. They may be considered 
when assessing Applicant’s credibility, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the 
“whole person.” 
 
21 AE B, C.  
 
 
7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
8 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant discussed his arrest when he was interviewed in 2005. The DOD was 
aware of his conduct and granted him a top secret clearance. I gave due consideration 
to Applicant’s argument that he had no motive to falsify the 2011 SF 86 because the 
DOD was already aware of his conduct and granted him a clearance.22 Applicant had 
recently started a new job when he submitted his 2011 SF 86. No one at his company 
was aware of his 1991 arrest. Applicant’s actual motive is unknown, but he may have 
been concerned about his co-workers discovering that he was arrested for a child 
molestation offense.23 I have also considered the following: 
                                                          
22 “Although evidence that an applicant has a particular motive to falsify may be probative of an intent to 
falsify for purposes of Guideline E, there is no legal requirement that a particular motive to falsify be 
established in order to prove an applicant had the intent to falsify.” See ISCR Case No. 03-10390 at 8 
(App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2005) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-15935 at 7 (Oct. 15, 2003). 
 
23 See ISCR Case No. 10-09035 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2014) for a discussion about an administrative 
judge’s obligation to discuss a motive to falsify:  
In addition, a reasonable person could believe and consider that Applicant had a motive 
to have omitted some of his misconduct: concern over losing his job. He testified that he 
was worried about the effect his last DUI might have on his continued employment, and it 
is not fanciful to suppose that this concern provided him with a strong reason to minimize 
the totality of his misconduct, especially his early felony arrest. The Judge did not 
address this, which, under the facts of this case, impairs her analysis. 
 
 
 
9 
 
 The clear language of the questions on the SF 86s, along with Applicant’s 
education, professional experience, and communication skills. 
 
 Applicant’s statement that he did not realize until his 2011 interview that he was 
required to list a charge that had been dismissed. This statement is contradicted 
by his admission that he became aware during his 2005 interview that he was 
required to list a dismissed charge. 
 
 Applicant lied to the police officers about what occurred. 
 
 The discrepancy between the victim’s description to the police of what occurred 
and Applicant’s description of the events. 
 
 The police reported that Applicant was given a polygraph. Applicant testified that 
he never took a police polygraph, but he told the background investigator in 2005 
that he took a police polygraph, which he failed. He denied telling the investigator 
that he took a police polygraph. He stated that he told the investigator that he 
took polygraphs during the course of his therapy. 
 
 Applicant testified that the 1991 charge was “one of the most significant” events 
in his life; he went through four years of counseling; and the victim became his 
stepdaughter; but he told the investigator in 2011 that the girl was 14 or 15 at the 
time of the assault, when she was actually 11 years old. 
 
 After considering all the evidence, including that which is discussed above, and 
considering Applicant’s demeanor and credibility, I find that he intentionally provided 
false information about his felony charge for lewd and lascivious assault upon a child on 
SF 86s submitted in 2003, 2005, and 2011. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable.   
 
 SOR ¶ 3.a cross-alleges Applicant’s sexual behavior. That conduct created a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. 
Additionally the conduct showed poor judgment and an unwillingness to comply with the 
law, which raises questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. The general concern addressed in AG ¶ 15 is also raised. 
See ISCR Case No. 12-01683 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 10, 2014).  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
10 
 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 Having determined that Applicant intentionally provided false information on 
three SF 86s, I have also determined that he provided false testimony when he denied 
the omission was intentional. It would be inconsistent to find the conduct mitigated.24   
 
 It has been about 23 years since Applicant molested an 11-year-old girl. 
Applicant had four years of therapy, and there is no evidence that he has ever repeated 
that behavior. He has told a number of family members about what he did. Other family 
members and co-workers are not aware of his actions. Applicant has lessened, but not 
eliminated, his vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, and duress. AG ¶ 14(c) is partially 
applicable. Moreover, I am concerned about the inconsistencies in this case. Applicant’s 
conduct continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.25  
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior  
 
 The security concern for sexual behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which can 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
                                                          
24 See ISCR Case 03-22819 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2006), in which the Appeal Board reversed the 
Administrative Judge’s decision to grant Applicant’s security clearance under similar circumstances: 
 
Once the Administrative Judge found that Applicant deliberately falsified a security 
clearance application in September 2002, the Judge could not render a favorable security 
clearance decision without articulating a rational basis for why it would be clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant 
despite the falsification. Here, the Judge gives reasons as to why he considers the 
falsification mitigated under a “whole person” analysis, namely that Applicant has 
matured, has held a position of responsibility, recognizes how important it is to be candid 
in relation to matters relating to her security clearance, and has changed her behavior so 
that there is little likelihood of recurrence. However, the Judge’s conclusion runs contrary 
to the Judge’s rejection of Applicant’s explanations for the security clearance application 
falsification. At the hearing (after earlier admitting the falsification in her March 2003 
written statement to a security investigator), Applicant testified that she had not 
intentionally falsified her application. Given the Judge's rejection of this explanation as 
not being credible, it follows that the Judge could not have concluded Applicant now 
recognizes the importance of candor and has changed her behavior. 
 
25 See ISCR Case No. 09-03233 (App. Bd. Aug. 12, 2010). The Appeal Board determined that an 
applicant’s child molestation offense “even though it occurred long ago, impugn[ed] his trustworthiness 
and good judgment.” 
 
11 
 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
 Applicant sexually molested an 11-year-old girl. All of the above disqualifying 
conditions are applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate sexual behavior security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 14. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress.  
 
 The sexual behavior security concerns are not mitigated for the same rationale 
discussed under the personal conduct guideline.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
12 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines D and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence, including his honorable 
military service. However, Applicant sexually molested an 11-year-old girl; he 
intentionally falsified three security clearance applications by failing to divulge his 
criminal record; and he intentionally provided false information in his interviews in 2005 
and 2011, in his SOR response, and during his hearing testimony when he denied 
intentionally falsifying the SF 86s. I have significant doubts about his judgment, honesty, 
and trustworthiness. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the personal conduct and sexual behavior security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
