 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 12-03437 
  ) 
 ) 
 ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Since 2007 Applicant accumulated over $44,000 of delinquent debts. She 
resolved or paid about $6,300 of it. The remaining amount is unresolved. When she 
completed a public trust application, she did not disclose a previous security clearance 
revocation, which alleged financial problems, and personal conduct issues for failing to 
disclose a criminal conviction. She failed to rebut or mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns raised under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. Her eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
On November 30, 3011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On December 13, 2013, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
 
2 
 
 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On January 9, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 25, 2014, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing ten 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy on April 1, 2014. Applicant received the 
FORM on April 16, 2014, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. Applicant did not submit any additional information. On June 2, 
2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 37 allegations in Paragraph 1, and one allegation in 
Paragraph 2. In her response to the SOR, Applicant denied all allegations contained in 
Paragraph 1, except for those in 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.m, 1.s, 1.u, 1.x, 1.y, 1.bb, and 1.dd, 
which she admitted. She denied the allegations contained in Paragraph 2.a. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old and was married twice to the same man. She has been 
divorced since August 2005. She has one child. She is enrolled in a Master’s degree 
program, having completed a Bachelor’s degree in July 2011. (Item 4.) 
 
 Appellant enlisted in the Marine Corps in March 1997 and earned an honorable 
discharge in November 2007. (Item 4.) In March 2000 the Department of the Navy 
issued Applicant a Letter of Intent to Revoke Security Clearance (2000 LOI) based on 
security concerns raised under the guidelines for Personal Conduct, Financial 
Considerations, and Criminal Conduct. The 2000 LOI alleged that she owed 11 
delinquent debts totaling $7,171. It further alleged that in March 1998 she was late 
every month with her rent payments and was counseled twice about her financial 
problems. It also noted that her Personal Financial Statement disclosed that she had 
more expenses than income.  
 
 The 2000 LOI also alleged that Appellant’s failure to disclose delinquent debts on 
a December 1997 security clearance application raised personal conduct security 
concerns. In January 1995 she was convicted of Malicious Injury to Real Property and 
Trespassing. During an interview related to this security clearance application, she 
denied falsifying the security clearance application by not disclosing the conviction, and 
argued that she had listed it on an enlistment contract. Those allegations raised security 
concerns under the guidelines for Criminal and Personal Conduct. On February 27, 
2001, the Department of the Navy issued a Final Revocation of Security Clearance. 
(Items 7, 8.) Appellant failed to disclose this revocation on a November 2011 e-QIP. 
(Item 3.)     
 
 After leaving the Marine Corps, Appellant worked in various positions, such as a 
computer lab assistant, administrative assistant, and help desk assistant. She was 
unemployed from December 2009 to January 2010, and December 2010 to February 
 
3 
 
 
2011.  During those times she attended school fulltime, and received VA benefits and 
child support. In October 2011 she assumed a position with a large insurance company 
at its help desk. She attributed her financial problems to the periods of unemployment 
when her benefits and child support were insufficient to support her and her child. (Item 
6.)  
 
 On January 17, 2012, and February 1, 2012, a government investigator 
interviewed Applicant regarding the e-QIP and discussed, amongst other things, her 
numerous delinquent debts. She accepted responsibility for many debts listed on the 
credit bureau reports (CBR), disputed some, and indicated she had payment plans for 
several. She said she would contact other creditors and establish repayment plans. She 
was unaware of certain delinquent debts. (Item 6.) 
 
 On September 13, 2013, Appellant responded to Interrogatories pertaining to 40 
delinquent debts, and asserted as follows: 13 debts were disputed and removed from 
her CBR; 16 debts were paid; two debts were not owed; four debts were unfamiliar; two 
debts were open; and five debts were not addressed. She provided proof that she paid 
three debts: 1.g for $231, 1.ee for $235, and an unidentified medical debt. Attached to 
the Interrogatories was a Personal Financial Statement that the government requested 
she submit. She refused to complete it stating, “I don’t wish to release this personal 
information.” (Item 5.) 
 
 Based on CBRs dated December 17, 2011, and July 10, 2013, the SOR alleged 
37 delinquent debts that totaled $44,122. They began accumulating in 2007.  (Items 9, 
10.) A summary of the status of the debts as reflected on Applicant’s September 2013 
credit report is as follows: 10 debts totaling $1,338 were paid; 6 debts totaling $3,996 
were disputed and removed from Applicant’s CBR; and 21 debts totaling $38,788 
remain unresolved or unpaid.1 (Items 3, 5.) 
 
 Applicant denied that she intentionally failed to disclose her previous security 
clearance revocation. She asserted that she “was never subjected to having my 
clearance removed to the best of my knowledge.” (Item 3.) She said her service record 
does not include any entries referencing a security clearance revocation. Without more 
information regarding her answer to the allegation, her response is not credible.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
                                                          
1 The 10 paid debts are: Paragraphs 1. a, 1. b, 1.g, 1.k, 1.l, 1.n, 1.q, 1.ee, 1.hh,  and 1.ll. The 6 
disputed debts are: Paragraphs 1.p, 1.t, 1.aa, 1.cc, 1.jj, and 1.kk: 
 
 
4 
 
 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense 
contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ 
C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
5 
 
 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Since 2007 Applicant has been accumulating delinquent debts that she has been 
unable or unwilling to satisfy. The evidence raises both security concerns, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in 2007, the bulk of which 
remain unresolved. She did not provide sufficient information to demonstrate that such 
problems are unlikely to continue or recur, calling into question her reliability and 
trustworthiness. The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 20(a). 
  
 Applicant provided some evidence that her financial problems arose because she 
experienced financial problems related to a period of unemployment. Those may have 
been circumstances beyond her control. However, she did not provide evidence that 
she attempted to responsibly address the delinquent debts as they were accumulating, 
a factor that must be considered in establishing mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Thus, this 
mitigating condition has little application.  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that she participated in credit or financial 
counseling. Twenty-one of the 37 SOR-listed delinquent debts, totaling over $38,788, 
remain unresolved. Hence, AG ¶ 20(c) has no application, as there are not clear 
indications that her financial problems are under control. Applicant provided evidence 
that she made a good-faith effort to resolve ten debts totaling $1,338, as required under 
AG ¶ 20(d). Said mitigating condition applies to those ten debts. There is evidence that 
Applicant successfully disputed six delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to those debts.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The trustworthiness concern pertaining to the guideline for personal conduct is 
set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The SOR alleged in ¶ 2.a that Applicant falsified her answer to a question on the 
e-QIP, because she did not disclose a previous revocation of a security clearance. The 
Government contended that the omission may raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying under AG ¶ 16: 
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant’s explanation for omitting information from her public trust application, 
which states that she did not receive notice of the revocation while in military service, is 
simply not credible. Based on the evidence, the Government established said 
disqualification.  
 
AG ¶ 17 includes six conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns 
arising under this guideline: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
Falsification of information requested in an e-QIP is serious misconduct. 
Applicant did not provide evidence that would support the application of any mitigating 
condition listed under AG ¶ 17.  
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 38-year-old divorced 
woman and mother of one child. From March 1997 to November 2007, she served on 
active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps. She received an honorable discharge.    
 
In February 2001 the Department of the Navy revoked Applicant’s clearance 
based on delinquent debts, failure to disclose those debts on her December 1997 SF 
86, and a 1995 criminal conviction. The revocation cited security concerns under the 
guidelines for financial considerations, personal conduct and criminal conduct. She 
denied the falsification allegations. In November 2011 she completed an e-QIP and 
failed to disclose the 2001 security clearance revocation. In January and February 
2012, she discussed numerous delinquent debts with an investigator and clearly 
became aware of the Government’s concerns. In December 2013 the DOD issued her 
an SOR alleging trustworthiness concerns under financial considerations and personal 
conduct.  
 
The record demonstrates that Applicant has a long history of financial problems, 
starting before December 1997 when she submitted her first security clearance 
application. The evidence also denotes a history of intentionally omitting requested 
information during the clearance process. In addition, she refused to submit a Personal 
Financial Statement as requested as part of the clearance investigation in September 
2013. These issues, pertinent to reliability, judgment, and willingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, are significant.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For these reasons, I 
 
9 
 
 
conclude Applicant did not meet her burden to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
arising from her financial problems and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c through 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.h through 1.j:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.k and 1.l:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.m:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.n:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.p and 1.q:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.r and 1.s:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.t:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.u through 1.z:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.aa:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.bb:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.cc:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.dd:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.ee:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.ff and 1.gg:  Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.hh and 1.ii:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.jj and 1.kk:  For Applicant  
 
                   Paragraph 2, Guideline E     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
