 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-01979 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 While serving in the U.S. Army, Applicant engaged in criminal conduct and was 
administratively discharged under other than honorable conditions in lieu of trial by 
court-martial in 2002. His current falsifications concerning his past criminal behavior 
raise serious questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and his ability to 
protect classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 29, 2011. 
On September 19, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline J (criminal 
conduct) and Guideline E (personal conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
November 5, 2013, and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of 
a hearing.  
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated March 21, 
2014, was provided to him by transmittal letter dated March 25, 2014. Applicant 
received the FORM on April 28, 2014. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections 
to the FORM and to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. He timely responded 
to the FORM and provided a statement, dated May 15, 2014, with eight enclosures that 
I made part of the record. The case was assigned to me on June 3, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR, but with reservations. 
His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of 
the record evidence, including his answers to the SOR, the FORM, his May 2013 
response to interrogatories, and his November 2003 statement, I make the following 
findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old field engineer working for a government contractor in 
support of deployed U.S. personnel. He graduated from high school in 1989, and 
completed some college courses in 1993, but did not earn a degree. He married his first 
wife in February 1989, and divorced in August 2010. He has three grown-up daughters 
from this relationship. He married his current wife in 2012. 
 
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army in August 1989, shortly after his high school 
graduation. He served on active duty until August 2002, when he was administratively 
discharged in lieu of trial by court-martial. In 2001, he was a drill sergeant in a training 
unit, and held the rank of sergeant first class (E-7). He and other drill sergeants were 
investigated for rape and maltreatment of subordinates. Applicant denied any 
involvement with the rape allegations or the maltreatment of subordinates’ incident. He 
was offered non-judicial punishment for those offenses, which he refused, and he 
demanded trial by court-martial. He averred that after he demanded trial by court-
martial, a subsequent investigation was conducted, and additional charges were 
preferred against him. 
 
In June 2002, Applicant was charged with violating a lawful general regulation for 
engaging in four wrongful relationships with three different enlisted women, and an 
indecent assault on a fourth female trainee. He was referred to a special court-martial 
empowered to adjudged a bad conduct discharge. After consulting with his attorney and 
receiving advice from supervisors, Applicant requested an administrative discharge in 
lieu of trial by court-martial. In his request for the administrative discharge, Applicant 
admitted to one specification of having an improper relationship with a trainee. Upon his 
discharge, Applicant was reduced to the rank of E-1, and his service was characterized 
as under other than honorable conditions (OTH).  
 
 
3 
 
 
After his discharge, Applicant was hired by a government contractor and applied 
for a security clearance. On November 6, 2003, Applicant was interviewed by a 
government agent conducting a background investigation. He provided an official 
statement, which he certified as true under the provision of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001. In 
his November 2003 statement, Applicant claimed that a female soldier accused him of 
assaulting another female soldier. After an investigation, he was offered non-judicial 
punishment for sexual assault, and he refused it because he did not assault anyone, 
and he did not want to take the Article 15 and say that he had. He claimed he did not 
assault a female soldier in the hotel room, and averred she never said he assaulted her. 
 
Applicant was hired by a government contractor in June 2003, and he has been 
working for different government contractors to present. He started working for his 
current employer in January 2011.  
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
January 29, 2011. He disclosed in Section 15 (Military History) of the 2011 SCA, that he 
was charged with indecent assault and maltreatment of subordinates in 2002, and 
referred to trial by court-martial after he refused non-judicial punishment. He then 
requested an administrative discharge in lieu of trial by court-martial and was 
administratively separated from the Army with an OTH. 
 
On August 29, 2011, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator 
concerning his 2002 court-martial charges. Applicant told the investigator that he was 
offered an Article 15 for offenses he did not commit. He demanded trial by court-martial 
and additional charges were preferred against him. He told the investigator that he had 
no idea why he was charged with indecent acts, failure to obey a regulation, and cruelty 
and maltreatment of subordinates because he did not do anything. He took the “fall” as 
he was instructed to do. 
 
In his response to DOD interrogatories (sworn on May 8, 2013), Applicant stated 
that the only reason he received an OTH discharge is because he refused to accept an 
Article 15 punishment for something he did not do.  
 
In his November 2013 answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the Guideline J 
allegations with reservations, because he did not remember the circumstances 
surrounding the 2002 offenses. He admitted to touching a female soldier 
inappropriately, but he denied any use of physical force. 
 
In his May 2014 response to the FORM, Applicant stated that he never 
intentionally tried to disavow any of the 2002 charges against him. He explained that 
when he told the investigator in 2011, that he was forced to take the fall for somebody 
else, he was expressing his recollection of the events. The investigator did not provide 
him with any documents to refresh his memory of the 2002 events before the interview. 
He claimed that he did not remember the circumstances that led to the 2002 charges 
against him. Applicant also claimed he never abused his position as a drill sergeant or 
 
4 
 
 
made inappropriate comments to female trainees. He answered the investigators 
questions to the best of his recollection. 
 
Applicant considers himself to be trustworthy, reliable, and a good worker. The 
only criminal charges ever filed against him were the 2002 court-martial charges. 
Except for the SOR allegations, he has never been the subject of any security concerns. 
Since 2002, he has been working for government contractors providing services to 
deployed U.S. personnel in hostile environments in Iraq and Afghanistan. He is currently 
deployed to Central America providing support to deployed U.S. personnel.  
 
As an aviation mechanic, Applicant was entrusted with the safety and security of 
airplanes and those who flew them. He has not received any negative operational 
readiness reports. He also has performed as his unit’s sensitive items custodian without 
incidents. He has selflessly dedicated himself to the U.S. service without waiver, and 
has received numerous awards and recognition for a job well done. He currently holds a 
managerial position, which is also recognition of his trustworthiness and reliability. In 
support of his good job performance, Applicant submitted two President’s Awards, 
commendable ratings, certificates of appreciation, and letters of recommendation. 
Applicant is considered to be a well-respected professional by his peers and 
supervisors. He is an invaluable asset to his unit. He demonstrates a high level of 
reliability and trustworthiness. He has established a reputation for following rules and 
enforcing strict performance standards. His references recommended his eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
 
5 
 
 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the Government’s concern is that criminal activity “creates 
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it 
calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations.” AG ¶ 30.  
 
 Applicant admitted (with reservations because he did not remember the 
circumstances) that he violated a lawful regulation three times by engaging in wrongful 
relationships with three female subordinates. He also admitted to indecently assaulting 
a female subordinate, but without the use of force. Applicant was offered non-judicial 
punishment for the above offenses in 2002, which he refused, and demanded trial by 
court-martial. Later, he requested an administrative discharge in lieu of trial by court-
martial, and admitted to one incident of having an unlawful relationship with a 
subordinate. Applicant’s behavior raises security concerns under AG ¶ 31(a) “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
 
6 
 
 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Considering the record as a whole, I find that both mitigating conditions partially 
apply, but do not fully mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s offenses were serious 
and violated the trust placed in him as a leader and drill sergeant. He used his position 
to abuse subordinates. Notwithstanding, his commander offered him non-judicial 
punishment, an administrative measure reserved for less serious offenses, and later 
approved Applicant’s administrative discharge in lieu of trial by court-martial. Such 
action also indicates the commander did not consider Applicant’s behavior sufficiently 
serious to warrant a court-martial. 
 
 Except for the SOR allegations, there is no evidence of Applicant being involved 
in any additional criminal conduct before 2002, or after 2002. Applicant’s good service 
to the United States during the last 12 years serves as some evidence of his possible 
rehabilitation 
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant’s past criminal behavior is aggravated by his 2011 
and 2013 false statements and falsifications, both of which are felony offenses in 
violation of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001. Applicant’s failure to fully disclose his past criminal 
behavior together with his current false statements bring to the forefront his lack of 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It shows Appellant’s lack of reform and 
rehabilitation and his unwillingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  The personal conduct security concerns are based on the same facts alleged 
under the criminal conduct guideline, incorporated herein, and the fact that he made 
false statements to an investigator in August 2011 and falsified his April 2013 response 
to Government interrogatories.  
 
  Notwithstanding Applicant’s numerous contradictory statements, the record 
shows that he indecently touched a female subordinate and engaged in an improper 
relationship with at least another female subordinate. Applicant made false statements 
to an investigator and falsified his response to interrogatories when he minimized his 
criminal behavior and failed to disclose the full extent of his prior criminal behavior. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s criminal behavior and falsifications trigger the applicability of the 
following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 
8 
 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that none of the mitigating conditions 
apply. Applicant made no effort to correct his numerous false statements and 
falsifications until he answered the SOR admitting (with reservations) his 2001-2002 
criminal behavior. He then minimized his past criminal behavior in his response to the 
FORM. Applicant’s past criminal behavior and current falsifications raise serious 
questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and his ability to protect 
classified information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines J and E in my 
whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant served 13 years on active duty in the Army until he was 
administratively discharged under other than honorable conditions in lieu of trial by 
court-martial. Since 2002, he has served the United States well while employed with 
government contractors supporting U.S. personnel in dangerous environments.  
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant’s falsifications concerning his past criminal behavior 
raise serious questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and his ability to 
protect classified information. He failed to mitigate the Guideline J and Guideline E 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a and 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b and 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a- 2.f:   Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
