 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-03235 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. His financial 
problems were a result of high medical cost incurred in treating his wife’s serious 
medical condition and the financial collapse of a family-owned business. Applicant was 
able to put his financial house in order and resolve his debts over the past three years. 
His past financial problems no longer raise questions about his eligibility for classified 
information. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD), in accordance with 
DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing (Answer).  
 
On April 10, 2014, Department Counsel notified the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed with a hearing. On April 22, 2014, a notice of hearing 
(NOH) was issued setting the hearing for May 16, 2014. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 7 and Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A – D were 
 
2 
 
 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and I granted his request for 
additional time to submit documents post hearing. He timely submitted Ax. E, which was 
admitted without objection. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on May 28, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact:1 
 
 Applicant is in his early forties. He is an engineer and has been working for a 
defense contractor since 1999. Before going to work for his current employer, Applicant 
served in the U.S. military for seven years, receiving an honorable discharge. He has 
held a security clearance since 1991. (Tr. at 9-10; Gx. 1) 
 
 Applicant married in 2001. He was working full time as a defense contractor and 
his wife was running a family-owned business. Their combined income allowed them to 
lead a typical middle class lifestyle. They had no problems paying their bills on time. In 
2004, Applicant’s child was born and, shortly thereafter, his wife started having medical 
issues. His wife’s health continued to deteriorate and, even after multiple medical tests, 
doctors were baffled as to the cause. (Tr. at 28-30) 
 
Applicant’s wife’s condition left her unable to manage the family-owned business. 
Employees, who she counted on to run the business in her absence, took advantage of 
the lack of oversight and diverted money into their own pockets. Applicant was not fully 
aware of their financial trouble, as his wife was in charge of the family’s finances and 
kept him in the dark as to the extent of their problems. (Tr. at 30-38, 51-54; Ax. B) 
 
In 2009, specialists were finally able to diagnose his wife’s medical condition. 
Also, around this time, Applicant started to become aware of his family’s financial 
problems. Applicant tried to meet the family’s expenses on his income alone, to include 
financing the failing business. He was unable to do so because of the staggering cost of 
his wife’s medical treatments, which his insurance company at first declined to cover. 
He fell behind on the mortgage payments on their home. His attempts to address his 
delinquent debts, to include his mortgage, were unsuccessful. (Tr. at 30-38, 53-54) 
 
 In 2011, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. He disclosed his 
financial problems. He was subsequently interviewed and provided details of his 
financial situation and efforts made to resolve his debts. He specifically discussed his 
mortgage, which he was paying on time, but he had a delinquency balance from when 
he missed several payments. He was working with the lender to modify the mortgage. 
At the time, Applicant still held out hope that he could save the family-owned business. 
His 2011 credit report reflects numerous debts in collection status or charged off. (Gx. 1; 
Gx. 3; Gx. 5)  
                                                          
1 I have made only those reasonable inferences supported by the evidence and, where necessary, 
resolved any potential conflict raised by the evidence.  
 
3 
 
 
By 2013, Applicant came to the realization that, despite their best efforts, the 
family-owned business had failed. He and his wife closed the business. His wife’s 
medical condition continued to pose severe limitations on her daily activities, but doctors 
were able to place her on a well-regulated treatment program covered by insurance. 
This new treatment program allowed Applicant’s wife to look for and start a new career. 
Applicant volunteered for a new project at his job that provided for increased pay. He 
supplements his earnings with a part-time job. With his family’s financial prospects 
improving, Applicant contacted his creditors, to include his mortgage lender, to address 
his debts. He resolved approximately $20,000 of debt that he had discussed during his 
clearance interview two years earlier. His 2013 credit report reflects the satisfaction of a 
number of debts that were previously reported as delinquent. These debts are not 
reflected on the SOR, as they were resolved before it was issued. (Tr. at 34-42, 55-59, 
64, 70; Gx. 4; Gx. 6; Ax. C – E) 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent mortgage debt was the only debt he had not resolved 
before the SOR was issued. According to the SOR, the delinquency amount owed was 
approximately $19,000. Applicant has resolved the mortgage debt through a recently 
approved modification agreement. He submitted proof of paying his new monthly 
mortgage payment a month in advance of the due date. He is able to afford his new 
monthly mortgage payments and, after three more payments, his payments will 
decrease and the loan will be rehabilitated. Applicant also submitted documentation that 
his home is worth about $50,000 more than the mortgage balance owed. He explained 
that it took him a long time to negotiate a modification agreement because his lender 
kept changing, losing his paperwork, and changing requirements for the modification. 
He also recognizes that his past failed attempts to address his mortgage also impeded 
his recent efforts to resolve the debt. (Tr. at 42-50; Gx. 5 – 6; Ax. C – E) 
 
Applicant and his wife now manage the family’s finances together. Applicant 
submitted a copy of his family’s written budget. After paying their recurring expenses, 
they have approximately $500 a month in discretionary income. Applicant expects their 
discretionary income to increase in the coming months as their mortgage payments 
decrease and they pay off a car loan on their late-model car. He has over $35,000 in a 
retirement savings account. (Tr. at 59-67; Ax. E) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
 
4 
 
 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.2  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.3 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The potential security concern regarding an applicant with financial problems is 
explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                                          
2 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”) 
 
3 See, ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013) (security clearance determinations require 
administrative judges to make predictive judgments).  
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems raises this concern and establishes the 
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 
19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions were raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s past financial problems were mainly attributable to matters outside of 
his control, notably, his wife’s serious medical condition that went undiagnosed for 
several years. Additionally, the family-owned business failed and they went from a two-
family income to one. Applicant was unable to pay all the family’s bills, including their 
mortgage, on his income alone. He did not walk away from his financial obligations. 
Instead, after doctors were able to diagnose his wife’s medical condition and start her 
on a new treatment program, he took concrete steps to address his debts.  
 
 Applicant’s first step was to close the failing business that was draining the 
family’s finances. He then volunteered for a work assignment that increased his pay. He 
supplements his income through part-time work. With this increased cash flow, 
Applicant reached out to his overdue creditors and started to address his debts. He 
resolved a substantial amount of debt before the SOR was issued. He also submitted 
proof of his efforts through the years to address his mortgage debt, culminating in the 
recent modification of his mortgage loan. He submitted proof of paying his mortgage as 
required by the modification agreement, which mitigates his past failed efforts to resolve 
 
6 
 
 
his mortgage. He also submitted proof of his ability and commitment to continue to meet 
all his financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has now taken control of his finances and submitted proof of a 
favorable track record of debt repayment that mitigates his past financial problems. AG 
¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply. Accordingly, Applicant’s past financial problems no longer 
raise a security concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).4  
 
 Applicant’s past financial problems were not a result of gambling, frivolous or 
reckless spending, or other matters raising a security concern. Instead, his financial 
problems were caused by the high cost of treatments for his wife’s serious medical 
illness and the financial collapse of a family-owned business. Applicant has resolved the 
debts he and his family accumulated during this period of financial turmoil. He was fully 
upfront and candid about his financial problems during the security clearance process. 
Applicant’s actions in resolving his debts and the candor he demonstrated during the 
security clearance process mitigate the concern his debts might be used as a source 
coercion or influence. 
 
 In addition, Applicant has served this nation in the military and as defense 
contractor for the past 20 years. Over that 20-year period, he has held a security 
clearance without issue. This favorable security record, including while going through 
the financial hardships of the last several years, also mitigates the security concerns 
raised by his past financial problems.  
 
 After considering all the evidence, I find that Applicant met his heavy burden of 
establishing his eligibility for continued access to classified information. His past 
financial problems no longer raise doubts about his judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
                                                          
4 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
