 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-04492 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his financial situation. 
He has made some effort to address his delinquent debts. However, his long track 
record of financial irresponsibility and the misleading statements he has made during 
the course of the security clearance process regarding his finances raise concerns 
about his eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD), in accordance with 
DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing (Answer).  
 
On April 10, 2014, Department Counsel notified the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed with a hearing. On April 15, 2014, a notice of hearing 
(NOH) was issued setting the hearing for May 16, 2014. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A – D were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and I granted his request for 
 
2 
 
 
additional time to submit documents post hearing. He elected not to submit post-hearing 
matters. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on May 28, 2014, and the record 
closed on June 6, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is in his late forties. He has never married and has two adult children. 
He helps support both children, one of whom has a serious medical issue. Applicant has 
been working for a defense contractor since 2011. He was previously granted a security 
clearance in about 1997. (Tr. at 12, 32-37; Gx. 1; Gx. 4) 
 
 In October 2011, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). He 
listed a delinquent $2,500 hospital bill. Applicant claimed that he contacted the creditor 
and was working on a payment plan to resolve the debt. The debt remains unpaid. It is 
listed at SOR ¶ 1.n. At hearing, Applicant first stated that he had not contacted the 
creditor or made payments. After being reminded of the claims he had previously made 
in his SCA, Applicant testified that he made some partial payments and would provide 
proof post hearing. He did not submit any documents post hearing. (Tr. at 57-59; Gx. 1)  
 
After Applicant submitted his SCA, a credit report was obtained as part of his 
security clearance background investigation. The credit report revealed that Applicant 
had far more delinquent accounts than what he listed on his SCA. The credit report lists 
about 14 debts in collection status. (Gx. 2) 
 
In January 2012, Applicant sat down for a security clearance background 
interview. He was confronted with the negative financial information listed in his credit 
report. Applicant stated he was paying some of the debts and promised to resolve all his 
delinquent accounts by December 2012. (Gx. 4)  
 
In October 2013, Applicant was sent a financial interrogatory. He was asked to 
update and provide documentation regarding the status of his delinquent accounts. He 
submitted proof of resolving a few debts, but most of his debts remained unpaid. Seven 
of the debts inquired about in the interrogatory are still unresolved and are listed in the 
the SOR at ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.h – 1.l. (Gx. 4; Ax. A) 
 
 The SOR lists 14 debts in collection status, totaling about $9,500. Applicant 
submitted proof of resolving 6 of the 14 debts. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d, 1.g, and 1.m.) The 
other eight SOR debts, which include the $2,500 delinquent hospital bill in ¶ 1.n, remain 
unresolved. Applicant admits the debts listed at ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.i, 1.k, and 1.l. He disputes 
the debts in ¶ 1.h and 1.j. During the current security clearance process, Applicant 
claimed that he has paid, negotiated a payment plan, or disputed the eight debts. He 
was given time post hearing to corroborate his claims. No documents were submitted 
post hearing. (Tr. at 38-59, 64-66, 77-80; Answer; Gx. 4; Ax. B – D) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant states that his financial trouble is related to periods of unemployment 
and underemployment. He used to work in the construction industry, and the collapse of 
the housing market left him unemployed from 2008 to 2009. He also suffered from 
periods of underemployment due to the unsteady nature of his previous work. He has 
been gainfully employed since about 2009. He has gone online and received help in 
repairing his credit report, but has not received financial or debt counseling. He currently 
has less than $50 in savings. (Tr. at 32-35, 60-64, Gx. 1) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.1 However, as the Appeal Board, recently reaffirmed, 
there is no per se rule requiring disqualification and a judge must decide each case 
based on its own merits.2 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
                                                          
1 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
4 
 
 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.3 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern regarding an applicant with financial problems is explained 
at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The debts alleged in the SOR are established through Applicant’s admissions 
and the other evidence submitted at hearing, to include his SCA and credit reports. 
Applicant’s history of failing to pay his debts raises the Guideline F concern and 
establishes the disqualifying conditions at:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a):  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c):  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions were potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
                                                          
3 See, ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013) (security clearance determinations require 
administrative judges to make predictive judgments about an individual’s ability and willness to protect 
and safeguard classified information). See also, ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (The “Adjudicative 
Guidelines are designed to predict. The prediction in nonsecurity violation cases is made by identifying 
and then evaluating behaviors or circumstances that have an articulable nexus to the ability or willingness 
to safeguard classified information.”) (emphasis in original). 
 
5 
 
 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts date back several years and continue to the present 
date. His financial situation is, in part, due to matters beyond his control; namely, job 
loss, underemployment, and helping to support his ill son. However, he has been 
gainfully employed since 2009 and has yet to address debts that he claimed to have 
resolved in his SCA, clearance interview, and interrogatory response. His failure to 
address these debts undermines the favorable evidence Applicant presented of paying 
several other debts.4  
 
 Applicant’s resolution of several SOR debts mitigates the security concern raised 
by those debts. Notwithstanding the resolution of those debts, it is too soon to conclude 
that Applicant will continue to manage his personal finances in a responsible fashion 
once the spotlight of the current security clearance review has passed. During the 
course of the security clearance process, Applicant claimed that he paid, was paying, or 
was in the process of resolving several SOR debts. Afterwards, the evidence 
established that he had not addressed the debts. His failure to address these debts and 
his misleading statements about resolving the debts raise doubts as to the extent to 
which his finances are under control.5 None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
Consequently, although Applicant has made some headway in addressing some of his 
past-due debts, it is too soon to resolve the financial considerations concern in his favor. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case No. 11-13984 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2014) (denial upheld because track record of financial 
irresponsibility undermined mitigating value of recent efforts to resolve delinquent debts). 
 
5 ISCR Case No. 10-08560 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 5, 2011) (conduct that is not alleged can be used to 
examine an applicant’s evidence in mitigation and credibility). 
 
6 
 
 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).6 I took into account that Applicant previously held a 
clearance (apparently) without issue and helps to financially support his children. 
However, this and other favorable record evidence does not mitigate the security 
concerns raised by his financial situation and the misleading statements he has made 
about his finances. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about 
Applicant’s continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:         For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.f:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:          For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h – 1.l:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.m:         For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.n:          Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
6 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
