 
1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-06952 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s home was 
foreclosed upon and she has three charged-off or collection debts totaling more than 
$65,000. She has paid $150 on her delinquent accounts. The financial considerations 
security concerns remain. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on February 4, 
2014, the DoD issued an SOR detailing financial considerations security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
due to financial considerations. On February 25, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR 
and elected to have the matter decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), dated April 7, 2014. The FORM contained nine attachments. 
On April 14, 2014, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of her 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. Responses to FORMs are due 30 days after receipt 
of the FORM. Applicant’s response was due on May 14, 2014. As of June 9, 2014, no 
response had been received. On June 9, 2014, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted filing for bankruptcy protection in 
September 2007 and denied the debts listed in the SOR, and her admissions are 
incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old human resource manager who has worked for a 
defense contractor since May 1992, and seeks to maintain a top-secret security 
clearance. No information as to her duty performance was submitted. In April 2011, she 
divorced after being married 19 years. (Item 4) There is no indication when the couple 
separated. She has one child who is 12.2 The record does not show her annual income, 
but lists a monthly gross salary of approximately $9,000.3 (Item 5) As of November 
2013, her monthly net remainder (gross monthly income less deductions, monthly 
expenses, and monthly debt payments) was $4,424. (Item 5)  
 
 In June 2006, Applicant and her husband purchased a home and obtained a 
mortgage (SOR 1.b) of approximately $450,000. (Item 5, 6, 7, 8) In October 2006, a 
home equity line of credit (SOR 1.d, $39,086) was opened with the same lender that 
held the mortgage. (Item 8) In March 2009, Applicant fell behind on her mortgage 
payments. She was going through a divorce and was unable to refinance her mortgage. 
(Item. 5) She asserted the monthly mortgage payments had increased to $3,611 at a 
time when her monthly net pay was $4,070. (Item 5) She did not state the amount of the 
monthly mortgage payments prior to the increase. In August 2010, the house was 
offered for sale at $320,000. (Item 5)  
 
 In November 2007, Applicant and her ex-husband, then current husband, filed for 
Chapter 13, Wage Earner’s Plan, bankruptcy protection (SOR 1.a). (Item 5) The 
bankruptcy listed assets of $615,000, which included real estate assets of $577,000, 
and liabilities of $542,000, including $525,000 of secured debt. (Item 9) At the time of 
filing, the household current gross monthly income was $10,000 and the combined 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s November 2013 Personal Financial Statement (PFS) does not indicate she is paying or 
receiving child support. (Item 5) 
 
3 This gross figure appears to be overly high. Base on the provided wage statement (Item 5), Applicant’s 
monthly gross income is approximately $6,100.   
 
3 
 
average monthly income after deductions was $7,500. (Item 9) The plan required $325 
monthly payments. (Item 9)  
 
In March 2009, the bankruptcy was dismissed because the plan was not 
sufficiently funded.4 (Item 9) Before the Chapter 13 plan was dismissed, $6,000 was 
paid into the plan of which $3,000 was paid for expenses of administration. (Item 9) 
  
In April 2012, Applicant was interviewed about her delinquent financial 
obligations by an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) and 
completed a Personal Subject Interview (PSI). (Item 5) At that time, she indicated some 
of the debts had been discharged in bankruptcy. However, no debts were discharged in 
bankruptcy, which she should have known at the time she made her PSI since the 
bankruptcy was dismissed in 2009.  
 
 In Applicant’s response to written financial interrogatories, dated November 20, 
2013, she included a copy of an IRS form 1099-A, Acquisition or Abandonment of 
Secured Property. A 1099-A form is typically generated when a home goes to 
foreclosure. The balance of principal outstanding was $249,000 and the fair market 
value (FMV) of the home was $236,000. No IRS form 1099-C, Cancellation of 
Indebtedness Income, was included in the FORM material. A lender is required to file a 
1099-C if more than $600 of debt has been cancelled.  
 
 In a November 2013 letter (Item 3), the creditor holding the $20,520 debt (SOR 
1.a) chose to charge off the debt. (Item 6, 7) Applicant reached a settlement agreement 
with the creditor listed in SOR 1.e ($7,602). The creditor agreed to settle the debt, then 
$8,935, for $4,492 with $50 monthly payments to be made on the 15th of each month 
starting on November 15, 2013, and ending on September 15, 2020. (Item 3, 6, 7, 8) 
Applicant submitted documents showing $50 payments were made on November 15, 
2014, January 3, 2014, and February 10, 2014. (Item 3) 
 
 Applicant submitted a November 2013 letter from a creditor (Item 3) indicating 
that the referenced account was closed and had a zero balance. Her credit report lists 
this account as an automobile loan opened in November 2006, which was in collection 
and had been charged off. (Item 6, 7) There is no evidence Applicant has received 
financial counseling, debt counseling, or has had recent contact with her creditors on 
her delinquent accounts other than the November 2013 offer of settlement previously 
discussed. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
4 In Chapter 13 plans, a motion to dismiss can be filed when insufficient funds have been paid to the 
Trustee to pay all the creditors that must be paid pursuant to the terms of the confirmed plan and the 
Trustee’s fees for administering the case. 
 
 
4 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
5 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Behavior in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may 
behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage her finances to meet her financial obligations.  
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, her 
PSI, and her SOR response. In September 2007, she sought bankruptcy protection. Her 
home was foreclosed upon and she has three charged-off or collection debts totaling 
more than $67,000. The evidence supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.”  
   
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
In 2007, Applicant and her husband entered into a Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. 
Even though, at the time of filing, the household’s gross monthly income was $10,000 
and the combined average monthly income after deductions was $7,500, they failed to 
make the required $325 monthly payments. The plan was dismissed in 2009. All 
obligations listed in the bankruptcy remain valid and enforceable following a dismissed 
bankruptcy.  
 
If a Chapter 13 plan is dismissed, creditors may immediately initiate or continue 
with state court litigation pursuant to applicable state law to foreclose on the petitioner's 
property or garnish their income. If a bankruptcy case is dismissed, the legal affect is 
that the bankruptcy is deemed void. If a Chapter 13 plan is completed successfully, the 
petitioner will earn a discharge. Discharge means that all debt listed in the Chapter 13 
plan is satisfied; and therefore, creditors may not pursue additional collection actions 
pursuant to applicable state law. 
 
 At the time Applicant’s home went to foreclosure, the balance on the mortgage 
was $249,000 and the FMV of the home was $236,000. She submitted a copy of an IRS 
form 1099-A, asserting this establishes the debt was cancelled. She submitted no IRS 
form 1099-C, Cancellation of Indebtedness Income. She failed to provide sufficient 
documentation to establish the debt has been cancelled.  
The debts listed in SOR 1.b ($20,520) and SOR 1.e ($7,602) have been charged 
off. Applicant has a mistaken believe that this means she no longer owes the debt. The 
term charged off refers to removing a delinquent account from the creditor's balance 
sheet. The original obligation was an asset to the creditor. A debt is charged off when 
the debt becomes severely delinquent5 and can no longer be listed as an asset. 
 The accounting move by the creditor to charge off the balance due on the 
account in no way affects Applicant’s responsibility to pay what is owed. Even though a 
debt is charged off, the debt is still legally valid and is owed until it is paid or becomes 
unenforceable through bankruptcy, application of the statute of limitation, or application 
of some other legal bar to recovery. The creditor has the right to legally collect the full 
amount for the time periods permitted by the statutes of limitations. Additionally, in 
November 2013, she entered into a repayment agreement with the creditor listed in 
SOR 1.e. She was required to pay $50 monthly until September 2020. She showed 
three payments, only one of which complied with payments to be made on the 15th of 
                                                          
5 Federal regulations require creditors to charge off installment loans after 120 days of delinquency, while 
revolving-credit accounts must be charged off after 180 days. If no payment has been made in that 
amount of time, the accounting rule requires, because it is unlikely it will be paid in the near future, the 
obligation cannot be carried on the books as a current asset. 
 
7 
 
each month as required in the repayment plan. Applicant has provided no 
documentation that the equity line of debt listed in SOR 1.d has been paid.  
Applicant has not presented sufficient evidence to warrant the application of any 
of the financial considerations mitigating conditions. Because she has multiple 
delinquent debts and her financial problems are continuing in nature, she receives 
minimal application of the mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s handling 
of her finances, under the circumstances, casts doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant receives only limited application of the mitigating condition listed in AG 
¶ 20(b). While Applicant’s divorce may have contributed to her difficulty, it does not 
entirely explain the delinquent accounts or her sporadic efforts to resolve them. She 
was divorced approximately three years ago, in 2011 and but the bankruptcy was filed 
more than six years ago, in 2007.  
 
Even though Applicant’s current monthly net income is more than $4,400 and 
she has known of the Government’s concern about her delinquent debts since her April 
2012 PSI, she has documented payment of only $150 on her debts. There is little 
documentary evidence establishing how Applicant was substantially affected by the 
divorce other than her statement that she was unable to pay her debts due to the 
divorce. There was no loss of employment. Applicant has been employed by the same 
employer for the past 22 years. She failed to resolve her debts and failed to reduce her 
delinquencies.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there is no 
evidence of financial counseling, nor is there any indication that the delinquent debts 
listed in the SOR are being addressed. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not apply because three $50 payments is insufficient to establish a good-faith 
repayment plan. Applicant has made minimal efforts to address the remaining 
delinquent SOR accounts. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply 
because Applicant has failed to provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the four disputed accounts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
8 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled administratively, I am 
unable to evaluate her demeanor, appearance, or credibility. In requesting an 
administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, 
however, she failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to supplement the 
record with relevant and material facts regarding her circumstances, articulate her 
position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. She failed to offer evidence of 
financial counseling or provide documentation regarding her past efforts to address her 
delinquent debts. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on only a scant 
paragraph of explanation, financial considerations security concerns remain.  
 
Applicant has held a security clearance without incident. Applicant has known of 
the Government’s concern over her delinquent accounts since April 2012. In the two 
years since her PSI, she has documented $150 in payments. The Government does not 
have to prove that an applicant poses a clear and present danger to national security, or 
that an applicant poses an imminent threat of engaging in criminal acts. Instead, it is 
sufficient to show that an applicant has a history of unresolved financial difficulties that 
may make her more vulnerable to financial pressures.  
 
I must reasonably consider the entirety of Applicant’s financial situation and her 
actions. She is not required to make payment on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan may provide for payment on such debts one at a time. 
Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. She has made little payment on her 
delinquent debts. Her failure to repay her creditors, at least in reasonable amounts, or to 
arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about her fitness to hold a 
security clearance. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether her financial circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
substantial doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For 
all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising 
from her financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E 3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
9 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Cnsiderations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_____________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
