 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-00276 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 17, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 7, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct). DOD 
CAF took that action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
On April 6, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on May 1, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 1, 2014. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled on May 20, 2014. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through E. The record was left open until June 3, 2014, to provide Applicant an 
opportunity to submit additional matters. Applicant timely submitted documents that 
were marked as AE F through AA. Applicant objected to GE 3, a redacted military police 
investigation, and his objection was overruled. The remaining proffered exhibits were 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 4, 2014.  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old engineering administrative support employee of a 
defense contractor. He has worked for that contractor since July 2011. He graduated 
from high school in 1986 and earned an associate’s degree in about 1991. He served 
on active duty in the U.S. Air Force from October 1986 to January 2010 and retired 
honorably in the grade of technical sergeant (E-6). He first married in 1992 and divorced 
in 1999. He married his current wife in 2004. He has three children between the ages of 
eight and eighteen. He has held a security clearance since about 1986.1 
 
 The SOR listed five Guideline E allegations asserting that Applicant hacked into 
an email account, recorded another’s proprietary documents onto a compact disc (CD), 
stole government furniture, and was awarded nonjudicial punishment for theft of military 
property and for a crime against intellectual property in 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.a); that he 
falsified his e-QIP dated September 17, 2011, by failing to report he received nonjudicial 
punishment for crimes against intellectual property (SOR ¶ 1.b); that he falsified the     
e-QIP by failing to report an arrest and charge for driving under the influence of alcohol 
(DUI) in February 2004 (SOR 1.c); that he falsified the e-QIP by failing to report that he 
entered into an information technology system and removed media without 
authorization (SOR ¶ 1.d); and that he falsified material facts during an interview with an 
investigator by failing to report information about hacking into an email account, 
recording of another’s proprietary information on a CD, and being awarded nonjudicial 
punishment for a  crime against intellectual property (SOR ¶ 1.e). In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations.2 
 
 From about August 2008 to January 2009, Applicant’s wife worked as a 
receptionist at a business (Company X) that assisted individuals with immigration 
issues, such as the submission of requests for work visas. Applicant was never 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5-6, 74; GE 1. 
2 Applicant Answer to the SOR.  
 
 
3 
 
employed at Company X but did assist the company and its chief executive officer 
(CEO) with their computer problems while his wife worked there.3    
 
 In late 2008, Applicant’s wife became dissatisfied working at Company X. 
Applicant and his wife decided to start their own company that would provide the same 
type of immigration services. In January 2009, Applicant incorporated that business 
(Company Y) in his name. Applicant’s wife and another Company X employee who was 
knowledgeable about immigration laws and procedures came to work for Company Y.4   
 
 In June 2009, the CEO of Company X alleged that Applicant may have used 
government computers to hack into Company X’s computers. The CEO further alleged 
that Applicant rerouted his emails, which included communications from federal 
agencies, without his authorization to Applicant’s company. As a result of those 
allegations, a military police investigation was initiated.5   
 
The military police investigation revealed that Applicant hacked into the CEO’s 
email account, rerouted the CEO’s emails without authorization to his account, and took 
government furniture from an aircraft hangar for use at Company Y. Applicant admitted 
to engaging in that conduct. Applicant claimed that he hacked into the CEO’s email to 
observe its content as a means of protecting his family from the CEO’s threats and that 
he thought the government furniture was being thrown away. The government furniture 
that Applicant took consisted of a desk, ladder, microwave, and other items.6    
 
 The military police investigation also indicated that Applicant confessed to 
recording Company X proprietary information onto a CD and taking that information. 
However, the written statement that Applicant provided to investigators is difficult to 
read and confusing. At the hearing, Applicant denied copying proprietary information 
from Company X onto a CD. He stated that he advised an employee of Company Y on 
how to copy information from a computer onto a flash drive, but claimed that copying of 
information occurred at Company Y, not Company X. On the other hand, the report of 
the military police investigation indicated that a CD was uncovered that contained 
proprietary information from Company X, including a list of its clients. This CD was 
labeled “Immigration Stuff [Company X]” in a handwriting style that investigators opined 
was extremely similar to Applicant’s.7       
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 33-42, 49-51, 66-68; GE 3, 5.  
4 Tr. at 33-42; GE 3, 5.  
5 GE 3.  
6 Tr. at 42-44, 47-53, 69-71; GE 3, 5. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he used 
the CEO’s password to enter the CEO’s email account without authorization. He knew the CEO’s 
password from working on the CEO’s computer.  
7 Tr. at 28-42, 47-53, 66-68; GE 3 (¶ 2-44), 5.  
 
 
4 
 
 In October 2009, Applicant was awarded nonjudicial punishment for theft of 
military property worth $500 or less and for a crime against intellectual property by 
taking data belonging to another without authorization in violation of a state law. His 
punishment consisted of a suspended reduction to staff sergeant (E-5), forfeiture of 
$1,414 pay per month for two months, and a reprimand. Applicant did not appeal the 
punishment. His security clearance was suspended for a period of time as a result of 
the investigation, but was later reinstated. In the present hearing, Applicant testified that 
he thought the crime against intellectual property pertained to his hacking into the 
CEO’s email account.8  
 
 Applicant submitted an e-QIP on September 17, 2011. In Section 15d of that 
document, he was asked if he had been subjected to a court-martial or any other 
disciplinary proceeding under the Uniform Code of Military Justice, including nonjudicial 
punishment, in the last seven years. He responded “Yes” to that question and indicated 
that he received Article 15 punishment for “removed property less than $500” in October 
2009. He explained that the property in question was a set of desks that he assumed 
was junk and would be discarded, but later learned those items were slated for disposal 
through official channels. His response to that e-QIP question did not mention the 
“crimes against intellectual property” charge or his hacking into the CEO’s email 
account.9 
 
 In Section 22e of the e-QIP, Applicant was asked if he had ever been charged 
with any offenses related to alcohol or drugs. He answered “No” to that question and 
failed to report that he was arrested and charged with DUI on February 1, 2004, after he 
crashed his vehicle multiple times.10    
 
 In Sections 27a and 27c of the e-QIP, Applicant was asked if he had illegally or 
without proper authorization entered into any information technology system and if he 
removed media from an information technology system without authorization when 
prohibited by rules, guidelines, and regulations. He responded “No” to both of those 
questions and failed to disclose his hacking into the CEO’s email account and rerouting 
the CEO’s emails to his account.11 
  
At the hearing, Applicant claimed that his failure to disclose on the e-QIP any 
information about the crime against intellectual property offense on the e-QIP was an 
oversight. He stated that he had no intent to deceive by excluding that information. He 
noted that, at the time he submitted the e-QIP, he had financial problems and was 
focused on those problems and other matters more than the prior nonjudicial 
punishment. Regarding his failure to report information about his DUI arrest on the       
                                                          
8 Tr. at 50-53, 68-72, 78-79; GE 2, 4.  
9 Tr. at 26-60; GE 1. 
10 Tr. at 44-47, 64-66, 71-72; GE 1. 
11 GE 1. 
 
 
5 
 
e-QIP, Applicant stated that he thought he had to report such matters only if it occurred 
in the last seven years. Finally, he indicated that his failure to report the computer 
hacking incident in Section 27 of the e-QIP was also an oversight. He stated that he had 
no reason to conceal such matter because the government had access to the military 
police report regarding those offenses.12 
 
Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator on October 14, 2011. During the interview, Applicant provided details of the 
theft of government furniture from an on-base hangar and the awarding of nonjudicial 
punishment for that offense. The summary of the OPM interview contained no mention 
of Applicant being charged with a “crime against intellectual property” offense or his 
hacking into the CEO’s email account. In his testimony at the hearing, he indicated that 
he was never asked about the hacking incident during the interview.13 
 
Applicant presented documents showing that the CEO of Company X was 
disbarred from the practice of law in one state and subjected to disciplinary action by 
other state bar associations. He was later convicted of attempted murder and sentenced 
to 30 years in jail. He was also convicted of racketeering and practicing law without a 
license for which he was sentenced to 80 months in prison that ran concurrently with his 
30-year sentence. The racketeering charge arose from his operation of Company X.14 
 
 Applicant was awarded the Air Force Achievement Medal and Air Force 
Commendation Medal. He presented enlisted performance evaluations that showed that 
he was a top performer. He also submitted character reference letters from supervisors, 
coworkers, military members, and friends that describe him as dependable, trustworthy, 
and reliable. He is active in the community and in his church.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
                                                          
12 Tr. at 53-63, 71-77; GE 1. 
13 Tr. at 61-63; GE 3. 
14 Tr. at 66-67, 69-72; AE A-C. 
15 AE F-AA. 
 
 
6 
 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available evidence 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, release of 
proprietary information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or 
other government protected information; (2) disruptive, violent, or other 
inappropriate behavior in the workplace; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
In 2009, Applicant was awarded nonjudicial punishment for stealing government 
property and for a crime against intellectual property by taking data belonging to another 
without authorization in violation of a state law. In this regard, he admitted that he stole 
government furniture, hacked into the email account of the CEO of Company X, and 
forwarded the CEO’s emails to his computer. Despite Applicant’s denials, substantial 
 
 
8 
 
evidence was presented to show that Applicant took proprietary information from 
Company X. AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d) and 16(e) apply to SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
When Applicant submitted his e-QIP, he disclosed in response to Section 15d 
that he received nonjudicial punishment, but failed to indicate the offenses at that 
proceeding included a crime against intellectual property. He also failed to disclose in 
Sections 27a and 27c of the e-QIP that he hacked into the email account of the CEO of 
Company X and forwarded the CEO’s emails to his computer. His claim that he failed to 
disclose information on his e-QIP about the crime against intellectual property due to an 
oversight is not believable. Substantial evidence was presented to establish that 
Applicant intentionally concealed information on his e-QIP. AG ¶ 16(a) applies to SOR 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.d.  
 
Applicant claim that he failed to disclose information about his 2004 DUI because 
he thought that information only needed to be disclosed if it occurred in the last seven 
years is plausible. I find in favor of Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.c.   
 
During an OPM interview, Applicant discussed being awarded nonjudicial 
punishment for theft of government property. The summary of the interview makes no 
mention of being awarded punishment for the crime against intellectual property. 
Applicant claimed that he was not asked about the crime against intellectual property 
during the interview. Because we do not know what questions Applicant was asked 
during the interview, insufficient evidence was submitted to establish that he provided 
false information during that interview. AG ¶ 16(b) does not apply. I find in favor of 
Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advise of 
unauthorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide information, 
the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
 
9 
 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 Applicant stole government property, hacked into another’s email account, and 
rerouted another’s email to his account. He also deliberately failed to disclose 
information on an e-QIP. His misconduct is recent and demonstrates a lack of honesty, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. After examining all of the applicable mitigating 
conditions, I find that none apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant served in the Air Force for about 23 years and retired honorably as a 
technical sergeant. Since retiring, he has continued to serve the Federal Government by 
working for a defense contractor. He is a valued employee and thought highly of by 
coworkers and friends. Nevertheless, his questionable conduct continues to raise 
serious questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He has 
failed to present sufficient evidence to conclude such wrongdoing is unlikely to recur. 
 
 
10 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
