 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01285 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Pakistan and immigrated to the United States in November 
2003. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in November 2012. His father and four of 
six siblings were born in Pakistan and are naturalized U.S. citizens. His mother is a 
Pakistani citizen and permanent resident of the United States. Applicant has two 
siblings (a brother and a sister) who are citizens and residents of Pakistan, as are their 
families. In 2008 Applicant and his father purchased a $40,000 home in Pakistan for his 
brother and family living there. Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate 
the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 8, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for him.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 22, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge (AR). The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on April 17, 2014, and issued a Notice of 
Hearing on April 23, 2014, scheduling the hearing for May 27, 2014. The hearing 
convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4 into evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified. He 
did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 6, 
2014.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Pakistan. She provided nine supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts (GE 4.) Applicant did not object to the request or documents, and I granted 
Department Counsel’s request.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004), and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g, except 
those contained in 1.e. His admissions, including those made in a June 19, 2013 
Counterintelligence Focused Security Screening Questionnaire and Interview, are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. (AR; GE 3.)  
 
Applicant was born in Pakistan in 1983 and is 30 years old. He is not married. He 
attended high school there. In November 2003 he immigrated to the United States when 
he was 20 years old, as a child of a U.S. permanent resident. He became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in November 2012. He has a current U.S. passport that will expire in 
November 2022. His Pakistani passport expired in 2010. (GE  2, 3.) 
 
After arriving in the United States, Applicant secured a part-time sales position 
and worked there from December 2003 to January 2006. From May 2005 until April 
2011 he was a full-time assistant manager at a bank. In January 2008 he started 
working as a part-time self-employed taxi driver. He currently works fulltime as a 
business system analyst for a large bank. (Tr. 44.) Applicant earned two associates’ 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
degrees from a U.S. community college in 2008, one in general studies and one in 
information technology. (GE 2.) 
 
Applicant’s parents were born in Pakistan. His father, age 67, immigrated to the 
United States in 2000, having been sponsored by one of his sisters who immigrated 
before that. He works as a bus driver. His mother, age 64, is a citizen of Pakistan, but 
resides in the United States as a permanent resident. Applicant has four sisters and two 
brothers, all of whom were born in Pakistan. Three sisters are naturalized U.S. citizens. 
Two of them are residents of the United States. The third currently is a resident of Saudi 
Arabia and works for the U.S. Government. She has a security clearance. (Tr. 53.) One 
of his brothers is a naturalized U.S. citizen and resident of the United States. He was a 
linguistic instructor for a defense contractor and trained soldiers before deploying to the 
Middle East. He now drives a taxicab because he completed his contract. He has 
applied for a linguist position with a defense contractor. He previously resided in 
Pakistan with his wife, a citizen and resident of Pakistan who still lives there. (Tr. 35, 33, 
40, 47.)  
 
Applicant’s fourth sister is a citizen and resident of Pakistan. She is a housewife 
and her husband is a teacher. They have two children. Applicant’s second brother is a 
citizen and resident of Pakistan. He is a lawyer and his wife is a housewife. They have 
one son. They are in the process of obtaining visas to come to the United States. 
Applicant has telephonic contact with his brother and sister two or three times a year. 
(Tr. 34; GE 2.) His parents speak to his sister and brother every week. They have 
returned to Pakistan once every two years and stay for a month. (Tr. 37-38.) 
 
In 2008 Applicant and his father visited their family in a small village in Pakistan. 
The living conditions in that area are extremely primitive, including the lack of water and 
sewage. After staying with his brother and family a few days, Applicant and his father 
decided to purchase a house for his brother in a nearby city. Applicant along with other 
family members can stay in that house during visits. The house cost $40,000 US. 
Applicant contributed $25,000 to the purchase and his father paid the remaining 
amount. (Tr. 29-32, 36.) His father asked Applicant to contribute the money because he 
had the money in his savings account. (GE 3.)The last time Applicant saw these 
relatives was during this visit. (Tr. 22.) Applicant intends to sell the house after his 
brother and family come to the United States. (Tr. 30.) He would sell it now if it 
interferes with obtaining a security clearance. (GE 3.) 
 
 In 2010 Applicant, along with his family living in the United States, purchased a 
$340,000 home in the United States. He contributed $20,000 to the down payment of 
$60-80,000. (Tr. 32.) He lives in this house with his parents, two sisters, and one 
brother. (Tr. 40.) Since making this purchase, Applicant has little money left in his 
savings account. (Tr. 44.) 
 
 Pashto is Applicant’s mother tongue. He speaks several dialects of it, which are 
spoken in Pakistan and Afghanistan. A defense contractor is seeking to employ him 
because of his linguistic skills. Applicant believes he will initially work in the United 
States, but could be sent to the Middle East. (Tr. 46-47.)  
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional 
performance or career, or the level of responsibility his duties entail. He submitted no 
objective character references describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or 
reliability.  
 
Pakistan 
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Administrative Notice 
documents concerning Pakistan, which are incorporated herein by reference. Of 
particular significance are Pakistan’s history of political unrest, and the presence of the 
Taliban and al-Qaeda, terrorist organizations, which continue to assert power and 
intimidation within the country and the bordering country of Afghanistan. Safety and 
security are key issues because these terrorist organizations target United States 
interests in Pakistan and in Afghanistan by suicide operations, bombings, 
assassinations, car-jacking, assaults, and hostage taking. At this time, the risk of 
terrorist activities remains extremely high. The country’s human rights record remains 
poor and violence is rampant. According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of 
State, insurgents continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other 
Western nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing. Few sections of Pakistan are safe or 
immune from violence, and the government has difficulty enforcing the rule of law.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern pertaining to foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The mere circumstance of close family ties with a family member living in 
Pakistan is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, 
a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States, or is a 
known terrorist haven. The relationship of Pakistan with the United States places a 
significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with 
family members living in Pakistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist family members living in Pakistan.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Pakistan 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as capable state intelligence services, and Pakistan has an enormous problem with 
terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with one brother, a sister, their families, and a sister-
in-law living in Pakistan creates a potential conflict of interest because these 
relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist 
those family members by providing sensitive or classified information. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 
7(b) apply. AG ¶ 7(d) applies because Applicant’s mother, although a permanent 
resident of the United States, is a citizen of Pakistan. Applicant invested $25,000 in a 
piece of real estate in Pakistan in 2008, raising a security concern under AG ¶ 7(e).   
 
 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. 
Those with potential application in mitigating the above security concerns in this case 
are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property  
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) does not have application under the facts in this case. Applicant 
admitted the SOR allegations that his brother, sister, their families, and sisters-in-law 
are citizens and residents of Pakistan. The family’s physical presence in that country 
creates a heightened potential for exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion, as there is strong evidence of suicide bombings, and human rights abuses 
toward citizens and residents. That evidence makes it possible that Applicant’s family 
interests could be threatened to the point that he would confront a choice between their 
interest and those of the United States should adverse forces learn of Applicant’s work 
for the U.S. Government.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) has some application. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,” such that he 
“can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” He has 
lived in the United States since 2003 and became a citizen in November 2012, less than 
two years ago. His father and four siblings are U.S. citizens. He lives with his parents, 
two sisters, and one brother. He has some economic ties, including a financial interest 
in his family’s home. He has a U.S. savings account. He attended a local community 
college and earned degrees. He has worked in the United States since late 2003, after 
his arrival. He is self-employed in a part-time taxi business and full-time with a bank. He 
asserted a desire to use his language skills to help the United States in its endeavors in 
the Middle East. In sum, Applicant’s has some strong connections to the United States.  
 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. After leaving Pakistan, Applicant has maintained 
periodic contact with his brother and sister, who are citizens and residents of Pakistan. 
In 2008 he visited them and their families. These contacts are sufficiently frequent, and 
cannot be construed to be casual.    
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has limited application. Applicant has a $25,000 interest in a piece of 
real estate in Pakistan that is a home for his brother and visiting family members. While 
that may not be a large amount in some instances, it was a significant amount for 
Applicant, who was 24 years old at the time his father requested his contribution. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept.  The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Some mitigating evidence weighs in 
favor of granting Applicant a security clearance. He is an intelligent, articulate, and 
hardworking person, who has lived in the United States for 11 years. He has worked 
here since arriving in 2003 in full-time and part-time positions. He attended a local 
college and earned degrees. He lives with five members of his immediate family, all of 
whom are U.S. citizens, except his mother. Another sister is a U.S. citizen and works for 
the U.S. Government. He contributed $20,000 to the purchase of a family home in the 
United States. Out of his sense of patriotism for the United States, Applicant would like 
to assist the Government’s endeavors in the Middle East. 
 
Five circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole-person analysis.  First, 
there is a significant risk of terrorism and human rights’ abuses in Pakistan. More 
importantly for security purposes, terrorists there are hostile to the United States, 
engage in violence against its citizens and residents, and actively seek classified 
information. Terrorists and friendly governments could attempt to use Applicant’s family 
members to obtain protected information and compromise Applicant’s responsibilities to 
the United States. Second, Applicant had numerous connections to Pakistan before he 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
immigrated to the United States in 2003. He spent his formative years there and 
attended high school there. Third, one of his brothers and one of his sisters, along with 
their families, and a sister-in-law are citizens and residents of Pakistan. He maintains 
some contact with them. Fourth, he has been a U.S. citizen for less than two years. 
Fifth, he contributed $25,000 for the purchase of a home for his brother’s benefit and 
visiting family members. While his loyalty and connections to family members in 
Pakistan are positive familial traits, for security clearance purposes those connections, 
in addition to the heightened risk Pakistan poses to the United States, continue to 
outweigh the factors in favor of granting him a security clearance.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant has not sufficiently 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline B.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.e:       For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
